FOUR




The guests were assembled, but Doña Okana had not yet arrived. Gathered around a small golden snack table, as if on a wall gobelin, were the chiefs of the royal guard, who were famous for their duels and amorous adventures. They leaned forward gracefully as they drank, while their fat behinds stuck out in the rear. Beside the fireplace giggled thin-blooded ladies who were distinguished in nothing whatsoever, and who for this reason had been assigned to Doña Okana as her confidantes and companions. They sat in a simple row on small, low divans, and before them three elderly gentlemen danced around constantly on their thin legs: famed lounge lizards from the era of the previous king, the last connoisseurs of long forgotten anecdotes of the royal court. Every one knew that a salon was no proper salon without these old gentlemen. In the middle of the hall, legs spread wide apart, stood Don Ripat, lieutenant of the Gray Court Guard—a clever and dependable agent for Rumata. He had a splendid mustache and was completely amoral. He had hooked the thumbs of his big red hands into his leather belt and listened to Don Tameo who, totally disorganized and with great rushes of detail, tried to present a project to revitalize business at the expense of the peasants; at the same time, Don Ripat pointed his mustache in the direction of Don Sera, who groped his way along the walls, obviously searching for some hidden door. Two famous portrait painters sat in a corner, scanning the room with alert eyes as they devoured a roast the size of a half-grown crocodile, and nearby in a bay window sat an elderly lad clad in black—the chaperone assigned to Doña Okana by Don Reba. She stared straight ahead with a rigid face, looking very severe; only once in a while would she suddenly jerk her whole body forward. Off to one side, a personage of royal blood and the secretary of the Soanian embassy passed the time with a game of cards. The royal personage was cheating and the secretary smiled indulgently. He was the only person in the entire salon who was occupied with something serious: he was gathering material for the diplomatic spy forces.


The guard officers at the little golden tables greeted Rumata with friendly shouts. Rumata gave them a comradely nod and went from one guest to the other. He exchanged bows with the old lounge lizards, paid a few compliments to the confidantes of Doña Okana, who immediately eyed the white feather behind his ear; gave a friendly slap to the blubbery back of the personage of royal blood; and then turned his attention to Don Ripat and Don Tameo. As he passed the bay window, the chaperone’s upper torso happened to fall forward once again; a strong odor of brew emanated from her.


Upon seeing Rumata, Don Ripat pulled his thumbs from his belt and clicked his heels. Don Tameo, however, called out loudly: “It’s you, my friend? Wonderful that you have come, I had already given up all hope of seeing you. Like a swan with a broken wing, sighing and staring up to a star … I was filled with such a longing—And if it had not been for the most charming Don Ripat, I would have long since perished from grief!”


It was obvious that Don Tameo had had the best intentions to remain sober until lunch, but unfortunately had not quite made it.


“Dear, dear!” exclaimed Rumata. “Since when do we quote the words of the rebel Zuren?”


Don Ripat straightened up and flashed his catlike eyes at Don Tameo.


“Eh, eh—” stammered Don Tameo in confusion. “Zuren? Yes, indeed, and why am I quoting him? Yes, yes, if I may say so … with sarcastic intent—I assure you, noble dons! Yes, for who is this Zuren? Nothing but a common, ungrateful demagogue. I wanted simply to emphasize—”


“That Doña Okana hasn’t arrived yet,” interrupted Rumata. “And you were forced to drink without her company.”


“That’s exactly what I wanted to emphasize.”


“By the way, where is she?”


“We expect her any moment now,” answered Don Ripat, who then bowed and walked away.


The confidantes of the lady of the house, however, sat there with their mouths wide open, still staring at the white feather. The old lounge lizards snickered archly. Don Tameo finally noticed the feather, too, and began to tremble.


“My friend!” he whispered. “What is that supposed to mean? If Don Reba should see that … Even if we don’t expect him tonight, but you can never know for sure …”


“Oh, cut it out,” said Rumata, letting his eyes sweep impatiently across the room. He wanted to get it all over with as quickly as possible.


The officers of the guard approached, wine cups in their hands.


“How pale you are!” whispered Don Tameo. “I understand, passion is like that … But, Holy Mickey! The state should come first. And after all, it’s so dangerous, so very dangerous … An insult to Don Reba’s emotions …”


Something in his face changed and he began to mince his steps restlessly; he stepped back a bit and then walked backwards out of the room, bowing and scraping all the while. The officers of the guard gathered around Rumata. Somebody handed him a full wine goblet.


“Let’s drink to honor and to our Majesty, the King!” shouted one of the officers.


“And to love!” added another officer.


“Just show her what the guard is capable of, noble don,” said a third officer.


Rumata took the goblet; then suddenly he saw Doña Okana. She stood in the doorway, fanning herself with her elegant fan and swaying her shoulders, a languid expression animating her features. She was very pretty. From this distance she could even be called beautiful. Unfortunately she was not at all Rumata’s type, but she was undoubtedly pretty, this stupid, sensuous cow. Big, blue eyes without a glimmer of intellect or warmth, a soft, knowing mouth, a voluptuous body whose contours were revealed intentionally with skill and with great care … A guard officer behind Rumata apparently could not control himself any longer and he noisily smacked his lips. Without turning around, Rumata handed him his goblet and with long strides walked over to Doña Okana. All those present in the salon turned their eyes aside and began to talk busily about inconsequential things.


“Your beauty is blinding my eyes,” murmured Rumata as he bowed deeply and rattled his swords. “Permit me to lie at your feet—like a whippet at the feet of an indifferent and beautiful woman.”


Doña Okana hid her face behind her fan and peeked out coquettishly.


“You are very daring, noble don,” she said. “Poor ladies from the provinces that we are, we are simply unable to withstand such storms …” She had a deep, rasping voice, that occasionally failed. “Alas, there is nothing left for me to do but to open the gates of my fortress and admit the victor …”


Gritting his teeth with shame and anger, Don Rumata bowed deeper still. Doña Okana lowered her fan and called out loudly:


“My noble dons! Go on and amuse yourselves! I’ll be right back with Don Rumata! I have promised to show him my new Irukanian carpets … !”


“Don’t rob us too long of your presence, you bewitching beauty!” bleated one of the old gentlemen.


“What a magnificent woman!” called out another old man. And he added in a sickeningly sweet tone of voice: “A fairy princess!”


The officers of the guard rattled their sabers. “You must admit, he has pretty good taste,” said the personage of royal blood. Doña Okana held Rumata by his sleeve and dragged him along behind her. Out in the corridor, Rumata could hear Don Sera declare in an offended tone of voice: “I can’t see why a noble don shouldn’t have a look at some Irukanian carpets …”


At the end of the corridor. Doña Okana suddenly came to a halt, clasped her arms around his neck and with a deep moan to indicate a sudden outburst of wild passion, she kissed him hard on his mouth, clinging and sucking on to his lips as tightly as a leech. Rumata held his breath. The woman’s body radiated a sharp odor of strong Irukanian perfume mingled with the smell of unwashed limbs. Her lips felt fiery hot, moist and sticky from sweetmeats. He tried valiantly to fight off nausea and to return the kiss, and was apparently successful, for Doña Okana moaned again loudly and with tightly shut eyes surrendered herself to his embrace. That seemed to last an eternity. Well, you’re going to get it now, you beast, thought Rumata and pressed his arms tightly around her torso. Something began to crack, the corset—or perhaps her ribs—; the beauty whined pitifully, opened her startled eyes and wiggled weakly trying to free herself from his firm clasp. Rumata quickly let go of her.


“You daredevil, you, what a lover!” she said breathing hard and rapt with desire. “You almost squashed me!”


“I’m burning with desire,” he murmured guiltily.


“So am I. Oh, how I have been waiting for you! Let’s go! Let’s hurry!”


She led him by the hand through some icy cold rooms. Rumata took his handkerchief and furtively wiped his lips. The whole affair seemed so senseless now. But it’s got to be, he thought. The things we have to bear here! Can’t be all done with words alone. Holy Mickey, why don’t they ever wash here at court? And on top of that stench this peculiar passionate temperament … if only Don Reba would surprise them now … She dragged him behind her, without a word, with purposeful strength, the way an ant drags along dead larvae. Rumata felt like an idiot and kept murmuring nonsense about “swift little feet” and “rosy pink lips.” Doña Okana kept giggling the whole way. She whisked him into an overheated boudoir, whose walls actually were decorated by huge rugs; threw herself on her enormous bed, gaped at him with her moist, glittering eyes. Rumata’s body stiffened. There was an unmistakable odor of bedbugs in this boudoir. “You are so beautiful!” she whispered loudly. “Do come closer, come to me. I have been waiting for you such a long time!”


Rumata turned away his eyes; he felt nauseated. Perspiration beaded on his forehead. I can’t do it, flashed through his mind. To hell with all the information I can drag out of her … what a beast she is, what a caricature … It’s unnatural, it goes against my grain, it’s dirty. Dirt is preferable to blood, of course, but this here is far worse than dirt.


“What are you waiting for, noble don?” panted Doña Okana. “Oh, my sweet, do come to me, I’m waiting!”


“Oh, go to hell!” Don Rumata hissed between his teeth impulsively.


She jumped off the bed and hurried toward him.


“What is the matter with you? Are you drunk?”


“I don’t know.” He forced the words over his lips. “It’s so hot here.”


“I’ll have a cup brought for you.”


“What cup?”


“Oh, forget it … it’ll pass …” Her fingers were trembling with impatience as she started to unbutton his vest. “How gorgeous you are …” she whispered breathlessly. “But you are so shy, like a virgin. I’d never have suspected that from you … But it’s so exciting, I swear by the Holy Bara! …”


Whether he wanted to or not, he could no longer delay it; he had to take her by the hands now. He looked down on her and saw her lacquered, untidy hair, her round, bare shoulders, dotted with tiny clumps of powder, and her tiny rose pink ears. Disgusting, he thought. Nothing doing here. Too bad, though, she is bound to know a few things … Don Reba talks in his sleep … He takes her along to the hearings, and she loves cross-examinations … No, I can’t do it …


“Well?” she asked, irritated.


“Your carpets are beautiful indeed, Doña,” he said. “Thanks for showing them to me but I have to go now.”


At first she failed to understand; but then her features were grotesquely contorted with fury.


“How dare you!” she demanded, but he had already groped for the door knob, slipped out into the corridor and taken to his heels. From now on I won’t wash myself any longer, he thought. One has to be a filthy swine here, not a god!


“You old nag!” she yelled. “You miserable old woman! You should be thrown into the dungeon!”


Rumata yanked a window open and jumped down into the yard. For a while he stood underneath a tree, greedily breathing in big gulps of fresh, cold air.


Then he remembered the stupid white feather. Furiously he pulled it from behind his ear and stomped on it with his boots. My friend Pashka wouldn’t have made it either, he thought. None of our crowd. (Are you so sure?—Yes!—Then none of you are any good.—But it makes me nauseated!—The experiment doesn’t care what your feelings are. If you can’t do it, then keep out of it!—But I’m no animal!


—If it’s required by the experiment, then you must turn into an animal, if need be.—The experiment can’t make such demands.—It can very well, as you see!—But then … !


—What, then?—He did not know what would follow after that.—Then … Then … Well, then, we’ll say that I am a bad historian.—He shrugged his shoulders—so let’s try to improve. Let’s learn how to turn into a pig …)


It was midnight when he arrived home. He undid the clasps of his fez and, without getting undressed, threw himself down on a couch in the salon, where he fell into a deep sleep.


He was awakened by the exasperated shouting of Uno and a good-natured deep bass voice yelling:


“Get away, you little beast. I’ll skin you alive!”


“My master is asleep, I’m telling you!”


“Beat it! Don’t crawl around my legs!”


“You can’t go in, I’m telling you!”


The door flew open with a loud bang and into the room came storming Don Bau, Baron Pampa, gigantic like the wild monster Pech, red-cheeked, with white teeth, drooping mustache, a jaunty red velvet beret on his head and an expensive raspberry-colored cape slung around his broad shoulders, and a copper mail shirt clearly visible underneath. He dragged Uno after him. Uno frantically clung to the baron’s right trouser leg.


“Baron!” called out Rumata and let his legs slide off the couch. “How do you happen to be in town, my friend? Uno, let go of the baron!”


“What a devoted boy, he really sticks by you,” said the baron and walked toward Rumata with open arms. “He seems all right, I must say. How much will you take for him? But let’s discuss this later … Now let me embrace you!”


They embraced. The baron exuded a pleasant smell of dusty country roads, horses, and a mixed bouquet of various wines.


“I see you are totally sober,” he said, sorrow in his voice. “But then, you are always sober, you fortunate man!”


“Please sit down, my friend!” said Rumata. “Uno! Bring some Estorian wine, and plenty of it!”


“Not a drop!”


“What? Not a drop of Estorian wine? Uno, forget the Estorian and bring us some Irukanian instead!”


“No wine at all!” said the baron miserably. “I’m not drinking.”


Rumata sat down again.


“What has happened?” he asked, worried. “Are you sick?”


“I am as healthy as a horse. But these damned family quarrels … To make a long story short; I have had a terrible fight with the baroness. And now I am here.”


“A fight with the baroness? You? Now please stop it, baron; what kind of joke is that supposed to be?”


“I can’t understand it myself, I’m like in a fog. Yes, I came here on horseback, riding 120 miles, my brain all in a fog!”


“My friend,” said Rumata, “let’s start right away and ride back to castle Bau.”


“But my horse is still winded and sweaty,” replied the baron. “And what’s more: I want to punish her!” “Who?”


“The baroness, damn it! Am I a man or a mouse? You see, she is dissatisfied with Pampa, the—drunk; let her find out for herself how sober he can be! I’d rather rot away here with plain water than return to the castle!” Uno pouted:


“Tell him to stop wiggling his ears.”


“Now be off, you little rascal!” grumbled the good-humored deep voice of the baron. “And bring me some beer! I’ve sweated it all out; now I must fill up again.”


Baron Pampa spent the next half hour filling up again and chattering away merrily all the while. In between big gulps from a tankard of beer he reported his troubles. He repeatedly cursed “those drunkards, my neighbors, who come and invade my castle. They pretend they want to go hunting with me, arrive early in the morning—and before you know it, they are all dead drunk and smash up the furniture. They come charging over the entire castle, befoul everything, annoy the servants, spoil the dogs and set a terrible example for the young baron. Then they all depart, ride home again and leave me behind, drunk as a pig, and I have to stay there with the baroness, all alone, have to face her, eye to eye …”


Toward the end of his story, the baron lost control over himself and was just about to ask for some Estorian wine, when he pulled himself together again and said:


“Rumata, my friend. Let’s leave here. Your wines are much too expensive! Let’s go!” “But where to?”


“That doesn’t matter, where to! How about the Gray Joy?”


“Hmm,” said Rumata. “And what are we going to do there at the Gray Joy?”


The baron remained silent for a few moments and tugged mischievously at his beard.


“Come, come, now!” he said finally. “You ask the strangest questions. What are we going to do there? We’ll just sit and talk a bit.”


“At the Gray Joy?” asked Rumata doubtfully.


“Yes,” said the baron. “I understand what you mean … That’s awful … but still, let’s go. Here I’m constantly tempted to ask for Estorian wine!”


“My horse!” said Rumata and went into his study in order to pick up his sender.


A few minutes later the two were riding side by side down a narrow lane, enveloped by impenetrable darkness. The baron had regained his good humor and told with a loud voice about the huge boar they had killed the previous day, then about the remarkable talents of the young baron, and about the miracle at the monastery of the Holy Tukky, where the abbot had given birth from his hip to a six-fingered boy. In between stories he did not forget his own kind of pranks. From time to time he would howl like a wolf, sing lullabies, and knock with the heavy handle of his riding whip against the shuttered windows.


They arrived at the Gray Joy and the baron stopped his horse and fell into deep thoughts. Rumata waited. The dirty windows of the inn shone gaudily, the horses were pawing the ground, the heavily made-up girls who were sitting on a bench underneath the window were quarreling noisily, and two servants were straining to roll a giant barrel through the entrance door.


The baron said sorrowfully:


“Alone! How horrible to think that I have the whole night before me, and all alone! And she, too, is all alone!”


“Don’t be so sad, my friend,” said Rumata. “The young baron is there with her, and I am here with you.”


“That is not the same thing,” said the baron. “You haven’t the faintest idea, my friend. You are young and light-hearted. I believe you even enjoy looking at these sluts here.”


“And why not?” replied Rumata and regarded the baron with interest. “These girls are quite acceptable, I think.”


The baron shook his head and laughed sarcastically.


“Just look at that one over there,” he shouted, “her behind is practically flopping to the ground. And the one over there, the one scratching herself, she hasn’t any behind at all. They are cows, my friend, cows at best. Just think of the baroness! What hands, what grace! What a body, my friend!”


“Yes,” agreed Rumata. “The baroness is beautiful. Let’s get out of here.”


“Where to?” asked the baron depressed. “And why?” An expression of resoluteness came suddenly over his face. “No, my friend. I won’t leave here. I won’t go anywhere but you can do what pleases you.” He got off his horse. “Although I would feel insulted if you would leave me here alone.”


“I’ll stay with you here, of course,” said Rumata. “But—”


“No buts,” said the baron.


They threw the reins to one of the servants who rushed up, and strutted haughtily past the girls into the inn. The air was oppressively heavy. The weak light of the tiny oil lamps hardly penetrated through the dense haze of fumes and exhalations; the place resembled a big and very filthy sauna bath back on Earth. Soldiers with unbuttoned tunics, dripping with sweat, sailors with colorful kaftans over their naked bodies, women with barely covered breasts. Gray Sturmoviks holding their battle axes between their knees, and some down-at-the-heel workers were all sitting at some long tables, eating and drinking, cursing, laughing, crying, and singing filthy songs with roaring voices. To the left, one could vaguely see a bar, where the innkeeper sat on a platform surrounded by huge barrels and directed a swarm of skilled and fraudulent servants. On the right, a large bright rectangle shone through the mist, the entrance to the “private room,” the room for noble dons, reputable merchants, and Gray officers.


“Why shouldn’t we wet our whistle, come to think of it?” asked the baron in a tone of irritation. He seized Rumata by the sleeve and made his way toward the bar, passing through a narrow aisle between the tables, scratching the backs of guests who were seated at the tables with his slightly protruding belt-armor. At the counter he picked up a large jug, had the innkeeper fill it up to the rim and without a word drained the jug in one large draught to the last drop;


then he stated that all was lost anyhow and only one thing remained—to have a good time. Then he turned to the innkeeper and inquired loudly if this establishment had some accommodation where noblemen could pass the time in a befitting manner without having to be bothered by all kinds of rabble, riff-raff and vermin. The innkeeper reassured him that there was indeed such a suitable place on the premises.


“Excellent!” said the baron with a grand flourish as he threw a few gold coins to the innkeeper. “Will you bring us the best you have in your house? But don’t have the food served by some dolled-up little whore—we want to be waited on by some respectable older woman!”


The innkeeper himself accompanied the noble dons to the “private room.” It was occupied by just a few guests. In one corner sat a group of Gray officers, two lieutenants in tight uniforms and two captains in short soldiers’ coats with the epaulets of the Ministry of Internal Security. Two aristocrats were dozing near the window over a slender jug of wine: their faces looked pinched and sour, exuding an air of general depression. At the nearby table sat a little band of impoverished dons in rumpled jackets and mended cloaks. They sipped their beer and let their greedy eyes sweep around the room ever so often.


The baron lumbered over to a free table, cast a mean glance in the direction of the Gray officers and grumbled:


“You just can’t get away from that rabble. Not even here.” But now a fat old auntie waddled into the room bearing the first course. The baron croaked greedily, pulled his dagger from his belt, and fell over the feast. Silently he devoured big chunks of roast venison, mountains of marinated mollusks, huge piles of crabs, enormous quantities of salads and mayonnaise dressings, washed everything down with cascades of wine, beer and home brew, and finally wine mixed with beer and home brew. The impoverished dons attempted repeatedly to join Baron Pampa at his table, but the baron sent them packing with a majestic sweep of his hand and a nasty growl.


Suddenly he stopped eating, stared at Rumata with protruding eyes, and roared like a beast of prey: “It’s quite a while since I’ve been last in Arkanar, my noble friend. And I swear upon my honor there is something I don’t like about this place!”


“And what would that be?” inquired Rumata, interested, while he gnawed at a chicken wing.


Awe and attention marked the faces of the impoverished dons.


“Tell me, my dear friend,” thundered the baron and wiped his greasy hands at his cloak, “since when has it become the custom in our beautiful capital city, the seat of our Highness the King, that the descendants of the oldest families of the realm can’t take a step without running into these miserable shopkeepers and butchers?!”


The noble dons exchanged quick glances and withdrew into their corner. Rumata blinked over to the other corner where the Gray officers were sitting. They put down their glasses and looked over to the baron’s table.


“I’ll tell you, noble dons, where the fly in the ointment is,” continued Baron Pampa. “The whole trouble is that you are a bunch of damped cowards. You tolerate them because you are afraid of them. You over there, you are scared stiff!” He yelled at the top of his voice and locked eyes with the impoverished don nearest to him. But the poor nobleman, smiling weakly, left his table like a dog with his tail between his legs. “Cowards!” trumpeted the baron. He was so excited that his mustache reared up skywards.


But there wasn’t much one could expect from the impoverished dons. They were obviously disinclined to get into a brawl; they only wanted to eat and drink.


Now the baron hurled one foot over the bench, twirled the right half of his mustache around his fist, riveted his eyes on the corner where the Gray officers were sitting and declared:


“But I, gentlemen, I am not afraid, not even of the devil! I squash the Gray pests under my foot wherever I encounter them!”


“What’s that beer barrel whining over there?” loudly inquired a Gray captain with a horse’s face.


A satisfied smile played around the baron’s lips. He rose boisterously from the table and jumped onto the bench. Rumata raised his eyebrows and started to gnaw at his second chicken wing.


“Hey, there, you Gray bastards from hell!” yelled the baron as loud as if the officers were miles away. “Let it be known that I, Baron Pampa Don Bau, gave a fine object lesson to the likes of you just three days ago. You know, my friend,” Baron Pampa turned and spoke from the ceiling down to Don Rumata, sitting at the table, “I had a few drinks the other night with Father Kabani at my castle. Suddenly my horse groom came running up to announce that a Horde of Gray Sturmoviks is just about to tear down the Golden Horseshoe Inn. My inn! On my own grounds! I issued the command: Let’s ride! And we were there in no time. I swear to you by my spurs, we found there a whole horde, some twenty men altogether! They’d caught three of my men, got as drunk as pigs—these bastards can’t drink, of course—and they were just beginning to smash everything to smithereens. I grabbed one by the legs, and that started the merry chase. I chased them as far as the Heavy Swords. Blood was flowing—you won’t believe it, my friend—we were wading in it up to our knees, and I don’t know how many battle axes were left behind!”


Here the baron’s account was interrupted. The captain with the horse’s face swung his hand and hurled his heavy dagger against the baron’s chain mail.


“Finally!” said the baron and drew his giant two-fisted sword.


He jumped off the bench with unexpected agility; his sword arched expertly through the air and cut through a crossbeam supporting the low ceiling. The baron cursed. The ceiling sagged a little and plaster and dust fell from above on the men’s heads.


Everyone in the room had risen. The impoverished dons kept close to the walls. The young aristocrats climbed onto the tables to have a better view. The Gray officers formed a half-circle and drew their swords while slowly advancing toward the baron. Only Rumata remained seated, trying to figure out on which side it would be safer to stand up without coming to grief. For now the baron’s broad sword was hissing ominously through the air, describing flashing circles above the baron’s head. It was an awe-inspiring sight. The baron reminded Rumata of a freight helicopter with idly spinning rotary blades.


Now the baron was hemmed in on three sides by the Gray officers, who were forced to a halt as soon as they came within range of the whirling sword. One of the officers was unfortunate enough to have his back to Rumata, who leaned across the table, seized the hapless man by the collar, yanked him down so that his back slammed into the dirty dishes on the table, and gave him a sharp chop behind his ear. The Gray officer shut his eyes and his body stiffened. The baron yelled:


“Cut his throat, noble Rumata, I’ll finish off the others!”


He’ll massacre the whole lot, thought Rumata uneasily.


“Attention!” he said to the Gray officers. “Why should we ruin each other’s evening? You don’t have a ghost of a chance against us. Throw down your arms and beat it!”


“Certainly not! That would be the limit!” put in the baron, visibly upset. “I want to fight! I want them to fight! Stand up and fight, you wretches!”


With these words he advanced towards the Gray officers, all the while whirling his sword faster and faster above his head. The Gray officers fell back, all pale in the face. Evidently this was the first time they had ever seen a freight helicopter. Rumata jumped over the table. “Stop, my friend!” he called out. “There is really no reason for us to quarrel with these people. You don’t care for their presence here? Fine, tell them to leave!”


“We won’t leave without our weapons,” grumbled one of the lieutenants. “We’d be punished. We are on patrol duty now.”


“Go to hell and take your weapons with you!” decided Rumata. “Sheath your swords, hands on top of your head; leave one at a time! And no tricks! Or I’ll beat you to a pulp!”


“How can we get out of the room?” inquired the captain with the horse face. His long upper lip twitched with irritation. “This don blocks our way as you can see!”


“And will continue to do so!” insisted the stubborn baron.


The young dons snickered.


“All right then,” said Rumata. “I’ll hold him down and you file out, one after the other, but hurry up. I won’t be able to control him much longer! Hey, there, clear the doorway! Baron,” he said and grasped Pampa around his broad waist, “it seems to me you have forgotten an important fact. This famous sword was used by your ancestors only to do battle, for it is written: Do not draw your sword in taverns!”


The shadow of a doubt darkened the baron’s features while he continued to swing his sword.


“But I don’t have another sword here with me,” he said puzzled.


“All the more relevant …” answered Rumata emphatically.


“Do you think that?” The baron was still hesitating.


“You know the rules better than I do!”


“That’s true,” said the baron. “You are right.” He looked up to his whirling hands. “You wouldn’t believe it, Don Rumata, I could go on like this easily for another three or four hours without stopping. And I wouldn’t even feel tired. Too bad that she can’t see me like this now!”


“I’ll tell her all about it, rest assured,” promised Rumata.


The baron sighed and lowered his sword. The Gray officers crept out of the room, cowering in fear. The baron followed them with his eyes.


“I don’t know, I don’t know,” he said undecided. “Do you really think I made the right decision, not smashing them to a pulp?”


“You acted correctly, absolutely correctly,” Rumata reassured him.


“Well then,” said the baron as he sheathed his sword. “If we were not fortunate enough to have a good fight, let’s have something decent to eat and lots to drink.”


He grabbed the still unconscious Gray lieutenant by his legs and pulled him off the table, while he croaked out loudly: “Hey, there, innkeeper! Bring us some wine and a bite to eat!”


The young aristocrats came to their table to congratulate them most humbly on their victory.


“That’s nothing, it was easy!” said the baron complacently. “Six skinny milksops—and big cowards, like all shopkeepers are. I’ve finished off two dozen like that, at the Golden Horseshoe—chased them out … How fortunate,” and he turned to Rumata, “that I did not have my battle sword with me at the time! I might have drawn it, absentminded as I am. Although the Golden Horseshoe is actually not a tavern, it’s just a little corner bistro …”


“Some also say,” remarked Rumata, “that it is written: Do not draw your sword in the corner bistro!”


The innkeeper’s wife brought new dishes with meat and some more wine. The baron rolled up his sleeves and set to work.


“By the way,” said Rumata, “who were the three prisoners you set free that time at the Golden Horseshoe?”


The baron stopped chewing and stared at Rumata. “But my dear friend, maybe I didn’t make myself clear. I did not set anybody free. True, they were all prisoners, had been arrested, but these are affairs of the government. Why should I have liberated them? It was just some old don, a big coward, an old bookworm and his servant …” He shrugged his shoulders.


“Yes, of course,” said Rumata.


Suddenly the baron turned purple in the face; he rolled his eyes in a most frightening manner.


“What?! Again?!” he roared.


Rumata turned around. Don Ripat stood in the doorway. The baron jumped up from his seat, overturning benches and dishes. Don Ripat threw a significant glance at Rumata and left the room again.


“I beg your pardon, baron,” said Rumata, rising to his feet. “The King’s service is calling.”


“Oh, dear,” mumbled the baron in a disappointed voice. “I feel sorry for you. I wouldn’t serve for anything in this world!”


Don Ripat was waiting for him outside the door.


“What’s new?” asked Rumata.


“Two hours ago,” reported Don Ripat officiously, “I placed Doña Okana under arrest under the orders of our Minister of Internal Security. I had her taken to the Tower of Joy.”


“Hmm,” was all that Rumata said.


“Doña Okana died one hour ago. She did not survive the tortures.”


“Hmm.”


“Officially she was accused of being a spy. But—” Don Ripat seemed embarrassed and gazed down at the floor. “I think—I believe—”


“I understand what you mean,” said Rumata.


Don Ripat looked at him with a guiltridden face.


“I was powerless—” he started to say.


“That’s none of your concern,” said Rumata hoarsely.


Don Ripat’s eyes became leaden. Rumata slightly nodded his head to him and went back to his table. The baron was just finishing off a platter with fried clams.


“Estorian wine! Let’s have a lot of it!” Rumata could hardly choke out the words. He tried to swallow a big lump in his throat. “Let’s enjoy ourselves now! To hell with everything, let’s have a good time!”


When Rumata came to again, he found himself lying in the middle of a big empty lot. A gray day was dawning, in the distance roosters crowed a raucous reveille. Dense flocks of blackbirds were crowing overhead, circling above something unpleasant nearby. It smelled of rot and decay. The fog in Rumata’s head lifted quickly, the usual penetrating lucidity and reliability of all his senses returned. A pleasant taste of mint seemed to linger on his tongue. The fingers of his right hand hurt badly. Rumata lifted his right fist, all cramped up, to his eyes. The skin around his wrist was chafed. He opened his fist and found that he had still been grasping an empty vial of Casparamid, the potent medication against alcohol poisoning that was standard equipment—just as a precautionary measure—for all Terranian emissaries sent by the various institutes to extraterrestrial planets. Apparently he had followed some blind instinct and poured the whole contents of the vial into his mouth before he had sunk completely into brute unconsciousness here on this large empty lot.


The neighborhood seemed familiar. The charred skeleton of the observatory tower jutted skywards and to the left of the burnt-out ruin, the watchtowers of the royal palace, thin as minarets, pierced the pale light of the dawn. Rumata breathed in deeply the cold, humid air, then set out for home.


Baron Pampa had had a wonderful night, exactly the kind he liked. Accompanied by a little band of moneyless dons who were easily inclined to lose their dignity, he set out on a gigantic roving expedition through the cheap saloons of Arkanar, where he downed unbelievable quantities of alcohol, accomplished amazing feats of gluttony, and became involved in no less than eight brawls. At least this was the number of times that Rumata could clearly recall having intervened to separate the belligerents in order to prevent the worst from happening. The rest had vanished in a haze. Only occasionally the fog would lift and animallike, grimacing faces, knives held in their teeth, would emerge, then again the bewildered, bitter face of the last of the moneyless dons, whom Don Pampa tried to sell as a slave down in the harbor area, then again an Irukanian with a bulbous nose and mean eyes, who, boiling with rage, demanded from the noble dons the return of his horse.


In the beginning Don Rumata still remained a spy. He did not drink any less than the baron: Irukanian, Estorian, Soanian, and Arkanarian wine; but every time he changed the brand of wine he secretly popped a vial of Casparamid into his mouth. He retained his discerning power of judgment and noticed that the Gray Patrols were stationing themselves in far larger numbers than usual at intersections and bridges; then there was a sentry post of barbarians on horseback somewhere on the Soanian cross-country road, who would probably have shot the baron if Don Rumata had not understood and mastered their dialect. He remembered clearly the thought that flashed through his mind at the motionless rows of strange soldiers in long, black cloaks with hoods, who had taken up position in front of the Patriotic School:


But isn’t that the guard of the monks? What business does the church have in this place? he had wondered. Since when does the church mix in secular affairs here in Arkanar? Only very gradually did he get inebriated, but then, all at once, he was overcome by deep intoxication. In a fleeting moment of lucidity he noticed a totally wrecked table in some unfamiliar room, saw his own hand brandishing a sword and the pitiful, imploring figures of the impoverished dons around him. He almost thought it was time to go home; but by then it was already too late. He was seized by a wave of mad rage and by a disgusting, irresistible joy to be able for once to throw off all traces of humaneness. Nevertheless, he had still remained a Terranian and an emissary of the institute back on Earth, a descendant of man, the masters over fire and iron, who will neither spare themselves nor stop before anything if it is in the cause of a great goal to be achieved. He could not remain Rumata of Estoria, flesh from the flesh of twenty generations of his warrior ancestors, who were famed for their robbing and drunkenness. But neither was he a communard, a comrade any longer. He no longer felt any obligation to the great Experiment. He was only concerned now with obligations toward his own person. And he was no more beset by doubts. Everything seemed clear now, absolutely clear. He now knew exactly who was to blame for everything and he knew exactly what he wanted to do: to lash out blindly, to hurl down into the fire, down from the steps of the palace, down onto the spears and pitchforks of the raging mob …


Rumata gave a sudden start; he unsheathed his swords. There were nicks on the blades that were otherwise blank. He remembered vaguely having fought with someone. But with whom? And how had it ended?


They had boozed away their horses. The impoverished dons had vanished somehow. Rumata had dragged the baron home—this he could recall, too. Pampa Don Bau was enterprising, apparently completely sober and good and ready to continue with this most entertaining evening—only he could not stand on his legs any longer. Besides, he believed for some obscure reason that he had just taken leave of his beloved baroness and that he was now on a campaign against his arch enemy, Baron Kaska, who had already had the audacity to commit the most outrageous feats (“Will you judge for yourself, my dear friend, this scoundrel brought forth from his hip a six-fingered boy and named him Pampa …”).


“The sun is about to set,” he declared as he regarded a gobelin representing a sunrise. “We could drink all night through, noble dons, but we need some sleep before the battle. And not a drop of wine during the battle! Besides, the baroness would not care for it.”


“What? A bed? Beds on a battlefield? Our bed is our saddled steed.” With these words he tore the gobelin off the wall, wrapped it around his entire body and stumbled noisily over to the corner under the big chandelier. Rumata ordered the boy Uno to place a tub with pickled cucumbers and a tub with sauerkraut beside the baron. The boy’s face was sleepy and very angry. “There, look! He has wrapped himself in our good gobelin,” he muttered. “Eyes that look in different directions …” “Shut up, you fool,” said Rumata in answer, and—then something happened. Something very vulgar, that had chased him halfway across town to this empty lot. Something very, very vile, wretched, mean, unforgivable, embarrassing …


The memory of this distressing action reawakened as he approached his house. He stopped in his tracks.


… He had pushed Uno aside, climbed up the stairs, pushed the door open and stormed over to her. He was her master. And by the light of the street lantern he saw her white face and huge eyes filled with fear and disgust—and in these eyes he could see himself as he was: staggering, with a drooping, drooling lower lip, with fists whose skin hung down in shreds, in soiled clothes. He saw a beastly, vile, blue-blooded skunk. And her glance hurled him backwards, down the stairs, into the entry hall, out of the door and out into the street, the dark nocturnal street and on and on, farther and farther, as far away as possible …


He gnashed his teeth, felt his insides contort and turn to ice, then he gently opened the house door and entered the hall. Over in a corner, snoring peacefully like a walrus, was the sleeping baron. “Who is that?” called Uno, who had been slumbering on a bench, a spread lying across his knees. “Quiet!” commanded Rumata in a whisper. “Go to the kitchen, bring a bucket of water, vinegar and new clothes. Hurry up!”


Leisurely he poured water over his body for quite a while, and with great gusto scrubbed himself with vinegar, thus cleansing himself from the filth of his nightly pleasures and fights. Contrary to his usual self, Uno remained silent throughout while he assisted his master. Not until he helped him button up the ridiculous lilac-colored trousers with the pretty buckles did he report sullenly:


“During the night, after you ran out, Kyra came downstairs and asked if the master had come home or not, but then said that she must have been dreaming. I told her that you had not yet returned from your guard duty at the palace, where you went last night …”


Rumata sighed deeply and turned away. But this did not help in the least. It made things even worse.


“And I’ve been sitting here the whole night through near the baron with my spear all ready across my knees. I was afraid he might crawl upstairs while he was so drunk.”


“Thanks, my little one, thanks,” Rumata uttered painfully. He put on his shoes, went into the dressing room and stood in front of his dark metal mirror. The Casparamid was doing its work. Very effectively. The mirror reflected an image of an elegant, noble don with a slightly fatigued face after the long, strenuous night guard duty. But definitely very decent looking. His moist hair, framed by the golden circlet, fell softly and neatly down on either side of his face. With an automatic gesture, Rumata adjusted the lens on his forehead. Lovely scenes they’re watching today on Earth, he thought somberly.


Meanwhile, the day broke. The sun began to peer into dusty windows. The shutters rattled. Sleepy voices could be heard in the street. “Did you sleep well, brother Kiris?”—“Very well, brother Tika, praise the Lord. The night is over, thank God.”—“Somebody was beating against the windows of our house. They say Don Rumata went out during the night.”—“He is said to have a house guest.”—“So, and he went out? I think he went to the young prince, and did not even notice how they burnt down half the town.”—“What can I tell you, brother Tika? Thank God that we have such a noble don in our neighborhood. Once a year he does guard duty, and that’s a lot already.”


Rumata walked up the stairs, knocked and entered the study. Kyra was sitting in the armchair as the day before. She raised her eyes and looked, restless and fearful, into his face.


“Good morning, my darling,” he said, walked over to her, kissed her hands and sat down in an armchair across from her.


She looked at him a while with questioning eyes and asked finally:


“Are you tired?”


“Yes, a bit. And I must go away once more today.”


“Would you like me to prepare something for you?”


“No, thanks. Uno will take care of it. Well … you might iron my collar …”


Rumata could feel a wall of lies rise between them. Very thin at first, then thicker and thicker and more and more solid. For the rest of our lives! Rumata thought bitterly. He sat in his seat, covered his eyes with his hands, while she was rubbing carefully various lotions and perfumes onto his strong neck, his cheeks, his forehead and his hair. Then she said:


“You don’t even ask how I slept.”


“How did you sleep, my darling?”


“I dreamt. A terrible, horrible dream. Do you know what I mean?”


The wall grew as thick as a rampart.


“It’s usually that way in a new place,” said Rumata hypocritically. “The baron must have caused quite a commotion.”


“Shall I order breakfast for you?” she asked.


“Go ahead!”


“What kind of wine do you like in the morning?”


Rumata opened his eyes.


“I’d like some water,” he said. “I don’t drink in the morning.”


She went out and he heard how she spoke to Uno. Her voice sounded clear and full. Then she returned, sat on the arm of his chair and began to tell him her dream. Rumata listened, nervously plucking at his eyebrows, and felt the wall grow thicker and more unassailable by the minute, separating him forever from the only human being whom he loved and cherished here on this horrible world. And, all of a sudden, he threw himself forcefully against this wall.


“Kyra,” he said. “It was no dream!” And nothing extraordinary happened.


“My poor darling,” said Kyra. “Wait, I’ll bring you some pickles …”