FIVE




Once, not too long ago the court of the Irukanian kings had been one that especially concerned itself with refinement and culture. A number of scholars were retained at court—mostly charlatans, of course, but also men like Bagir Kissenski, the discoverer of the curvature of the planet, or the king’s personal physician Tata, who made the brilliant assertion that epidemics were caused by tiny worms, invisible to the naked eye and spread by water and wind, or Synda the alchemist, who—true to his kind—was searching for a way of making gold from dirt, and who quite incidentally discovered the law of the preservation of energy. There were also poets to be found at the Arkanarian court. Though the majority consisted mainly of sycophants and parasites, there was also Pepin, the Great, the author of the historical tragedy The Northern Campaign; then there was also Zuren, the Just, who wrote over five hundred ballads and sonnets that became folksongs; and finally the poet Gur, who wrote the first secular novel in the history of the realm, a sad romance about a prince who fell in love with a beautiful barbarian maiden. There were also splendid artists, dancers and singers at the court. Remarkable painters covered the walls with immortal frescoes, famous sculptors adorned the parks of the royal abode with their creations. Nevertheless it cannot be said that the Arkanarian kings were true patrons of the arts and sciences or genuine connoisseurs. All that served merely as decoration, the same as the ceremony accompanying the awakening and rising of the king or the spectacular officers of the guard at the castle entrance.


The indulgence of the monarchs would sometimes go as far as to permit some scientists and poets to become noteworthy little cogs in the machinery of the state. Thus, for instance, barely fifty years had passed since the highly learned alchemist Botsa had held the post of Minister of the Department of Mining—a position that had since been eliminated because it was no longer needed. In this capacity he opened up several new mines and made Arkanar famous for its high-grade alloys; unfortunately, Botsa’s secret formulas had been lost after his death. Pepin, the poet, presided until recently over the state’s educational program, but then his Ministry for History and Language Sciences was declared to be detrimental to mental health, as it was known to have caused the disintegration of human minds.


Although it had occasionally happened that the king’s favorite mistress, a dull, mawkish person, did not care for a particular scientist or artist, who then might be either sold abroad or poisoned by arsenic, it was Don Reba who finally espoused the cause thoroughly and with gusto. During his reign as omnipotent Minister of Security for the Protection of the Crown, he would organize such violent pogroms amongst the members of the intelligentsia that he would even manage to evoke the dissatisfaction of certain noble grandees, who pronounced that court life was becoming increasingly more boring and who complained that they heard nothing but silly gossip at the court balls.


Bagir Kissenski was accused of insanity present to a degree bordering on treason, and was then imprisoned in a dungeon. It was only through the efforts of Rumata that he was released and returned to the capital. Bagir’s observatory was burned to the ground and those of his students who had remained unmolested fled as far away as possible. Tata, the king’s personal physician, together with five other quacks, suddenly turned out to be a common poisoner who was inciting the Irukanian Duke against the person of the King. He confessed everything in the torture chamber and was hanged in public on the Royal Square. While attempting to rescue Tata, Rumata spent thirty poods of gold, lost four of his agents (noble dons who did not realize what they were doing) and came himself within an ace of being killed when he was attacked during an attempt to abduct the condemned physician.


That had been his first big defeat. And that was when he finally understood that Don Reba was no mere accident. One week later he learned that Synda the alchemist was to be brought to trial for allegedly concealing the philosopher’s stone from the state treasury. Rumata was still boiling mad over his latest defeat and therefore decided to take matters into his own hands. He laid an ambush around the house of the alchemist, disguised himself with a black mask, and personally disarmed the Sturmoviks who were about to march the alchemist off to prison; locked the Sturmoviks in the cellar of Synda’s house and that very night led Synda, who had not the vaguest notion what was happening to him, across the border to Soan. There, after an initial shrug of his shoulders, the alchemist continued his search for the philosopher’s stone under Don Kondor’s supervision. Pepin, the poet, suddenly donned a monk’s garb and retired to some distant monastery. Zuren, the Just, had been unmasked only recently. He was found guilty of making criminally ambiguous utterances, and was further convicted of playing up to the taste of the lower classes. He was declared to have forfeited his honor and fortune, tried to fight for his rights, recited quite openly subversive ballads in disreputable inns and was twice almost beaten to death by some patriotically minded persons. Not until then did he permit his friend and patron Don Rumata to persuade him to flee to the capital of the realm. Rumata would never be able to forget the sight of the departing poet: pale and blue at the same time, totally drunk, his thin arms clung to the planks of the ship as it left the dock, while he roared out his farewell sonnet in a resonant, surprisingly youthful voice: “It weighs upon my soul like fallen leaves …”


As far as the poet Gur was concerned, he was informed by Don Reba on the occasion of a private audience that the Prince of Arkanar could not befriend his ilk, in view of the hostility expressed in his poems. Whereupon Gur personally threw his own works into a bonfire on the Royal Square. Ever since that time, whenever the king was graciously pleased to go for a ride, Gur would stand in the crowd of courtiers, his head bowed, his face blank; upon an imperceptible sign from Don Reba, he would step forward from the courtiers’ ranks and recite ultrapatriotic poems—which, however, were greeted with nothing but secretly stifled yawns.


And on the stage the same play was presented over and over again: The Downfall of the Barbarians; or Marshal Totz, King Pits of Arkanar. Musical performances were generally limited now to concerts with songs accompanied by orchestra. Those artists who had survived painted signboards. Two or three of the cleverest ones even managed to remain at court, where they painted portrait after portrait of the king and Don Reba (who was always solicitously and respectfully supporting the king). This characterization was none too encouraging: the king was always represented as a radiant twenty year old clad in a suit of armor, while Don Reba was pictured as a mature man with a very meaningful expression.


It became very boring indeed at the Arkanarian court. Nevertheless, the grandees, the noble dons without occupation, the officers of the guard, and the noble dons’ frivolous beauties would fill the antechambers and salons of the palace as of yore—some out of vanity, others out of fear. To be truthful, many were quite unaware of any changes. They were those who, in the olden days, when they had had to attend concerts and poetry readings, had been most appreciative of the intermission. In fact, they could hardly wait for the pause so that they could discuss the merits of various breeds of hunting dogs or tell each other jokes. They were still capable of participating in a short dispute about the characteristics of souls in life after death, but problems such as the form of planets or the cause of epidemics were already considered indecent. A certain nostalgia was felt by the officers of the guard when the painters vanished; their representations of nature in the raw had been so masterful …


Rumata appeared at the palace, a little too late. The ceremony of the king’s toilette had already begun. The rooms were packed, and the king’s irritated voice could be heard over the melodious commands of the master of ceremony, who oversaw the formal dressing of His Majesty. The courtiers were discussing the events of the previous night. A criminal with Irukanian features had stolen into the palace during the night, slain the guard, and crept into the king’s sleeping chamber. There, it was said, he had been disarmed and captured by Don Reba in person; on the way to the Tower of Joy he had been torn to pieces by a pack of patriots whose servility and loyalty to the king had driven them wild with rage. This was the sixth attempt on the king’s life in one month, and this latest incident hardly roused any particular interest. It was only the special details that were being discussed. Rumata learned that His Majesty had set up in bed at the sight of the murderer and had covered the most beautiful Doña Midara with his own body, while uttering the historic words: “Get away with you, scoundrel!” Most courtiers willingly believed that these historic words had been spoken but assumed that the king had uttered them mistaking the murderer for a servant. And all agreed to a man that as usual Don Reba had been on his guard and was invincible in a fight at close quarters. Rumata expressed his agreement with this opinion with some flowery expressions, and in reply told a story he thought up on the spur of the moment how Don Reba had been attacked by twelve bandits: he finished off three of them right then and there, and routed the rest. The story was received with keen interest and lively approval, whereupon Rumata made the incidental remark that he had heard this story from Don Sera. All interest rapidly faded from the faces of the listeners, for it was common knowledge what a notorious liar and cheat Don Sera was. Not a word was said about Doña Okana. Either they had not yet heard about it or they pretended not to know anything.


With pleasant remarks, gallantly kissing the ladies’ hands, Rumata pushed his way step by step through the crowd of bedizened, perfumed and profusely sweating people until he reached the front rows. The nobles of the land spoke in soft voices: “Yes indeed, what a filly. She tried to barricade herself but, confound it! If he didn’t gamble her away that same night and lost her to Don Ke …”—“And her hips, my noble don, were of the most exquisite shape. How did Zuren phrase it so beautifully … hm, hm, hm … mountains of cool foam … hm, hm, hm … no, hills of cool foam … be it as it may, they were fine hips.”—“So I open the window very softly, take my dagger between my teeth, and just imagine, my dear friend, I feel how the window grating above me is giving way …”—“I raked the hilt of my sword across his teeth so that the old gray dog spun twice around his axis. By the way, you can admire him right over there; there he stands looking like he owned the world …”—“… and Don Tameo was spitting on the floor, slipped and fell head forward into the fireplace …”—“… then the monk says to her: ‘Do tell me your dream.’ Ha ha ha!”


Nauseating, thought Rumata. If somebody should chance to do away with me at this moment, this group of morons would be the last thing I had seen in my life. Only ready wit, that’s the only thing that will save me. Me and Budach. Seize the right moment and then suddenly let him have it. Take him by surprise so he won’t even have a chance to open his mouth! But don’t give them a chance to finish me off; there is no reason for me to die here!


At a measured pace he advanced toward the door of the king’s bedchamber, touched his swords with both hands, bent his legs slightly at the knees according to the court’s etiquette and approached the royal bed. They were just about to put on the king’s stockings. The master of ceremonies followed with bated breath each movement of the skillful hands of the two royal grooms. To the right of an open alcove stood Don Reba, talking in a hardly audible voice with a tall, rawboned man in a gray velvet uniform. It was Father Zupik, one of the leaders of the Sturmoviki, a colonel in the king’s bodyguard. Don Reba was a well-experienced courtier. To judge by the expression on his face, his only concern here was the nose of a certain filly, or the virtuous behavior of the royal niece. Father Zupik, however, a warrior and an ex-grocer, did not know how to control himself. His face grew dark, he bit his lips, and his fingers gripped his sword hilt, then released it suddenly. Finally, with a violent twitching of his cheeks, he turned around abruptly and—violating all rules of proper etiquette—walked straight out of the king’s bedchamber toward the crowd of assembled courtiers, who stood there petrified by such rudeness. Don Reba looked after him with an innocent smile, while Rumata followed the awkward gray figure with his eyes and thought: another dead man. Here we go again! He knew of the friction between Don Reba and the leadership of the Gray hordes. History was about to repeat itself; another one to share the fate of Captain Ernst Rohm of Nazi fame!


Now the stockings had been properly pulled up on the king’s legs. Obeying the melodious orders of the master of ceremony, the royal grooms elegantly reached for the royal shoes with their fingertips, when suddenly, out of the clear blue sky, the king kicked at them and turned so violently in the direction of Don Reba, that his belly flopped on his knees like a fully packed sack.


“I am sick and tired of your attempts on my life!” he howled hysterically. “Assassins, assassins, assassins! I want to sleep at night, and not to have to battle with assassins! Why can’t it be arranged that they attack me sometime during the day? You’re a lousy minister, Reba. Another night like this and I will have you executed.” Don Reba bowed and put his hand on his heart. “I always get a headache after these attempts on my life!”


All of a sudden he fell silent and quietly regarded his belly. The moment seemed favorable. The royal grooms were hesitating. Above all, he had to draw the king’s attention to himself. Rumata yanked the right shoe out of the royal groom’s hand, knelt down before the king and reverently pulled the shoe onto the heavy, silk-clad foot. For this was the age-old privilege of the house of the Rumatas: to shoe with their own hand the right foot of the crowned heads of the kingdom. The king bestowed a dull glance upon Don Rumata; then suddenly, a glimmer of interest came into his eyes.


“Ah, Rumata!” he said. “You are still alive? But Reba promised me to do away with you!”


He started to chuckle. “What a miserable minister he is, that Reba. He’s always making promises but he only pretends. He promised to put an end to all these conspiracies but the conspiracies grow more and more frequent. And these Gray monsters he’s shipped into my palace … I’m a sick man, and he hangs all my personal physicians.”


Rumata had now completely slipped the shoe on, bowed and stepped back two paces. He intercepted an attentive glance from Don Reba and tried to give his face a snooty, dull expression.


“I’m a very sick man,” the king continued. “Everything hurts me. I’d like to pass on to my eternal rest. I would have long since done so, but you’ll all go to rot and ruin without me, you pigs …”


Now they put on his other shoe. He rose to his feet but soon began to moan, doubled over with pain, and clasped his knees.


“Where are my physicians, my quacksalvers?” he roared with pain. “Where is my good Tata? You hanged him, you imbecile! And I would feel better at the mere sound of his voice! Be silent! I know myself that he was a poisoner! But I could not have cared less? So what if he concocted poisons? He was a physician, he was a good medical doctor! Do you understand that, you murderer? He may have poisoned some people, but he cured others. But you strangle everybody you can lay your hands on. How I wish you’d hanged yourself instead of him!” Don Reba bowed, placed a hand over his heart and remained in this position. “You had all of them hanged! Nobody stayed alive except for the charlatans! And the priests who administer holy water to me instead of medicine … Who will prepare some medicine for me now that Tata is gone? Who will rub healing ointment on my foot?”


“My King!” Rumata spoke up loud and clear, and it seemed to him that the whole palace froze in horror. “You have but to give the command and the best doctor in your entire kingdom will be here within one hour!”


The king stared at him perplexed. The risk was tremendous. Don Reba needed merely to blink an eyelid … Rumata could sense with all his body how numerous eyes stared at him intensely, ready to attack at any moment—he also knew the purpose of the rows of round, black openings which were visible just below the ceiling of the bed chamber. Don Reba regarded him with an expression of both politeness and benevolent curiosity.


“What is that supposed to mean?” asked the king in a sulking voice. “Well, then, I am giving you an order: where is your quacksalver?”


Rumata’s entire body began to tense up. He could almost feel the arrow tips in his back already.


“Your Majesty,” he said quickly. “Please, order Don Reba to produce the famous doctor Budach before your presence!”


How amazing! He had said the most important thing and he was still alive. Should Don Reba harbor any doubts about his position in this case? The king directed his weary glance toward his Minister of Internal Security.


“Your Majesty,” continued Rumata, now without haste and with a deliberate and restrained tone. “Inasmuch as I have known of your truly unbearable suffering, and heedful of my family’s duty toward the royal house, I arranged for the famous, most learned physician Budach to come here from Irukan. Most regrettably I must report that the doctor’s journey to you was cut short. The soldiers of our honorable Don Reba seized him one week ago and his fate from that day on is known to Don Reba alone. I presume that the physician is currently somewhere in this vicinity, probably in the Tower of Joy. I can only hope that Don Reba’s peculiar dislike of physicians has not yet had a fateful effect on Doctor Budach’s well-being.”


Rumata fell silent and held his breath. Apparently everything was going smoothly. Hold your horses, Don Reba! He glanced swiftly in the direction of the minister—and froze. The Minister of Internal Security had firm control over himself. He nodded briefly toward Rumata—a tender, fatherly reproach. This was the last thing Rumata expected from him. He seems triumphant, thought Rumata nonplussed. But the king, on the other hand, behaved true to form.


“You scoundrel!” he shouted. “I’ll wring your neck! Where is the doctor? Where is the doctor, I am asking you!”


Reba advanced a step, smiling pleasantly.


“Your Majesty,” he said, “you are truly a fortunate ruler, for you have so many devoted subjects that they sometimes interfere with each other in their desire to serve you.” The king stared at him with dull, uncomprehending eyes. “I do not wish to conceal that our zealous Don Rumata’s noble intentions were well known to me, like everything else in your realm. I do not wish to conceal that I sent out our Gray soldiers to meet Doctor Budach halfway for the sole purpose of protecting the honorable old man from the discomforts of his long journey. Furthermore, I do not wish to conceal that I was in no particular hurry to present the Irukanian Budach to Your Majesty …”


“How dare you do that!” the king reproached him.


“Your Majesty, Don Rumata is young and as inexperienced in politics as he is experienced in the noble art of dueling. Thus he was, of course, totally unaware of the dastardly feats the Duke of Irukan is capable of in his raging wickedness against the person of Your Majesty. But you and I, we two are naturally aware of that, aren’t we, Your Majesty?” The king nodded assent. “And that is why I deemed it advisable to conduct some kind of an investigation, merely as a precautionary measure. I would not have rushed matters, but if you, my King (a deep bow toward the king), and you, Don Rumata (a slight nod toward Rumata), so urgently insist on it, I’ll bring Doctor Budach into your presence this very day, after your midday meal, so that he can begin your treatment.”


“You are not so stupid after all, Don Reba,” said the king, after pondering a little while over his minister’s words. “An investigation … that’s fine … can never do any harm.


The cursed Irukanian …” He howled suddenly with pain and touched his knee again. “Oh, damn that leg! Good, right after the midday meal then? I’ll have to wait till then … have to wait.”


And leaning on the shoulder of the master of ceremony, the king slowly walked into the presence chamber, past Rumata, who was completely dumbfounded. And just as Don Reba was about to make his way through the crowd of the courtiers, who politely stepped aside to let him pass through, he bestowed a friendly smile on Don Rumata and asked:


“Is it correct, Don Rumata, that it is you who will do guard duty tonight in the Prince’s bedroom? I have been properly informed, haven’t I?”


Rumata bowed in silence.


Rumata ambled aimlessly through the endless corridors and cross passages of the palace. It was dark and humid there, and smelled of ammonia and putrefaction. He passed by magnificent rooms, decorated with rich carpets and wall hangings, and also by storage closets filled with junk and old furniture with peeling gilding. One rarely encountered anybody there. Occasionally some courtier would lose his way and wander around in this labyrinth, located in the back wings of the palace where the royal apartments gradually merged into the offices of the Ministry of Internal Security. It was easy to get lost here. Everyone remembered the time when a patrol of the guard, doing their rounds, were frightened by the howling of some man, who stretched his scratched hands out to them through the barred window of an embrasure. “Save me!” yelled the man. “I am a gentleman of the bedchamber! I don’t know how to get out of here! I haven’t eaten in two days! Will you get me out of here!” (There was an animated correspondence for ten days between the Treasurer of the Household and the Lord Stewart, which finally resulted in a decision to yank out the window bars. During these ten days they fed the poor gentleman of the bedchamber with bread and meat that was passed to him speared upon the tip of a lance.) Besides, there lurked various other dangers in these passages. Drunken soldiers of the Household troops, who were supposed to guard the person of the king, and drunken Sturmoviks, in charge of watching over the ministry, would clash in these narrow corridors and fight bitter battles. But after they had done with beating each other up, they would separate and carry off their wounded. And finally, this was where the ghosts of the slain would wander about—a quite considerable crowd of poor murdered souls had accumulated here in the palace during the course of the last two centuries.


From a deep nook in the wall he saw a Sturmovik emerging who was on guard duty. The Gray soldier raised his ax and said somberly:


“No admittance.”


“A fat lot you know, stupid!” said Rumata and shoved him aside.


As he was walking on, he could hear the Sturmovik scrape the floor with his boots and stomp his feet, unable to decide how he should react to Don Rumata’s insult. Don Rumata caught himself thinking that this offensive manner of speaking and these indolent gestures had almost become second nature to him: no longer did he merely pretend to act like a lout of noble birth, but he had assumed such behavior as sort of an automatic reflex. He visualized the effect of such behavior back on Earth and was overcome at once by a feeling of shame and nausea.—Why should I behave that way? What change has come over me? Whatever became of the respect and the confidence in my peers that constituted an ingrained pattern of conduct ever since I was a child? What kind of relationship have I developed to other human beings, to the wonderful creature called “man”? But I must be beyond all help anyhow by now … The horrifying thought raced through his mind: I actually hate and despise them. I feel no pity for them—no, I truly hate and despise them. Even if I consider the dullness and bestiality of that lump of flesh, the social circumstances and his horrible education … I can try as hard as I might, but I now see quite clearly that this is my enemy, hostile to everything I hold dear, the enemy of my friends, the enemy of all I personally hold sacred. And I do not hate him in an abstract manner, nor as a “typical representative,” but as an individual. I hate his disgusting mouth, all smeared with saliva, the stench of his unwashed body, his blind faith, his antipathy toward anything beyond sexual needs and guzzling beer. There he stands, shuffling his feet, this adolescent whose potbellied father used to thrash his hide not more than half a year ago in order to train him with such methods to become a merchant in maggoty flour and mouldy jam: there he stands, moaning and groaning, this addlebrain, torturing himself as he tries in vain to remember the pertinent paragraphs of the rules that were crammed into his stupid head—and he cannot make up his mind whether to use his hatchet on the noble don, to shout for help, or to simply wave him on his way. Whichever way he decides, no one will ever find out about it. He shrugs off everything in the world that bothers him, returns to his niche in the wall, puts a piece of chewing rind into his fat mouth, smacks his lips, chews the cud like a contented cow, and drips saliva like a teething babe. And nothing in the world will interest him. He will not exercise his brain for anything. God forbid! But how much better than he is our Enlightened Eagle, Don Reba? True, his psyche is more complicated, and his reflexes are more intricate, but his thoughts definitely resemble those of this fellow, who is reeking of ammonia and these labyrinthine corridors, studded with crimes. And he is indescribably vile, a horrid criminal, an unscrupulous spider. I have come to this planet to love these people, to assist them in their task of self-development, to enable them to see the light. No, I am a poor emissary, he thought sadly. I am a failure as a historian. And when did it happen that I fell into this abyss of which Don Kondor was speaking? Is a god entitled to any other feelings besides pity?


From behind his back came a hurried clomping of boots down the corridor. Rumata spun around and seized both swords with his hands placed crosswise at the hilt. Don Ripat rushed toward him, brandishing his unsheathed sword.


“Don Rumata, Don Rumata!” he called out in a loud whisper while still far away.


Rumata released his grip on his swords. Now Don Ripat had come quite close; he looked carefully in all directions, then whispered, almost inaudibly, into Rumata’s ear:


“I’ve been looking for you for nearly an hour. Waga Koleso is here in the palace! He is talking with Don Reba in the lilac room.”


Rumata narrowed his eyes momentarily. Then he cautiously stepped to one side and said with polite surprise:


“You wouldn’t be talking about the famous robber chief? I believe he has been executed a long time ago, or probably exists only as a figment of popular imagination.”


The lieutenant licked his chapped lips.


“He does exist … He is in the palace … I thought this would interest you.”


“My dear Don Ripat,” said Rumata with emphasis. “I am always interested in all kinds of rumors. Gossip. Anecdotes. Life is so dull … You must have misunderstood me.”


The lieutenant regarded him with perplexed eyes. Rumata continued: “Just use your own judgment, will you? Why should I be involved in Don Reba’s underhand dealings and fishy relationships? But don’t forget how much I do appreciate Don Reba as a person; I would be unable to condemn and criticize his actions.—Please, will you forgive me, I am in a hurry. A lady is expecting me.”


Don Ripat licked his lips again, bowed awkwardly and walked off to one side. Suddenly, Don Rumata had an inspiration.


“By the way, my friend,” he called after Don Ripat with kindness in his voice, “how did you like the little trick we played on Don Reba this forenoon?”


Don Ripat willingly came to a halt.


“We are most satisfied,” he said.


“Wasn’t it charming?”


“It was marvelous! The leadership of the Gray soldiers is very pleased that you finally have openly taken our side. Such a clever man like you, Don Rumata, wasting your time with barons, these titled monsters …”


“My dear Ripat!” said Rumata condescendingly, while turning to leave. “You seem to forget that seen from the pinnacle of my lineage hardly any difference can be noticed between the king and your ilk. Goodbye!”


He strode off confidently through the corridors, turned into side passages without a trace of indecision and pushed the guards aside without as much as a word being said. He had only some dim notion how to proceed now but he was sure that this was an amazing and very rare coincidence. He must hear the conversation between the two spiders. It was not for nothing that Don Reba had promised fourteen times the reward for Waga brought in alive rather than dead.


From behind the heavy lilac-colored curtains stepped two Gray lieutenants, their swords unsheathed.


“Greetings to you, my friends,” said Don Rumata and stopped right between the two men. “Is the minister in his apartment?”


“The minister is busy, Don Rumata,” said one of the two lieutenants.


“I’ll wait for him, then,” said Rumata and passed between the drapes. It was pitch dark here, impossible to see anything at all. He cautiously groped his way through chairs, tables, and heavy cast iron lantern stands. Then he perceived a thin ray of light, heard the familiar tenor voice of Waga Koleso, and came to a halt. Several times he distinctly heard someone breathe just behind his head and he was enveloped in a cloud of garlic and beer odors. Then he felt a spear point pressed cautiously but unmistakably between his shoulder blades. “Keep calm, you moron!” he said irritably but softly. “It’s me, Don Rumata!”


The spear was withdrawn. Rumata pushed a chair toward the chink of light, sat down, crossed one leg over the other, and yawned so loud that anyone could hear it. Then he started to observe.


The spiders had met. Don Reba sat there, very tense, elbows on the table and fingers interlaced. At his right was a stack of papers with a heavy wooden-handled dagger placed on top.


The minister’s face displayed a pleasant if somewhat rigid smile. The honorable Waga was sitting on a divan, his back turned to Rumata. He resembled a quaint old magnate who had been spending the last thirty years of his life on his country place in total seclusion.


“The murgles are crockled,” he said, “and the crack-stampers have been stubbing around our warrels with their greems quappered up. And there are twenty long zackerlings by now. Crupply and cressly, I would shrab them right on the snoller, crump over crass. But the zackerlings have a zunker way of sharmauning things. That’s why we’ve been brimsing our trunks. That’s our expomple …”


Don Reba cupped his well-shaven chin in his hand.


“Murbelously brickered out,” he said pensively.


Waga shrugged his shoulders.


“That is krapul our expomple. I wouldn’t flarry that you’d cruckle with us. Well, groosby then?”


“Groosby,” said the Minister of Internal Security firmly.


“And smucks off,” said Waga and got to his feet.


Rumata, who had listened totally perplexed to this nonsense, discovered a bushy mustache in Waga’s face and a little gray pointed beard. A genuine courtier from the reign of the former king.


“This was a very pleasant chat, Don Reba,” said Waga.


Don Reba rose, too.


“I thoroughly enjoyed our conversation, a great pleasure indeed,” he said. “I have never met such a courageous man as you, my dear Koleso …”


“The same here,” replied Waga with a slightly bored expression. “I am as amazed as I am proud of the boldness of the First Minister of our kingdom.”


Then he turned on his heels and walked toward the exit, leaning heavily on his cane. Don Reba did not take his eyes off the old man. He seemed lost in thought and absentmindedly placed his hand on the handle of his dagger. Immediately afterwards somebody standing behind Rumata puffed with all his might and the long blue tube of a blow-gun pushed past his ear to the chink in the drapes. For a moment, Don Reba remained motionless, intent on listening, then he sat down again, pulled out a drawer, took out a bundle of papers and began to study them. Somebody spat out in back of Rumata and the blowpipe disappeared. It was all very clear. The spiders had found their solution. Rumata stood up, stepped on someone’s feet and finally left the horrid room with the lilac-colored drapes.


The king was dining in a gigantic hall whose ceiling took up two storeys. The ninety-foot table had been set for 100 persons. The king was joined at table by Don Reba, personages of royal blood (two dozen blue bloods, gluttons, and experienced drunkards), various masters of ceremony, several members of the local aristocracy who traditionally were the king’s dinner guests and among whom Rumata was counted, a few transient barons with their wooden-headed spouses, and at the farthest end of the table, the landed gentry, the lesser nobility that had been invited with or even without any special privileges. The last group of guests received, together with their dinner invitations, a seating number for the table, and a list of instructions: “Sit quietly; the King does not like people to wiggle in their seats. Keep your hands on top of the table; the King does not like people to hide their hands underneath it. Do not turn around; the King does not like people to turn their back on him.” At every meal they would devour enormous quantities of the choicest foods, guzzle down rivers of old wines, and veritable mountains of the famous Estorian porcelain dishes were broken. In one of his reports to the king, the Treasurer once boasted that one such dinner at the royal table cost as much as was spent for the upkeep of the Soanian Academy of Sciences during six months.


While Rumata was waiting for the master of ceremonies to call three times, “Come to table!” and the accompanying sound of fanfares, he joined a group of courtiers and listened for the tenth time to Don Tameo’s famous story about how he had had the honor to partake of another royal meal some six months ago. “… So I arrive at my designated seat, we’re all standing, the King enters, sits down, so we, too, sit down, and the meal takes its normal course. But suddenly, just imagine, my noble dons, all of a sudden I feel all wet on my seat. Wet! I don’t dare to budge from the spot, neither turn around, nor put my hand down there. But, then, I wait for some propitious moment and cautiously feel down there with the fingers of my left hand. And would you believe it, my dear gentlemen, would you believe it! It’s wet down there! I quickly sniff at my fingers—no, they don’t stink. What the devil is going on? Meanwhile the dinner is over, everyone rises from their chairs, but—as you can fully imagine, my dear dons—I don’t quite feel like getting up from my seat … Then, lo and behold, the King comes toward me, His Majesty! But I remain seated like some yokel baron from the hinterland who knows nothing about court etiquette. His Majesty comes quite close, smiles graciously and puts his hand on my shoulder. ‘My dear Don Tameo,’ he says. ‘We have all gotten up from table and are going to watch the ballet but you are still sitting on your chair. What is the matter? Have you not had enough to eat, perhaps?’—‘Your Majesty,’ I say, ‘have my head cut off, but my seat is wet.’ His Majesty was graciously pleased to break out in laughter, and ordered me to stand up. I rise from my chair—and guess what? Loud laughter all around us. Noble dons, all throughout dinner I had been sitting on a rum torte! His Majesty was graciously roaring with laughter. Finally he said: ‘Reba, Reba! Is that one of your pranks again? Just wipe the noble don’s behind, he has his pants full!’ Don Reba doubles over with laughter, pulls out his dagger and scrapes the torte off the seat of my pants. Can you picture what I felt like, noble dons? I won’t hide it from you, I was trembling and shaking all over, frightened to death at the thought of having humiliated Don Reba in front of everyone, afraid that he now would revenge himself. Fortunately, however, all turned out all right at the end. I assure you, my noble dons, this was the happiest event in my life! I made the King enjoy himself. Oh, how he laughed! How he had fun!”


The fanfares sounded, the master of ceremonies called in his melodious voice for all to come to the table. The king entered the hall, slightly dragging one leg behind. All took their seats at the royal table. The guards on duty were stationed in all four corners of the hall, immobile, leaning on their double-fisted swords. Rumata’s table companions on either side were silent. To his right, the chair was filled with the quaking, immense belly of the somber glutton Don Pifa, married to a fabled beauty. On his left sat the poet Gur, staring into his empty plate with a blank expression. The guests were all intently watching the king. The king fastened a napkin, more gray than white, around his neck, quickly glanced at the round of dishes in front of him, and reached for a chicken leg. Hardly had he fastened his teeth on the meat than one hundred knives swept with a noisy clatter down on the plates and one hundred hands greedily dug into the dishes. The dining hall was filled with slurping and smacking of lips, the wine flowed like a torrent. The mustaches of the guardsmen, who were leaning unmoving on their swords, began to twitch in a dance of greed. Once Rumata had been nauseated by these affairs, but now he had gotten used to them.


While he was carving the thigh of a ram with his dagger, he slyly glanced to his right, but quickly looked away again:


Don Pifa’s torso was bent over an entire roast boar and working its way into it like a bulldozer. Not even the bones remained behind his steadily advancing body. Rumata held his breath and emptied a full glass of Irukanian wine. Then he turned slightly to his left. The poet Gur was poking his spoon joylessly in a bowl of meat salad.


“Writing something?” inquired Rumata in a subdued voice. Gur gave a sudden start.


“Writing something? I? I don’t know … sure, sure, lots of things …”


“Poems?”


“Yes, yes … poems …”


“They’re terrible poems, Father Gur.” Gur looked at him with a strange expression “You’re no poet!”


“No poet … Sometimes I reflect on what I really am, and what I am afraid of. I don’t know …”


“Look into your plate and continue eating. I’ll tell you what you are. A creative genius, the discoverer of new ways in literature, and one of the most productive writers to boot.” Gur’s cheeks became flushed with red. “In a hundred years, and maybe sooner, dozens of poets will follow in your tracks.”


“God forbid!” The words escaped from the poet’s lips. “Now I shall tell you what you’re really afraid of.” “I am afraid of the dark.” “The evening darkness?”


“This too. For dusk offers us up to the power of the ghosts. But most of all I fear the darkness at night, for everything turns gray in the same manner at night.”


“Well said, Father Gur. But now, something else: is your work still obtainable?”


“I don’t know—and I do not want to know.” “Let me assure you, one copy is in the capital, in the emperor’s library. Another copy is preserved in the Museum of Rarities in Soan. And a third copy is in my possession.” Gur took a spoonful of jelly, his hand trembling heavily. “I … I do not know …”


His large, deep-set eyes were depressed as he looked at Rumata. “I would like to read it … read it once more …” “I shall send it to you with pleasure.” “And then?” “And then you’ll return it to me.” “Oh, yes, give it back again!” said Gur sharply. “Don Reba has intimidated you very much, Father Gur.” “Intimidated … Have you ever had to burn your own children? What do you know of terror, of fear, noble don?”


“I bow my head respectfully before all you have had to go through, Father Gur. But I condemn you with all my soul for giving up!”


Suddenly Gur, the poet, began to whisper so softly that Rumata could hardly hear him over the general babble of voices and noisy eaters at the table.


“And what is that all supposed to mean? What is the truth? Prince Chaar really did love that beautiful copper-skinned woman. They had children together. I know their grandchildren. They poisoned them, they really did. But they told me this was all a lie. They told me truth is whatever is beneficial for the King. All else is nothing but lies and crimes. Only now am I finally writing the truth …” He suddenly rose from his seat and recited in a lofty, declamatory singsong:


Great and glorious, like eternity,


Rules the King named Noblemind.


Plotting princes grope uncertainly


When their visions he strikes blind.






The king interrupted his chewing for a moment, parted his lips to show a mouth full of food. He regarded Gur out of dull eyes. The guests pulled their heads back between their shoulders. Only Don Reba smiled and clapped his hands a few times, almost inaudibly. The king spat out several bones onto the carpet and said:


“Glorious? Right. Eternity? Good! You can go on eating.”


The lip smacking and babbling started anew. Gur sat down.


“How sweet and pleasant to tell the King the truth right to his face,” he said raucously.


Rumata was silent. Then he said:


“I’ll have a copy of the book sent over, Father Gur. One condition though. You will immediately begin a new work.”


“No,” said Gur. “Too late. Let Kiun write. I’m already poisoned. And anyway, I’m no longer interested in these things. The only thing I’d like to do now—I want to learn to drink. Only I can’t … My stomach hurts …”


One more defeat to chalk up, thought Rumata. Too late.


“Listen, Reba,” said the king suddenly. “Where is the quack? You promised to bring me a physician after dinner!”


“He is here, Your Highness,” said Don Reba. “Are you ordering me to call him?”


“Am I ordering you? That’s more than flesh and blood can bear! If you had pains in your knee like mine, you’d be squealing like a stuck pig! Have him come in at once!”


Rumata leaned back in his chair in order to see better. Don Reba raised his hand above his head and snapped his fingers. The door opened and in walked an old, bent man, constantly bowing, clad in a floor-length mantilla embroidered with silvery spiders, golden stars and glittering snakes. He was carrying a long, flat satchel under his arm. Rumata was worried and disappointed at the same time. He had imagined Budach to look quite different. Could such a wise man and humanist, author of the encyclopedic Treatise Concerning Poisons, have such restlessly wandering, inflamed eyes, lips aquiver with fear, and such a pitiful, subservient smile? But then Rumata remembered the poet Gur. Wouldn’t the persecution of an Irukanian spy be a worthwhile literary discussion in Don Reba’s cabinet? Wouldn’t it be fun to tweak Don Reba’s ear, he thought, and mentally smacked his lips. He should be dragged off to the dungeon. And the torturers should be instructed: There he is, that Irukanian spy who pretends to be our Arkanarian Minister of Internal Security. The king demands that you drag out of him where the real minister is being kept. Go to work! And woe betide you, if he dies before the week is over … Rumata had to hide his face in his hand. A wave of hatred swept over him. What a terrible thing, this hatred …


“There you are. Come over here, you quack,” said the king. “Come here, my dear man, you mental giant. Well, sit down over here—sit down, I said!—and begin!”


The unfortunate Budach set to work, his face contorted with fright.


“Go on, go on!” winced the king. “Keep on going, I tell you! Get down on your knees, your knees can’t possibly hurt you. Cured himself, that devil! Now, let me see your teeth! That’s the way. I’ll say a fine set of teeth you have here. If I only had teeth like that! And your hands are in fine shape, too, good and strong. What a healthy chap he is … and a mental giant in spite of it … Well, then … Come on, my dove, go on, heal me, what are you waiting for?”


“If You-you-r Ma-majesty … would graciously show me the sick leg … the leg … ,” stuttered the physician. Rumata looked up.


The physician knelt before the king and cautiously examined his leg.


“Eh!” snorted the king. “What’s that supposed to be? Don’t you touch me! Now that you have started, cure me!”


“I … I … have seen everything I need, Your Majesty,” mumbled the physician nervously and started to rummage hurriedly in his satchel.


The guests stopped chewing. The aristocrats of lower rank, who were sitting at the farthest end of the table, even stood up and, burning with curiosity, stretched their necks so as to be able to see better.


Budach took a few small stone bottles from his satchel, uncorked them, sniffed at each, one after the other, then placed them in one row on the table before him. Then he took the king’s goblet and filled it half with wine. While he was executing mysterious hand motions above the goblet, he whispered magic formulas then swiftly emptied all the little bottles into the cup. A distinct smell of ammonia spread throughout the hall. The king’s lips became pencil-thin. He peered into the cup, puckered, up his mouth, and glanced over in Don Reba’s direction. The minister smiled sympathetically. The courtiers held their breath.


What on earth is he doing? wondered Rumata. The old king has gout! What concoction has he been brewing together in that cup? Yet he stated quite clearly in his treatise:


“Rub the swollen limbs with the three-days-old poison of the Qu snake.” Perhaps he is going to use it to rub the potion into his skin?


“What is this?” asked the king, full of distrust, pointing with his right forefinger to the goblet. “It’s a liniment, is it, to rub into my aching knee?”


“Not at all, Your Majesty,” said Budach. He seemed to have regained his composure somewhat by now. “This is to be taken by mouth.”


“B-y-y mou-outh?” The king puffed out his cheeks and leaned back in his armchair. “I don’t want to take anything by mouth! Rub it in!”


“Your wish is my command,” said Budach obediently. “But I take the liberty of warning Your Majesty that an external application will not help you, not at all.”


“And why did all the others used to rub my knee with ointments?” inquired the king in a surly tone. “And you insist on making me drink this abomination.”


“Your Majesty,” said Budach and straightened up proudly. “This medicine is known only to me. I have cured the uncle of the Duke of Irukan with it. And what concerns those who advocate rubbing your knee with salves … permit me to say … these quacksalvers have not cured Your Majesty …”


The king glanced once more over to Don Reba. Don Reba smiled with compassion, it seemed.


“You swindler!” said the king to the physician in a nasty tone of voice. “You yokel! You flea-bitten know-it-all!” He seized the cup. “Here, that’s what I’ll do with this brew! I’ll throw it in your teeth!” He peered into the goblet. “What if it makes me throw up?”


“Then the procedure will have to be repeated, Your Majesty,” answered Budach with a sad face.


“Well, I’ll do it then,” said the king and was just about to raise the cup to his lips when he suddenly pushed it back again, so violently that some of the liquid spilled on the rug. “Ha, dear man, you drink some of it first! I know your ilk, you tricky Irukanians have even sold our Holy Mickey to the barbarians. Drink, I order you!”


Budach accepted the cup, looking rather offended, and sipped a few drops from it.


“Well, what does it taste like?”


“Bitter, Your Majesty,” said Budach subdued. “But you, Your Majesty, must drink this medicine now!”


“Must, must!” wailed the king. “I know all by myself what I must do. Give it to me! Half has been spilt already anyhow. Well then, hand it to me!”


He drained the cup at one draught. Compassionate sighs could be heard here and there coming from the dinner guests. And suddenly all was quiet. The king grew rigid, his mouth wide open. Tears welled up in his eyes, then ran down his cheeks, one by one. His face became flushed, little by little, then it turned blue. He stretched one hand out over the table, spasmodically snapping his fingers. Don Reba quickly handed him a sour pickle. The king hurled the pickle at Don Reba and then stretched his hand out again.


“Wine!” he croaked hoarsely.


Somebody bent down and handed him a clay jug. The king drank hastily with huge gulps, madly rolling his eyes all the while. Red stripes were flowing down on his white vest. After he had drained the jug, he threw it at Budach, but he missed.


“You dog’s son!” he said with an unexpected deep basso. “Why do you want to kill me off? Haven’t they hanged enough of your kind? Go to the devil!”


He fell silent and touched his knee.


“It hurts!” he said in the same whining tone as before. “It’s still hurting!”


“Your Majesty!” said Budach. “To obtain a complete cure your Majesty ought to drink this mixture daily, for at least one week.”


Something seemed to burst in the king’s throat.


“Get away!” howled the king. “Go and be hanged! All of you!” The courtiers jumped up, rushed en masse to the doors, overturning some chairs.


“Out of my sight! Ou-ou-ou-t!” screamed the king, beside himself with fury, and swept the dishes from the table.


After Rumata had quickly fled the scene along with the rest of the diners, he dived behind the nearest curtain at hand and started to laugh. Behind the curtain next to him, he heard the others laughing too—fitfully, gasping for breath and howling with delight.