PROLOGUE




The stock of Anka’s crossbow was made of black plastic. The string of chrome steel was operated by a noiselessly moving winch. Anton did not think much of such innovations. He owned a conventional arquebus in the style of Marshal Totz, King Pitz the first. It was overlaid with black copper and a rope of steer sinews ran along small wheels. Pashka, on the other hand, had an air rifle. Crossbows were childish weapons, he thought, for he was lazy by nature and lacked manual dexterity.


They landed on the north shore at a spot where the gnarled roots of mighty pine trees protruded from the yellow sandy slope. Anka let go of the rudder and looked around. The sun had risen above the forest. A blue fog hung over the lake. The pines glowed dark green and a yellow sandy beach stretched in the distance. A light blue sky arched over the whole landscape.


The children bent over the side of the boat and looked into the water.


“Can’t see a thing,” said Pashka.


“A huge pike,” said Anton, a trifle too sure of himself.


“With fins like that?” asked Pashka.


Anton did not reply. Anka, too, looked into the water, but she saw only her own reflection in it.


“How about taking a swim?” said Pashka, and plunged his arm into the water up to the elbow. “Cold,” he reported.


Anton climbed onto the bow and jumped ashore. The boat rocked to and fro. Anton took hold of the boat and glanced questioningly at Pashka. Now Pashka rose, placed the oar like a water carrier’s beam across his neck, bent his knees a bit and sang at the top of his voice:


Old salt, sea-dog, Witzliputzli!


Are you watching, on your guard?


Look! A school of hard-boiled sharkies


Are approaching, swimming hard!










Anton rocked the boat.


“Hey, hey!” yelled Pashka, trying not to lose his balance.


“Why ‘hard-boiled?’” Anka asked.


“I don’t know,” answered Pashka. They climbed out of the boat. “But it’s pretty good, isn’t it? ‘A school of hard-boiled sharkies!’”


They pulled the boat ashore. Their feet slipped on the wet sand, which was strewn with dried needles and pine cones. The boat was heavy and slippery but they dragged it all the way up onto the land. Then they stopped for a while to catch their breath.


“Almost squashed my foot,” said Pashka, and straightened his red fez. He made sure that the tassel hung directly above his right ear—just like the broad-nosed Irukanian pirates were wont to do. “Life isn’t worth a farthing, my dear!” he recited dramatically.


Anka was intently sucking her finger.


“A splinter?” asked Anton.


“No. Got a scratch. One of you two must have long nails.”


“Let me see!”


She showed him her finger.


“Yes,” said Anton. “A scratch.—Well, let’s do something!”


“Pick up your arms and let’s walk along the shore!” suggested Pashka.


“For that we didn’t need to crawl ashore,” Anton said.


“It’s chicken to stay in the boat,” stated Pashka. “But along the shore there are all kinds of things. Reeds, canyons, whirlpools, eddies with eels—and catfish, too.”


“A school of hard-boiled catfish,” said Anton.


“Hey, did you ever dive into a whirlpool?”


“Sure.”


“Funny that I didn’t see you do it.”


“Lots of things you haven’t seen yet.”


Anka turned her back on them, raised her crossbow and aimed at a pine tree 20 feet away. The bark came off in splinters.


“Wow, did you see that!” exclaimed Pashka with admiration. Then he aimed his air rifle at the same spot. But he missed. “I didn’t hold my breath properly,” he said.


“And even if you had held it properly, so what?” asked Anton. He looked at Anka.


With a firm movement Anka retracted the steel bow with the winch. She had splendid muscles, and Anton watched with pleasure the hard ball of her biceps rolling beneath her tanned skin.


Anka took aim carefully, and shot again. The second arrow penetrated the tree trunk, a bit lower than the first.


“That doesn’t make any sense,” said Anka, and let the crossbow hang down her side. “What?” asked Anton.


“We’re only damaging the trees, that’s all. Yesterday, a kid shot an arrow at a tree and I forced him to pull that arrow out with his own teeth.”


“Pashka would have run away,” said Anton. “You have good teeth.”


“I can whistle through my teeth, too,” said Pashka.


“Well,” said Anka, “let’s do something!”


“I don’t feel like climbing up and down canyons,” said Anton.


“Me neither. Let’s walk straight ahead.”


“Where to?” asked Pashka.


“Just follow your nose.”


“Meaning what?” said Anton.


“Let’s go into the forest!” said Pashka. “Toshka, do you remember the ‘Forgotten Road’?”


“Sure!”


“You know, Anetchka—” said Pashka.


“Don’t you call me Anetchka,” Anka cut in abruptly. She could not stand to be called by any other name than Anka.


Anton remembered very well that she did not like it, and said quickly:


“Sure—the Forgotten Road. Nobody has driven over it for ages. It isn’t even marked on the map, and where it leads to, nobody knows.”


“Have you ever been there?”


“Yes. But we didn’t explore it.”


“A road coming from nowhere and leading nowhere,” stated Pashka, who had regained his former self-assurance.


“That’s fine!” said Anka. Her eyes narrowed to black slits. “Let’s go! Will we get there by tonight?”


“What are you talking about? We’ll be there by noon.”


They clambered up the steep slope. Once they had arrived at the top, Pashka turned around. Down below was the blue lake with yellow speckled sand bars, and the boat on the sandy beach. Close to the shore, where the water was as smooth as oil, large concentric circles broke the surface—that was the pike, probably. And the boy felt, as always, that vague joy he experienced whenever he and Toshka stole away from the boarding-school and a whole day of freedom lay before them. A day filled with unexplored places, strawberries, sun-scorched deserted meadows, lizards, and ice cold water from unexpected springs amidst the rocks. And as always he felt overcome by a desire to shout out loud and jump up into the air. Anton, laughing happily, watched him, and Pashka saw the understanding in his friend’s eyes. Anka placed two fingers in her mouth and gave forth with a piercing whistle. And they entered the forest.


It was a pine wood, with sparse vegetation. Their feet skidded over the slippery, needle-covered soil. The slanting sun rays glittered between the straight tree trunks, and golden spots danced on the ground. The air smelled of resin, the nearby lake, and strawberries. Somewhere, far above them, an invisible lark was warbling.


Anka walked ahead. She carried her crossbow in one hand, and with the other reached now and then for the strawberries that occasionally peeked out, as red as blood, from among the foliage. Anton marched behind her with the solid battle gear of Marshal Totz slung over his shoulder. The quiver, filled with mighty battle arrows, rhythmically banged against the seat of his trousers with every step. He looked at Anka’s neck: it was deeply tanned, and the vertebrae jutted out like little knobs. Once in a while he turned around and looked for Pashka, who had disappeared; only the red fez flashed from time to time in the bright sunlight. Anton imagined Pashka prowling silently among the pine trees, his air rifle held in firing position, his lean face with the hooked nose pointing forward like some predatory animal. Pashka crawling through the underwood. But the forest knows no mercy. A challenge—and you must react at once, thought Anton. He was just about to duck—but Anka was walking right in front of him, and she might turn around any moment. Wouldn’t he look silly then!


Anka turned around and asked:


“Did you sneak away real quietly?”


Anton shrugged his shoulders. “Nobody sneaks away noisily!”


“Well, I did. I guess I made some awful noise,” said Anka with a worried expression. “I dropped a cup—and suddenly I heard steps in the corridor. Probably old maid Katja; she’s on duty today. I had to jump out of the window into a flower bed. Guess what kind of flowers grow there, Toshka?”


Anton frowned.


“Under your window? I don’t know, what kind?”


“Pretty tough flowers. No wind can rock them, no storm can break them. You can jump around in them and trample on them and it won’t harm them.”


“That’s interesting,” said Anton in a serious voice. He remembered that he also had a flower bed under his window, with flowers that were neither rocked by wind nor broken by storm. But actually he had never paid any attention to it.


Anka stopped and waited until Anton had caught up with her. She held her hand out to him. It was full of strawberries. With the tip of his fingers, Anton seized exactly three berries.


“Go ahead. Take some more,” said Anka.


“No, thanks,” said Anton. “I like to pick them myself.—But listen, Anka, it must be easy to get along with old maid Katja, isn’t it?”


“That all depends,” said Anka. “Just imagine somebody telling you every night how dirty and dusty your feet are—”


She fell silent. It was good to walk with her through the woods, shoulder to shoulder, and their bare elbows touching now and then. And it felt good to look at her—how pretty she was, so nimble, so friendly—and how big and gray her eyes were, and what dark lashes she had.


“Sure,” said Anton, and stretched out his hand to grasp a spider web that glistened in the sun. “Her feet wouldn’t get dirty. If somebody carried you through every puddle, then you wouldn’t get dirty either.”


“Who carries her?”


“Henry from the weather station. A big, strong guy with blond hair, you know.”


“Really?”


“Didn’t you know it? It’s old hat, everybody knows they’re in love.”


Both fell silent again. Anton looked at Anka. Her eyes were dark caves.


“And when did that happen?” she asked.


“Oh, on a moonlit night,” replied Anton, not too eagerly. “Just keep this all to yourself, will you?”


Anka laughed.


“It wasn’t hard to drag it out of you, Toshka,” she said. “Do you want some more strawberries?”


Quite mechanically, Anton now took some berries from her red-stained hand and put them in his mouth. I don’t like gossip-mongers, he thought. I can’t stand people who tell tales about others. Suddenly he had a thought.


“Some day somebody will carry you, too. How would you like it if people talk about it then?”


“I’m certainly not going to tell anybody about it,” said Anka. “I don’t like gossip.”


Then she continued in a more confidential tone: “You know, I’m really fed up with having to wash my feet two times every night.”


Poor old maid Katja, thought Anton. What an uphill fight she has.


They reached a narrow lane. The path led up a steep slope and the wood became darker and darker. Ferns grew in profusion, and wood sorrel. The pine trunks were covered with moss and the whitish foam of lichen.


But the forest knows no mercy. Suddenly a hoarse, shrill voice, quite unhuman, roared out:


“Stop! Throw your arms to the ground! You, milord, noble don and you, too, Doña!”


If there is a challenge in the woods, you must react at once, Anton knew. With calculated precision, Anton pushed Anka down into the ferns to the left of the path, while he himself leapt into the ferns to the right. He slipped at first, and then hid behind the evil-smelling lichen foam. The echo of the hoarse voice still rang through the wood, but the path was empty. Suddenly everything was quiet.


Anton turned to one side to bend his bow, when an arrow hit close by. Dirt showered down on him. The hoarse, unhuman voice announced:


“Milord has been hit in the heel!”


Anton moaned and pulled up his left leg.


“Not that one, it’s the right heel!” corrected the voice.


He could hear Pashka giggle nearby. Cautiously, Anton peered out from the ferns, but he could not see him anywhere in the dusky, green jungle.


At that moment, a penetrating, whistling sound came and a thud as if a tree were falling to the ground.


“Owoooooo!” howled Pashka in a tortured voice. “Have mercy! Spare my life! Don’t kill me!”


Anton leapt to his feet. From the thicket of ferns he saw Pashka approach in an unsteady gait, both arms raised above his head. Anka’s voice asked:


“Toshka, can you see him?”


“Yes, I can,” called Anton cheerfully. “Don’t move!” he yelled in Pashka’s direction. “Put your hands on top of your head!”


Pashka obediently clasped his hands above his head and declared:


“I won’t tell a thing.”


“What shall we do with him, Toshka?” asked Anka.


“You’ll find out in just a minute,” said Anton, settling comfortably on the ground and placing his crossbow across his knees.


“Name!” he croaked, using the voice of the witch of Irukan.


Pashka simply arched his back and made a contemptuous gesture. He did not want to submit to defeat. Anton fired. The heavy arrow noisily penetrated the branches above Pashka’s head.


“Wow!” exclaimed Anka.


“They call me Don Sarancha,” grudgingly confessed Pashka. And then he began to recite: “And here lies, as you all can see, one of his accomplices.”


“An infamous thug and murderer,” Anton clarified. “But he is known never to do something for nothing. On whose behalf have you come here to snoop around?”


“Don Satarina the Pitiless has sent me,” Pashka lied.


Anton spoke with contempt in his voice:


“This hand of mine cut the thread of Don Satarina’s stinking life on the Square of the Heavy Swords just two years ago.”


“Shall I pierce him with an arrow?” suggested Anka.


“Oh, I completely forgot,” said Pashka quickly. “Actually, I’m being sent by Arata the Fair. He promised me one hundred gold pieces for your heads.”


Anton slapped his knees.


“What a liar!” he shouted. “Do you believe for an instant that Arata would have anything to do with a swindler like you?”


“Maybe I’d better pierce him with an arrow after all?” asked a bloodthirsty Anka.


Anton laughed demonically.


“By the way,” said Pashka, “you were shot in your heel. You should have collapsed long since from losing so much blood.”


“Nuts!” countered Anton. “First of all, I’ve had a piece from the bark of the White Tree in my mouth the whole time; and, second, two beautiful barbarian maidens bandaged my wound.”


The ferns began to move and Anka stepped out onto the path. On her cheek was a long scratch and her knees were smeared with earth and lichen.


“It’s about time we threw him into the swamp,” she declared. “If the enemy won’t surrender, he must be destroyed.”


Pashka’s arms dropped down and dangled at his sides.


“You don’t stick to the rules of the game,” he said to Anton. “With you it always turns out that the witch is a good person.”


“You don’t know the first thing about it!” said Anton. He, too, stepped out onto the path. “The forest knows no mercy, you filthy mercenary.”


Anka returned the air rifle to Pashka.


“You two are real sharpshooters,” said Anka enviously. “Do you always aim so close?”


“What else did you expect from us?” Pashka asked. “We don’t run around yelling ‘Bang, bang—you’re dead!’ When we play, we always take risks.”


Anton added with nonchalance:


“We play William Tell a lot.”


“We take turns,” volunteered Pashka. “One day I have to go stand there with an apple on my head, and next time he’s got to do it.”


“You don’t say.” Her words came slowly. “I’d love to watch that some time.”


“We’d show it to you right now—with pleasure,” snapped Anton. “Too bad we don’t have an apple!”


Pashka grinned from ear to ear. But Anka quickly yanked the pirate’s fez from his head and swiftly rolled it up into a cone.


“It doesn’t have to be an apple!” she said. “This makes a marvelous target. Come on, let’s play William Tell!”


Anton took the red cone and examined it carefully. He glanced at Anka; her eyes were like dark wells. Pashka was dancing about; he felt great Anton held the cone out to him.


“I can hit the bull’s-eye at 30 paces,” he said flatly. “Of course, only with a pistol I’m familiar with.”


“Really?” said Anka, and she turned to Pashka. “And how about you? Can you score a direct hit from 30 feet away?”


“I’m known as the fastest gun this side of the lake!” he grinned broadly. “Let’s try it out.”


Anton made an about-face and walked down the path, counting out loud:


“… fifteen … sixteen … seventeen …”


Pashka said something that Anton couldn’t hear, and Anka laughed, much too loud.


“Thirty,” said Anton and turned around.


At a distance of thirty paces, Pashka looked pretty small. The red cone sat on his head like a dunce cap. Pashka grinned. He was still playing. Anton leaned forward and leisurely drew his bow.


“Bless you. Father William!” Pashka called out to him. “And whatever happens, thanks for everything!”


Anton placed a bolt in the slot which would guide the missile. He straightened up. Pashka and Anka looked at him. They were standing close to each other. The lane stretched ahead like a dark soggy passage between tall green walls. Anton raised the crossbow. The battle gear of Marshal Totz suddenly felt very heavy. My hands are trembling, thought Anton. That’s bad. What nonsense! He remembered how he and Pashka had amused themselves last winter for one full hour by aiming snowballs at an icicle on a fence post. They were throwing from a distance of twenty feet, then fifteen, then ten—and they still could not hit it And finally, when they had grown tired of the game and were just about to leave, Pashka pitched the last snowball, without even taking aim, and made a direct hit.


Anton pressed the stock hard against his shoulder. Anka is standing much too close, he thought. He was on the point of calling out to her to move over a bit, but then he remembered that this would seem silly. Higher. Higher still … Higher … Suddenly he was firmly convinced that the heavy bolt was going to strike Pashka right between the eyes, bore deeply between those merry, green eyes, even if he turned around now and let the arrow fly in the opposite direction.


He opened his eyes and looked at Pashka. Pashka’s grin had vanished. Anka raised her hand very slowly, then ever so slowly spread her fingers apart. Her face looked very intense and grown-up. Now Anton lifted his crossbow higher still and pulled the trigger. He did not see where the arrow landed.


“Missed it!” he said very loud.


He walked along the path but his legs would not properly obey him. Pashka wiped the red cone across his face, shook himself like a wet dog, unrolled the cone and formed it into a fez again. Anka bent down and picked up her crossbow. If she’ll hit me over the head with it, thought Anton, I’ll even say thank you. But Anka did not even look at him.


She turned to Pashka and asked: “Are we leaving?”


“Right away,” said Pashka.


He looked at Anton, tapping his finger against his forehead.


“But you were scared too.” Anton said. Pashka did not reply. Once more he tapped his finger against his forehead. Then he followed Anka. Anton ambled along in the rear, trying to cope with his doubts.


What did I do, he thought. His head felt very heavy all of a sudden. Why are they so put out? Pashka—well, he was scared stiff. Who knows who was more afraid: Father William or his son? But what’s the matter with Anka? Maybe she was worried about Pashka. But what should I have done? Now they make me trot behind like an outcast. I should take off on my own. I can take that turn over there on the left, there’s an interesting looking little pool. Maybe I can catch an owl; wouldn’t that be something!


But he did not even slow down. That’s for good, he thought. Somewhere he had read that such things happened frequently.


They reached the Forgotten Road sooner than they had expected. By now, the sun was high up in the sky, and it was very hot. The pine needles pricked their bare skin. The road was paved with concrete; it consisted of two rows of cracked, reddish-gray blocks. Thick tufts of dried grass were growing in the cracks. The soft shoulders on either side were full of dusty thistles. Above the road flew fat blowflies, buzzing and droning, and a brazen one bumped right into Anton’s forehead. The air was quiet and sultry.


“Look, you two!” said Pashka.


He pointed to a round metal sign hanging over the middle of the road on a rusty wire that had been strung across. The paint was peeling off the sign. They could barely make out a light-colored crossbar on a red background.


“What is that?” asked Anka. She did not seem too interested.


“A traffic sign,” said Pashka. “Do Not Enter.”


“A one-way street,” explained Anton.


“What does that mean?” asked Anka.


“That means that you can’t enter that road,” said Pashka.


“But why do they have the road, then?”


Pashka shrugged his shoulders.


“It’s a very old road,” he said.


“An anisotropic road,” Anton explained. Anka stood with her back to him. “Traffic can move only in one direction.”


“The wisdom of our forefathers,” said Pashka pensively. “There they were, driving along for about 200 miles, and all of a sudden—smash, bang!—Do Not Enter! Wrong Way! And you can’t drive on, and there isn’t anybody you can ask.”


“Just imagine all the things that might be there on the other side of that traffic sign!” said Anka. She looked all around. For many miles there was only the deserted forest and not a person to ask what might lie beyond that traffic sign. “Maybe it isn’t an anisotropic traffic sign after all,” said Anka. “The paint’s almost all peeled off.”


Now Anton lifted his crossbow, took careful aim and shot off an arrow. How nice if the bolt would snap the wire and let the traffic sign fall right before Anka’s feet. But the arrow hit the upper part of the sign, pierced the rusty metal and nothing fell down except some flakes of dried paint.


“Silly ass!” said Anka without bothering to turn around.


That was the first remark she had addressed to him since they had played William Tell. Anton smiled wryly.


“And enterprises of great pitch and moment,” he recited, “with this regard their current turn away and lose the name of action.”


Faithful Pashka called out:


“Hey, kids, a car was here! After the thunderstorm! The grass is still flat where the tires drove over it! And here—”


That lucky Pashka, thought Anton. Carefully he examined the tire tracks in the road. He, too, saw the trampled grass and the black skid marks where the car must have suddenly braked before a pothole in the concrete pavement.


“I can see it now,” called out Pashka. “The car must have come from the other side, from behind the traffic sign.”


It seemed very obvious, but Anton said:


“Baloney! He’s come from the other direction!”


Pashka regarded him with surprise:


“What’s gotten into you? You’re blind as a bat!”


“He’s come from this way here,” Anton argued stubbornly. “Let’s follow his track.”


“You idiot!” Pashka sounded angry. “Who in his right mind would drive into a one-way street the wrong way? And look here: here is the pothole and over there the skid mark—so where did the car come from?”


“I don’t care what you say! I’m going along this one-way street, even if it’s the wrong way.”


Pashka turned pale with fury. “Go right ahead!”


He started to hiccup. “What idiocy! The sun must have cooked your brain!”


Anton turned around. He looked straight ahead, ducked under the traffic sign and passed through to the other side. He only wished he could come upon a collapsed bridge and have to work his way over to the other side. I have nothing more to do with them, he thought. Let them go wherever they please—with her darling Pashka. Then he remembered how Anka had cut off Pashka when he had called her Anetchka, and feeling a bit relieved, he turned and looked back.


His eye fell on Pashka. Like a dog sniffing a scent, Don Sarancha was following the track of the mysterious car. The rusty sign over the road was gently swaying in the wind, and the blue sky gleamed through the hole the arrow had made, Anka sat at the side of the road, her elbows resting on her knees and her chin supported by her small, clenched fists.


As they were returning home, dusk began to fall. The two boys rowed, while Anka sat at the rudder. A red moon stood above the dark forest and the frogs croaked untiringly.


“And we had planned everything so nicely,” said Anka mournfully. “You two—!”


The boys remained silent. Then Pashka asked softly:


“Toshka, what did you find behind the one-way street sign?”


“A collapsed bridge,” answered Anton. “And the skeleton of a German, chained to a machine gun.” He thought a while, then he added: “the machine gun was halfway sunk into the ground already.”


“Hmm, yes,” said Pashka. “These things can happen. I helped somebody repair his car back there.”