CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE - First Contact


When Jimmy Pak returned to consciousness, the first
thing he became aware of was a splitting headache. He
almost welcomed it; at least it proved that he was still
alive.


 Then he tried to move, and at once a wide selection of
aches and pains brought themselves to his attention. But
as far as he could tell, nothing seemed to be broken.


 After that, he risked opening his eyes, but closed them
at once when he found himself staring straight into the
band of light along the ceiling of the world. As a cure
for headache, that view was not recommended.


 He was still lying there, regaining his strength and won-
dering how soon it would be safe to open his eyes, when
there was a sudden crunching noise from close at hand.
Turning his head very slowly towards the source of the
sound, he risked a look - and almost lost consciousness
again.


 Not more than five metres away, a large crab-like
creature was apparently dining on the wreckage of poor
Dragonfly. When Jimmy recovered his wits he rolled
slowly and quietly away from the monster, expecting at
every moment to be seized by its claws, when it discov-
ered that more appetizing fare was available. However, it
took not the slightest notice of him; when he had in-
creased their mutual separation to ten metres, he cauti-
ously propped himself up in a sitting position.


 From this greater distance, the thing did not appear
quite so formidable. It had a low, flat body about two
metres long and one wide, supported on six triple-jointed
legs. Jimmy saw that he was mistaken in assuming that it
had been eating Dragonfly; in fact, he could not see any
sign of a mouth. The creature was actually doing a neat
job of demolition, using scissor-like claws to chop the sky-
bike into small pieces. A whole row of manipulators,
which looked uncannily like tiny human hands, then
transferred the fragments to a steadily growing pile on
the animal's back.


 But was it an animal? Though that had been Jimmy's
first reaction, now he had second thoughts. There was a
purposefulness about its behaviour which suggested fairly
high intelligence; he could see no reason why any crea-
ture of pure instincts should carefully collect the scat-
tered pieces of his sky-bike - unless, perhaps, it was gath-
ering material for a nest.


 Keeping a wary eye on the crab, which still ignored
him completely, Jimmy struggled to his feet. A few wav-
ering steps demonstrated that he could still walk, though
he was not sure if he could outdistance those six legs.
Then he switched on his radio, never doubting that it
would be operating. A crash that he could survive would
not even have been noticed by its solid-state electronics.


 'Hub Control,' he said softly. 'Can you receive me?'


 'Thank God! Are you OK?'


 'Just a bit shaken. Take a look at this.'


 He turned his camera towards the crab, just in time to
record the final demolition of Dragonfly's wing.


 'What the devil is it - and why is it chewing up your
bike?'


 'Wish I knew. It's finished with Dragonfly. I'm going to
back away, in case it wants to start on me.'


 Jimmy slowly retreated, never taking his eyes off the
crab. It was now moving round .and round in a steadily
widening spiral, apparently searching for fragments it
might have overlooked, and so Jimmy was able to get an
overall view of it for the first time.


 Now that the initial shock had worn off, he could
appreciate that it was quite a handsome beast. The name
'crab' which he had automatically given it was perhaps a
little misleading; if it had not been so impossibly large,
he might have called it a beetle. Its carapace had a beaut-
iful metallic sheen; in fact, he would almost have been
prepared to swear that it was metal.


 That was an interesting idea. Could it be a robot, and
not an animal? He stared at the crab intently with this
thought in mind, analysing all the details of its anatomy.
Where it should have had a mouth was a collection of
manipulators that reminded Jimmy strongly of the multi-
purpose knives that are the delight of all red-blooded
boys; there were pinchers, probes, rasps and even some-
thing that looked like a drill. But none of this was de-
cisive. On Earth, the insect world had matched all these
tools, and many more. The animal-or-robot question re-
mained in perfect balance in his mind.


 The eyes, which might have settled the matter, left it
even more ambiguous. They were so deeply recessed in
protective hoods that it was impossible to tell whether
their lenses were made of crystal or jelly. They were quite
expressionless and of a startlingly vivid blue. Though
they had been directed towards Jimmy several times, they
had never shown the slightest flicker of interest. In his
perhaps biased opinion, that decided the level of the
creature's intelligence. An entity - robot or animal -
which could ignore a human being could not be very
bright.


 It had now stopped its circling, and stood still for a few
seconds, as if listening to some inaudible message. Then
it set off, with a curious rolling gait, in the general direc-
tion of the Sea. It moved in a perfectly straight line at a
steady four or five kilometres an hour, and had already
travelled a couple of hundred metres before Jimmy's still
slightly-shocked mind registered the fact that the last sad
relics of his beloved Dragonfly were being carried away
from him. He set off in a hot and indignant pursuit.


 His action was not wholly illogical. The crab was head-
ing towards the Sea - and if any rescue was possible, it
could only be from this direction. Moreover, he wanted
to discover what the creature would do with its trophy;
that should reveal something about its motivation and
intelligence.


 Because he was still bruised and stiff, it took Jimmy
several minutes to catch up with the purposefully-moving
crab. When he had done so, he followed it at a respectful
distance, until he felt sure that it did not resent his pres-
ence. It was then - that he noticed his water-flask and
emergency ration pack among the debris of Dragonfly,
and instantly felt both hungry and thirsty.


 There, scuttling away from him at a remorseless five
kilometres an hour, was the only food and drink in all
this half of the world. Whatever the risk, he had to get
hold of it.


 He cautiously closed in on the crab, approaching from
right rear. While he kept station with it, he studied the
complicated rhythm of its legs, until he could anticipate
where they would be at any moment. When he was ready,
he muttered a quick 'Excuse me,' and shot swiftly in to
grab his property. Jimmy had never dreamed that he
would one day have to exercise the skills of a pickpocket,
and was delighted with his success. He was out again in
less than a second, and the crab never slackened its steady
pace.


 He dropped back a dozen metres, moistened his lips
from the flask, and started to chew a bar of meat concen-
trate. The little victory made him feel much happier;
now he could even risk thinking about his sombre future.


 While there was life, there was hope; yet he could im-
agine no way in which he could possibly be rescued. Even
if his colleagues crossed the Sea, how could he reach
them, half a kilometre below? 'We'll find a way down
somehow,' Hub Control had promised. 'That cliff can't
go right round the world, without a break anywhere.' He
had been tempted to answer 'Why not?', but had thought
better of it.


 One of the strangest things about walking inside Rama
was that you could always see your destination. Here, the
curve of the world did not hide - it revealed. For some
time Jimmy had been aware of the crab's objective; up
there in the land which seemed to rise before him was a
half-kilometre-wide pit. It was one of three in the south-
ern continent; from the Hub, it had been impossible to
see how deep they were. All had been named after promi-
nent lunar craters, and he was approaching Copernicus.
The name was hardly appropriate, for there were no sur-
rounding hills and no central peaks. This Copernicus was
merely a deep shaft or well, with perfectly vertical sides.


 When he came close enough to look into it, Jimmy was
able to see a pool of ominous, leaden-green water at least
half a kilometre below. This would put it just about level
with the Sea, and he wondered if they were connected.


 Winding down the interior of the well was a spiral
ramp, completely recessed into the sheer wall, so that the
effect was rather like that of rifling in an immense gun-
barrel. There seemed to be a remarkable number of
turns; not until Jimmy had traced them for several revo-
lutions, getting more and more confused in the process,
did he realize that there was not one ramp but three,
totally independent and 120 degrees apart. In any other
background than Rama, the whole concept would have
been an impressive architectural tour de force.


 The three ramps led straight down into the pool and
disappeared beneath its opaque surface. Near the water-
line Jimmy could see a group of black tunnels or caves;
they looked rather sinister, and he wondered if they were
inhabited. Perhaps the Ramans were amphibious...


 As the crab approached the edge of the well, Jimmy
assumed that it was going to descend one of the ramps -
perhaps taking the wreckage of Dragonfly to some entity
who would be able to evaluate it. Instead, the creature
walked straight to the brink, extended almost half its
body over the gulf without any sign of hesitation, though
an error of a few centimetres would have been disastrous
- and gave a brisk shrug. The fragments of Dragonfly
went fluttering down into the depths; there were tears in
Jimmy's eyes as he watched them go. So much, he thought
bitterly, for this creature's intelligence.


 Having disposed of the garbage, the crab swung
around and started to walk towards Jimmy, standing
only about ten metres away. Am I going to get the same
treatment? he wondered. He hoped the camera was not
too unsteady as he showed Hub Control the rapidly ap-
proaching monster. 'What do you advise?' he whispered
anxiously, without much hope that he would get a useful
answer. It was some small consolation to realize that he
was making history, and his mind raced through the ap-
proved patterns for such a meeting. Until now, all of
these had been purely theoretical. He would be the first
man to check them in practice.


 'Don't run until you're sure it's hostile', Hub Control
whispered back at him. Run where? Jimmy asked him-
self. He thought he could out-distance the thing in a
hundred metre sprint, but had a sick certainty that it
could wear him down over the long haul.


 Slowly, Jimmy held up his outstretched hands. Men
had been arguing for two hundred years about this ges-
ture; would every creature, everywhere in the universe,
interpret this as 'See no weapons?' But no one could
think of anything better.


 The crab showed no reaction whatsoever, nor did it
slacken its pace. Ignoring Jimmy completely, it. walked
straight past him and headed purposefully into the south.
Feeling extremely foolish, the acting representative of
Homo sapiens watched his First Contact stride away
across the Raman plain, totally indifferent to his pres-
ence.
- He had seldom been so humiliated in his life. Then
Jimmy's sense of humour came to his rescue. After all, it
was no great matter to have been ignored by an animated
garbage truck. It would have been worse if it had greeted
him as a long-lost brother...


 He walked back to the rim of Copernicus, and stared
down into its opaque waters. For the first time, he noticed
that vague shapes - some of them quite large - were mov-
ing slowly back and forth beneath the surface. Presently
one of them headed towards the nearest spiral ramp, and
something that looked like a multi-legged tank started on
the long ascent. At the rate it was going, Jimmy decided,
it would take almost an hour to get here; if it was a
threat, it was a very slow-moving one.
- Then he noticed a flicker of much more rapid move-
ment, near those cave-like openings down by the water-
line. Something was travelling very swiftly along the
ramp, but he could not focus clearly upon it, or discern
any definite shape. It was as if he was looking at a small
whirlwind or 'dust-devil', about the size of a man ...


 He blinked and shook his head, keeping his eyes closed
for several seconds. When he opened them again, the
apparition was gone.


 Perhaps the impact had shaken him up more than he
had realized; this was the first time he had ever suffered
from visual hallucinations. He would not mention it to
Hub Control.


 Nor would he bother to explore those ramps, as he had
half-thought of doing. It would obviously be a waste of
energy.
 The spinning phantom he had merely imagined seeing
had nothing to do with his decision.


 Nothing at all; for, of course, Jimmy did not believe in
ghosts.