CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE - Maiden Flight


Dragonfly was certainly a good name. The long, tapering
wings were almost invisible, except when the light struck
them from certain angles and was refracted into rainbow
hues. It was as if a soap-bubble had been wrapped round
a delicate tracery of aerofoil sections; the envelope en-
dosing the little flyer was an organic film only a few
molecules thick, yet strong enough to control and direct
the movements of a fifty-kph air flow.
 
 The pilot - who was also the powerplant and the guid-
ance system - sat on a tiny seat at the centre of gravity, in
a semi-reclining position to reduce air resistance. Control
was by a single stick which could be moved backwards
and forwards, right and left; the only 'instrument' was a
piece of weighted ribbon attached to the leading edge, to
show the direction of the relative wind.


 Once the flyer had been assembled at the Hub, Jimmy
Pak would allow no one to -touch it. Clumsy handling
could snap one of the single-fibre structural members,
and those glittering wings were an almost irresistible at-
traction to prying fingers. It was hard to believe that
there was really something there... 


 As he watched Jimmy climb into the contraption, Com-
mander Norton began to have second thoughts. If one of
those wire-sized struts snapped when Dragonfly was on
the other side of the Cylindrical Sea, Jimmy would have
no way of getting back - even if he was able to make a
safe landing. They were also breaking one of the most
sacrosanct rules of space exploration; a man was going
alone into unknown territory, beyond all possibility of
help. The only consolation was that he would be in full
view and communication all the time; they would know
exactly what had happened to him, if he did meet with
disaster.


 Yet this opportunity was far too good to miss; if one
believed in fate or destiny, it would be challenging the
gods themselves to neglect the only chance they might
ever have of reaching the far side of Rama, and seeing at
close quarters the mysteries of the South Pole. Jimmy
knew what he was attempting, far better than anyone in
the crew could tell him. This was precisely the sort of risk
that had to be taken; if it failed, that was the luck of the
game. You couldn't win them all...


 'Now listen to me carefully, Jimmy,' said Surgeon-Com-
mander Ernst. 'It's very important not to over-exert your-
self. Remember, the oxygen level here at the axis is still
very low. If you feel breathless at any time, stop and
hyperventilate for thirty seconds - but no longer.'


 Jimmy nodded absentmindedly as he tested the con-
trols. The whole rudder-elevator assembly, which formed
a single unit on an outrigger five metres behind the rudi-
mentary cockpit, began to twist around; then the flap-
shaped ailerons, halfway along the wing, moved altern-
ately up and down.


 'Do you want me to swing the prop?' asked Joe Calvert,
unable to suppress memories of two-hundred-year-old war
movies. 'Ignition! Contact!' Probably no one except
Jimmy knew what he was talking about, but it helped to
relieve the tension.


 Very slowly, Jimmy started to move the foot-pedals.
The flimsy, broad fan of the airscrew - like the wing, a
delicate skeleton covered with shimmering film - began
to turn. By the time it had made a few revolutions, it had
disappeared completely; and Dragonfly was on her way.


 She moved straight outwards from the Hub, moving
slowly along the axis of Rama. When she had travelled a
hundred metres, Jimmy stopped pedalling; it was strange
to see an obviously aerodynamic vehicle hanging motion-
less in mid-air. This must be the first time such a thing
had ever happened, except possibly on a very limited
scale inside one of the larger space-stations.


 'How does she handle?' Norton called.


 'Response good, stability poor. But I know what the
trouble is - no gravity. We'll be better off a kilometre
lower down.'


 'Now wait a minute- is that safe?'


 By losing altitude, Jimmy would be sacrificing his
main advantage. As long as he stayed precisely on the
axis, he - and Dragonfly - would be completely weightless.
He could hover effortlessly, or even go to sleep if he
wished. But as soon as he moved away from the central
line around which Rama spun, the pseudo-weight of
centrifugal force would reappear.


 And so, unless he could maintain himself at this alti-
tude, he would continue to lose height - - and at the same
time, to gain weight. It would be an accelerating process,
which could end in catastrophe. The gravity down on the
plain of Rama was twice that in which Dragonfly had been
designed to operate. Jimmy might be able to make a safe
landing; he could certainly never take off again.
 
 But he had already considered all this, and he an-
swered confidently enough: 'I can manage a tenth of a
gee without any trouble. And she'll handle more easily in
denser air.


 In a slow, leisurely spiral, Dragonfly drifted across the
sky, roughly following the line of Stairway Alpha down
towards the plain. From some angles, the little sky-bike
was almost invisible; Jimmy seemed to be sitting in mid-
air pedalling furiously. Sometimes he moved into spurts
of up to thirty kilometres an hour; then he would coast to
a halt, getting the feel of the controls, before accelerating
again. And he was always very careful to keep a safe dist-
ance from the curving end of Rama.


 It was soon obvious that Dragonfly handled much bet-
ter at lower altitudes; she no longer rolled around at any
angle, - but stabilized so that her wings were parallel to
the plain seven kilometres below. Jimmy completed sev-
eral wide orbits, then started to climb upwards again. He
finally halted a Jew metres above his waiting colleagues
and realized, a little belatedly, that he was not quite sure
how to land this gossamer craft.


 'Shall we throw you a rope?' Norton asked half-seri-
ously.


 'No, Skipper - I've got to work this out myself. I won't
have anyone to help me at the other end.'


 He sat thinking for a while, then started to ease Dra-
gonfly towards the Hub with short bursts of power. She
quickly lost momentum between each, as air drag
brought her to rest again. When he was only five metres
away, and the sky-bike was still barely moving, Jimmy
abandoned ship. He let himself float towards the nearest
safety line in the Hub webwork, grasped it, then swung
around in time to catch the approaching bike with his
hands. The manoeuvre was so neatly executed that it
drew a round of applause.


 'For my next act-' Joe Calvert began.


 Jimmy was quick to disclaim any credit.


 'That was messy,' he said. 'But now I know how to do
it. I'll take a sticky-bomb on a twenty-metre line; then I'll
be able to pull myself in wherever I want to.' --


 'Give me your wrist, Jimmy,' ordered the Doctor, 'and
blow into this bag. I'll want a blood sample, too. Did you
have any difficulty in breathing?'


 'Only at this altitude. Hey, what do you want the
blood for?'


 'Sugar level; then I can tell how much energy you've
used. We've got to make sure you carry enough fuel for
the mission. By the way, what's the endurance record for
sky-biking?'


 'Two hours twenty-five minutes three point six seconds.
On the Moon, of course - a two kilometre circuit in the
Olympic Dome.'
 
 'And you think you can keep it up for six hours?'


 'Easily, since I can stop for a rest at any time. Sky-
biking on the Moon is at least twice as hard as it is here.'
 
 'OK Jimmy - back to the lab. I'll give you a Go-No-Go
as soon as I've analysed these samples. I don't want to
raise false hopes - but I think you can make it.'
 
 A large smile of satisfaction spread across Jimmy Pak's
ivory-hued countenance. As he followed Surgeon-Com-
mander Ernst to the airlock, he called back to his com-
panions: 'Hands off, please! I don't Want anyone put-
ting his fist through the wings.'
 
 'I'll see to that, Jimmy,' promised the Commander.
'Dragonfly is off limits to everybody - including myself.'