CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE - NY, Rama


It was not a city; it was a machine. Norton had come to
that conclusion in ten minutes, and saw no reason to
change it after they had made a complete traverse of the
island. A city - whatever - the nature of its occupants -
surely had to provide some form of accommodation: there
was nothing here of that - nature, unless it was under-
ground. And if that was the case, where were the en-
trances, the stairways, the elevators? He had not found
anything that even qualified as a simple door...


 The closest analogy he had ever seen to this place on
Earth was a giant chemical processing plant. However,
there were no stockpiles of raw materials, or any indica-
tions of a transport system to move them around. Nor
could he imagine where the finished product would
emerge - still less what that product could possibly be. It
was all very baffling, and more than a little frustrating.
 
 'Anybody care to make a guess?' he said at last, to all
who might be listening. 'If this is a factory, what does it
make? And where does it get its raw materials?'


 'I've a suggestion, Skipper,' said Karl Mercer, over on
the far shore. 'Suppose it uses the Sea. According to Doc,
that contains just about anything you can think of.'
 
 It was a plausible answer, and Norton had already con-
sidered it. There could well be buried pipes leading to
the Sea - in fact, there must be, for any conceivable
chemical plant would require large quantities of water.
But he had a suspicion of plausible answers; they were so
often wrong.
 
 'That's a good idea, Karl; but what does New York do
with its seawater?'
 
 For a long time, nobody answered from ship, Hub or
Northern plain. Then an unexpected voice spoke.
 
 'That's easy, Skipper. But you're all going to laugh at
me.'


 'No, we're not, Ravi. Go ahead.'


 Sergeant Ravi McAndrews, Chief Steward and Simp
Master, was the last person on this ship who would norm-
ally get involved in a technical discussion. His IQ was
modest and his scientific knowledge was minimal, but
he was no fool and had a natural shrewdness which
everyone respected.


 'Well, it's a factory all right, Skipper, and maybe the
Sea - provides the raw material ... after all, that's how it
all happened on Earth, though in a different way ... I
believe New York is a factory for making - Ramans.
 
 Somebody, somewhere, snickered, but became quickly
silent and did not identify himself.
 
 'You know, Ravi,' said his commander at last, 'that
theory is crazy enough to be true. And I'm not sure if I
want to see it tested ... at least, until I get back to the
mainland.'
 
 This celestial New York was just about as wide as the
island of Manhattan, but its geometry was totally differ-
ent. There were few straight thoroughfares; it was a maze
of short, concentric arcs, with radial spokes linking them.
Luckily, it was impossible to lose one's bearings inside
Rama; a single glance at the sky was enough to establish
the north-south axis of the world.
 
 They paused at almost every intersection to make a
panoramic scan. When all these hundreds of pictures
were sorted out, it would be a tedious but fairly straight-
forward job to construct an accurate scale model of the
city. Norton suspected that the resulting jigsaw puzzle
would keep scientists busy for generations.
 
 It was even harder to get used to the silence here than
it had been out on the plain of Rama. A city-machine
should make some sound; yet there - was not even the
faintest of electric hums, or the slightest whisper of mech-
anical motion. Several times Norton put his ear to the
ground, or to the side of a building, and listened in-
tently. He could hear nothing except the pounding of his
own blood,
 
 The machines were sleeping: they were not even tick-
ing over. Would they ever wake again, and for what pur-
pose? Everything was in perfect condition, as usual. It was
easy to believe that the closing of a single circuit, in some
patient, hidden computer, would bring all this maze back
to life.
 
 When at last they had reached the far side of the city,
they climbed to the top of the surrounding levee and
looked across the southern branch of the Sea. For a long
time Norton stared at the five-hundred-metre cliff that
barred them from almost half of Rama - and, judging
from their telescopic surveys, the most complex and var-
ied half. From this angle, it appeared an ominous, for-
bidding black, and it was easy to think of it as a prison
wall surrounding a whole continent. Nowhere along its
entire circle was there a flight of stairways or any other
means of access.


 He wondered how the Ramans reached their southern
land from New York. Probably there was an under-
ground transport system running beneath the Sea, but
they must also have aircraft as well; there were many
open areas here in the city that could be used for landing.
To discover a Raman vehicle would be a major accom-
plishment - especially if -they could learn to operate it.
(Though could any conceivable power-source still be
functioning, after several hundred thousand years?)
 
 There were numerous structures that had the functional
look of hangars or garages, but they were all smooth and
windowless, as if they had been sprayed with sealant.
Sooner or later, Norton had told himself grimly, we'll be
forced to use explosives, and laser beams. He was deter-
mined to put off this decision to the last possible moment.
 
 His reluctance to use brute force was based partly on
pride, partly on fear. He did not wish to behave like a
technological barbarian, smashing what he could not
understand. After all, he was an uninvited visitor in this
world, and should act accordingly.


 As for his fear - perhaps that was too strong ~ word;
apprehension might be better. The Ramans seemed to
have planned for everything; he was not anxious to dis-
cover the precautions they had taken to guard their
property. When he sailed back to the mainland, it would
be with empty hands.