CHAPTER FORTY-ONE - Hero


'Darling,' began Norton, 'this nonsense has cost us more
than a day, but at least it's given me a chance to talk to
you.


 'I'm still in the ship, and she's heading back to station
at the polar axis. We picked up Rod an hour ago, looking
as if he'd just come off duty after a quiet watch. I suppose
neither of us will ever be able to visit Mercury again, and
I'm wondering if we're going to be treated as heroes or
villains when we get back to Earth. But my conscience is
clear; I'm sure we did the right thing. I wonder if the
Ramans will ever say "thank you".


 'We can stay here only two more days; unlike Rama,
we don't have a kilometre-thick skin to protect us from
the sun. The hull's already developing dangerous hot-
spots and we've had to put out some local screening. I'm
sorry - I didn't want to bore you with my problems...


 'So there's time for just one more trip into Rama, and I
intend to make the most of it. But don't worry - I'm not
taking any chances.'


 He stopped the recording. That, to say the least, was
stretching the truth. There was danger and uncertainty
about every moment inside Rama; no man could ever feel
really at home there, in the presence of forces beyond his
understanding. And on this final trip, now that he knew
they would never return and that no future operations
would be jeopardized, he intended to press his luck just a
little further.


 'In forty-eight hours, then, we'll have completed this
mission. What happens then is still uncertain; as you
know, we've used virtually all our fuel getting into this
orbit. I'm still waiting to hear if a tanker can rendezvous
with us in time to get back to Earth, or whether we'll
have to make planet-fall at Mars. Anyway, I should be
home by Christmas. Tell Junior I'm sorry I can't bring a
baby biot; there's no such animal...


 'We're all fine, but we're very tired. I've earned a long
leave after all this, and we'll make up for lost time. What-
ever they say about me, you can claim you're married to a
hero. How many wives have a husband who saved a
world?'


 As always, he listened carefully to the tape before dup-
ing it, to make sure that it was applicable to both his
families. It was strange to think that he did not know
which of them he would see first; usually, his schedule was
determined at least a year in advance, by the inexorable
movements of the planets themselves.


 But that was in the days before Rama; now nothing
would ever be the same again.