CHAPTER SEVEN - Two Wives


If his wives ever compared his videograms, Commander
Norton thought with more amusement than concern, it
would involve him in a lot of extra work. Now, he could
make one long 'gram and dupe it, adding only brief- per-
sonal messages and endearments before shooting the al-
most identical copies off to Mars and Earth.


 Of course, it was highly unlikely that his wives ever
would do such a thing; even at the concessionary rates
allowed to spacemen's families, it would be expensive.
And there would be no point in it; his families were on
excellent terms with each other, and exchanged- the usual
greetings on birthdays and anniversaries. Yet, on -the
whole, perhaps it was just as well that the girls had never
met, and probably never would. Myrna had been born on
Mars and so could not- tolerate the high gravity of Earth.
And Caroline hated even the twenty-five minutes of the
longest possible terrestrial journey.


 'Sorry I'm a day late with this transmission,' said the
Commander after he had finished the general-purpose
preliminaries, 'but I've been away from the ship for the
last thirty hours, believe it or not. . . -


 'Don't be alarmed - everything is under control, going
perfectly. It's taken us two days, but we're almost through
the airlock complex. We could have done it in a couple of
hours, if we'd known what we do now. But we took no
chances, sent remote cameras ahead, and cycled all the
locks a dozen times to make sure they wouldn't seize up
behind us - after we'd gone through...


 'Each lock is a simple revolving cylinder with a slot on
one side. You go in through this opening, crank the cyl-
inder round a hundred and eighty degrees - and the slot
then matches up with another door so that you can step
out of it. Or float, in this case.


 'The Ramans really made sure of things. There are
three of these cylinder-locks, one after the other just in-
side the outer hull and below the entry pill-box. I can't
imagine how even one would fail, unless someone blew it
up with explosives, but if it did, there would be a second
back-up, and then a third...


 'And that's only the beginning. The final lock opens
into a straight corridor, almost half a kilometre long. It
looks clean and tidy, like everything else we've seen;
- every few metres there are small ports that probably held
lights, but -now everything is completely black and, I
don't mind telling you, scary. There are also two parallel
slots, about a centimetre wide, cut in the walls and run-
ning the whole length of the tunnel. We suspect that
some kind of shuttle runs inside these, to tow equipment
- or people - back and forth. It would save us a lot of
trouble if we could get it working...


 'I mentioned that the tunnel was half a kilometre long.
Well, from our seismic soundings we knew that's about
the thickness of the shell, so obviously we were almost
through it. And at the end of the tunnel we were'nt sur-
prised to find another of those cylindrical airlocks.


 'Yes, and another. And another. These people seem to
have done everything in threes. We're in the final lock
chamber now, awaiting the OK from Earth before we go
through. The interior of Rama is only a few metres away.
I'll be a lot happier when the suspense is over.


 'You know Jerry Kirchoff, my Exec, who's got such a
library of real books that he can't afford to emigrate from
Earth? Well, Jerry told me about a situation just like
this, back at the beginning of the twenty-first - no, twen-
tieth century. An archaeologist found the tomb of an
Egyptian king, the first one that hadn't been looted by
robbers. His workmen took months to dig their way in,
chamber by - chamber, until they came to the final wall.
Then they broke through the masonery, and he held out
a lantern and pushed his head inside. He found himself
looking into a whole roomful of treasure - incredible
stuff gold and jewels ...


 'Perhaps this place is also a tomb; it seems more and
more -likely. Even now, there's still not the slightest
sound, or hint of any activity. Well, tomorrow we should
know.'


 Commander Norton switched the record to HOLD.
What else, he wondered, should he say about the work
before he began 'the separate personal messages to his
families? Normally, he never went into so much detail,
but these circumstances were scarcely normal. This might
be the last 'gram he would ever send to those he loved; he
owed it to them to explain what he was doing.


 By the time they saw these images, and heard these
words, he would be inside Rama - for better or for worse.