CHAPTER FIFTEEN - The Edge of the Sea


There were now more than twenty men and women in-
side Rama - six of them down on the plain, the rest ferry-
ing equipment and expendables through the airlock sys-
tem and down the stairway. The ship itself was almost
deserted, with the minimum possible staff on duty; the
joke went around that Endeavour was really being run
by the four simps and that Goldie had been given the
rank of Acting-Commander.


 For these first explorations, Norton had established a
number of ground-rules; the most important dated back
to the earliest days of man's space-faring. Every group, he
had decided, must contain one person with prior experi-
ence. But not more than one. In that way, everybody
would have an opportunity of learning as quickly as pos-
sible.


 And so the first party to head for the Cylindrical Sea,
though it was led by Surgeon-Commander Laura Ernst,
had as its one-time veteran Lt Boris Rodrigo, just back
from Paris. The third member, Sergeant Pieter Rousseau,
had been with the back-up teams at the Hub; he was an
expert on space reconnaissance instrumentation, but on
this trip he would have to depend on his own eyes and a
small portable telescope.


 From the foot of Stairway Alpha to the edge of the Sea
was just under fifteen kilometres - or an Earth-equi-
valent of eight under the low gravity of Rama. Laura
Ernst, who had to prove that she lived up to her own
standards, set a brisk pace. They stopped for thirty min-
utes at the mid-way mark, and made the whole trip in a
completely uneventful three hours.


 It was also quite monotonous, walking forward in the
beam of the searchlight through the anechoic darkness of
Rama. As the pool of light advanced with them, it slowly
elongated into a long, narrow ellipse; this foreshortening
of the beam was the only visible sign of progress. If the
observers up on the Hub had not given them continual
distance checks, they could not have guessed whether
they had travelled one kilometre, or five, or ten. They
just plodded onwards through the million-year-old night,
over an apparently seamless metal surface.


 But at last, far ahead at the limits of the now weaken-
ing beam, there was something new. On a normal world,
- it would have been a horizon; as they approached, they
could see that the plain on which they were walking dame
to an abrupt stop. They were nearing the edge of the
Sea.


 'Only a hundred metres,' said Hub Control. 'Better
slow down.'


 That was hardly necessary, yet they had already done
so. It was a sheer straight drop of fifty metres from the
level of the plain to that of the Sea - if it was a sea, and not
another sheet of that mysterious crystalline material. Al-
though Norton had impressed upon everyone the danger
of taking anything for granted in Rama, few doubted
that the Sea was really made of ice. But for what conceiv-
able reason was the cliff on the southern shore five hun-
dred metres high, instead of the fifty here?


 It was as if they were approaching the edge of the
world; their oval of light, cut off abruptly ahead of them,
became shorter and shorter. But far out on the curved
screen of the Sea their monstrous foreshortened shadows
had appeared, magnifying and exaggerating every move-
ment. Those shadows had been their companions every
step of the way, as they marched down the beam, but now
that they were broken at the edge of the cliff they no
longer seemed part of them. They might have been crea-
tures of the Cylindrical Sea, waiting to deal with any in-
truders into their domain.


 Because they were now standing on the edge of a fifty-
metre cliff, it was possible for the first time to appreciate
the curvature of Rama. But no one had ever seen a frozen
lake bent upwards into a cylindrical surface;, that was
distinctly unsettling, and the eye did its best to find some
other interpretation. It seemed to Dr Ernst, who had once
made a study of visual illusions, that half the time she
was really looking at a horizontally curving bay, not a
surface that soared up into the sky. It required a deliber-
ate effort of will to accept the fantastic truth.


 Only in the line directly ahead, parallel to the axis of
Rama, was normalcy preserved. In this direction alone
was there agreement between vision and logic. Here - for
the next few kilometres at least - Rama looked flat, and
was flat... And out there, beyond their distorted shadows
and the outer limit of the beam, lay the island that
dominated the Cylindrical Sea.


 'Hub Control,' Dr Ernst radioed, 'please aim your
beam at New York.'


 The night of Rama fell suddenly upon them, as the
oval of light went sliding out to sea. Conscious of the now
invisible cliff at their feet, they all stepped back a few
metres. Then, as if by some magical stage transformation,
the towers of New York sprang into view.


 The resemblance to old-time Manhattan was only super-
ficial; this star-born echo of Earth's past possessed its
own unique identity. The more Dr Ernst stared at it, the
more certain she became that it was not a city at all.


 The real New York, like all of Man's habitations, had
never been finished; still less had it been designed. This
place, however, had an overall symmetry and pattern,
though one so complex that it eluded the mind. It had
been conceived and planned by some controlling intelli-
gence - and then it had been completed, like a machine
devised for some specific purpose. After that, there was no
possibility of growth or change.


 The beam of the searchlight slowly tracked along those
distant towers and domes and interlocked spheres and
criss-crossed tubes. Sometimes there would be a brilliant
reflection as some flat surface shot the light back towards
them; the first time this happened, they were all taken by
surprise. It was exactly as. if, over there on that strange
island, someone was signalling to them...


 But there was nothing that they could see here that was
not already shown in greater detail on photographs taken
from the Hub. After a few minutes, they called for the
light to return to them, and began to walk eastwards
along the edge of the cliff. It had been plausibly theor-
ized that, somewhere, there must surely be a flight of
steps, or a ramp, leading down to the Sea. And one crew-
man, who was a keen sailor, had raised an interesting
conjecture.


 'Where there's a sea,' Sergeant Ruby Barhes had pre-
dicted, 'there must be docks and harbours - and ships.
You can learn everything about a culture by studying the
way it builds boats.' Her colleagues thought this a rather
restricted point of view, but at least it was a stimulating
one.


 Dr Ernst had almost given up the search, and was pre-
paring to m4e a descent by rope, when Lt Rodrigo spot-
ted the narrow stairway. It could easily have been over-
looked in the shadowed darkness below the edge of the
cliff, for there was no guard-rail or other indication of its
presence. And it seemed to lead nowhere; it ran down the
fifty-metre vertical wall at a steep angle, and disappeared
below the surface of the Sea.


 They scanned the flight of steps with their helmet-
lights, could see no conceivable hazard, and Dr Ernst
got Commander Norton's permission to descend. A
minute later, she was cautiously testing the surface of the
Sea.


 Her foot slithered almost frictionlessly back and forth.
The material felt exactly like ice. It was ice.


 When she struck it with her hammer, a familiar pat-
tern of cracks radiated from the impact point, and she
had no difficulty in collecting as many pieces as she
wished. Some had already melted when she held up the
sample holder to the light; the liquid appeared to be
slightly turbid water, and she took a cautious sniff.


 'Is that safe?' Rodrigo called down, with a' trace of
anxiety.


 'Believe me, Boris,' she answered, 'if there are any
pathogens around here that have slipped through my de-
tectors, our insurance policies lapsed a week ago.


 But Boris had a point. Despite all the tests that had
been carried out, there was a very slight risk that this
substance might be poisonous, or might carry some un-
known disease. In normal circumstances, Dr Ernst would
not have taken even this minuscule chance. Now, how-
ever, time was short and the stakes were enormous. If it
became necessary to quarantine Endeavour, that would
be a very small price to pay for her cargo of knowledge.


 'It's water, but I wouldn't care to drink it - it smells
like an algae culture that's gone bad. I can hardly wait to
get it to the lab.'


 'Is the ice safe to walk on?'


 'Yes, solid as a rock.'


 'Then we can get to New York.'


 'Can we, Pieter? Have you ever tried to walk across
four kilometres of ice?'


 'Oh - I see what you mean. Just imagine what Stores
would say, if we asked for a set of skates! Not that many
of us would know how to use them, even if we had any
aboard.'


 'And there's another problem,' put in Boris Rodrigo.
'Do you realize that the temperature is already above
freezing? Before long, that ice is going to melt. How
many spacemen can swim four kilometres? Certainly not
this one...'


 Dr Ernst rejoined them at the edge of the cliff, and
held up the small sample bottle in triumph.


 'It's a long walk for a few cc's of dirty water, but it may
teach us more about Rama than anything we've found so
far. let's head for home.'


 They turned towards the distant lights of the Hub,
moving with the gentle, loping strides which had proved
the most comfortable means of walking under this re-
duced gravity. Often they looked back, drawn by the hid-
den enigma of the island out there in the centre of the
frozen sea.
 
 And just once, Dr Ernst thought she felt the faint sus-
picion of a breeze against her cheek.
 
 It did not come again, and she quickly forgot all about
it.