CHAPTER THIRTY- The Flower


Jimmy's exertions had made him thirsty, and he was
acutely conscious of the fact that in all this land there
was no water that a man could drink. With the contents
of his flask, he could probably survive a week - but for
what purpose? The best brains of Earth would soon be
focused on his problem; doubtless Commander Norton
would be bombarded with suggestions. But he could
imagine no way in which he could lower himself down
the face of that half-kilometre cliff. Even it he had a long
enough rope, there was nothing to which he could attach
it.


 Nevertheless, it was foolish - and unmanly - to give up
without a struggle. Any help would have to come from
the Sea, and while he was marching towards it he could
carry on with his job as if nothing had happened. No one
else would ever observe and photograph the varied ter-
rain through which he must pass, and that would guaran-
tee a posthumous immortality. Though he would have
preferred many other honours, that was better than noth-
ing.


 He was only three kilometres from the Sea as poor
Dragonfly could have flown, but it seemed unlikely that
he could reach it in a straight line; some of the terrain
ahead of him might prove too great an obstacle. That was
no problem, however, as there were plenty of alternative
routes. Jimmy could see them all, spread out on the great
curving map that swept up and away from him on
either side.


 He had plenty of time; he would start with the most
interesting scenery, even if it took him off his direct
route. About a kilometre away towards the right was a
square that glittered like cut glass - or a gigantic display
of jewellery. It was probably this thought that triggered
Jimmy's footsteps. Even a doomed man might reasonably
be expected to take some slight interest in a few thousand
square metres of gems.
 
 He was not particularly disappointed when they
turned out to be quartz crystals, millions of them, set in a
bed of sand. The adjacent square of the checkerboard
was rather more interesting, being covered with an ap-
parently random pattern of hollow metal columns, set
very close together and ranging in height from less than
one to more than five metres. It was completely impass-
able; only a tank could have crashed through that forest
of tubes.
 
 Jimmy walked between the crystals and the columns
until he came to the first crossroads. The square on the
right was a huge rug or tapestry made of woven wire; he
tried to prise a strand loose, but was unable to break it.
 
 On the left was a tessellation of hexagonal tiles, so
smoothly inlaid that there were no visible joints between
them. It would have appeared a continuous surface, had
the tiles not been coloured all the hues of the rainbow.
Jimmy spent many minutes trying to find two adjacent
tiles of the same colour, to see if he could then distin-
guish their boundaries, but he could not find a single
example of such coincidence.
 
 As he did a slow pan right around the crossroads, he
said plaintively to Hub Control: 'What do you think
this is? I feel I'm trapped in a giant jigsaw puzzle. Or is
this the Raman Art Gallery?'
 
 'We're as baffled as you, Jimmy. But there's never been
any sign that the Ramans go in for art. Let's wait until
we have some more examples before we jump to any con-
clusions.'
 
 The two examples he found at the next crossroads were
not much help. One was completely blank - a smooth,
neutral grey, hard but slippery to the touch. The other
was a soft sponge, perforated with billions upon billions of
tiny holes. He tested it with his foot, and the whole sur-
face undulated sickeningly beneath him like a barely
stabilized quicksand.
 
 At the next cross-roads he encountered something strik-
ingly like a ploughed field - except that the furrows were
a uniform metre in depth, and the material of which they
were made had the texture of a file or rasp. But he paid
little attention to this, because the square adjacent to it
was the most thought-provoking of all that he had so far
met. At last there was something that he could under.
stand; and it was more than a little disturbing.
 
 The entire square was surrounded by a fence, so con-
ventional that he would not have looked at it twice had
he seen it on Earth. There were posts - apparently of
metal - five metres apart, with six strands of wire strung
taut between them.
 
 Beyond this fence was a second, identical one - and
beyond that, a third. It was another typical example of
Raman redundancy; whatever was penned inside this en-
closure would have no chance of breaking out. There was
no entrance - no gates that could be swung open to drive
in the beast, or beasts, that were presumably kept here.
Instead, there was a single hole, like a smaller version of
Copernicus, in the centre of the square.
 
 Even in different circumstances, Jimmy would prob-
ably not have hesitated, but now he had nothing to lose.
He quickly scaled all three fences, walked over to the
hole, and peered into it.
 
 Unlike Copernicus, this well was only fifty metres deep.
There were three tunnel exits at the bottom, each of
which looked large enough to accommodate an elephant.
And that was all.
 
 After staring for some time, Jimmy decided that the
only thing that made sense about the arrangement was
for the floor down there to be an elevator. But what it
elevated he was never likely to know; he could only guess
that it was quite large, and possibly quite dangerous.
 
 During the next few hours, he walked more than ten
kilometres along the edge of the Sea, and the checker-
board squares had begun to blur together in his memory.
He had seen some that were totally enclosed in tent-like
structures of wire mesh, as if they were giant bird-cages.
There were others which seemed to be pools of congealed
liquid, full of swirl-patterns; however, when he tested
them gingerly, they were quite solid. And there was
one so utterly black that he could not even see it clearly;
only the sense of touch told him that anything was
there.
 
 Yet now there was a subtle modulation into something
he could understand. Ranging one after the other to-
wards the south was a series of - no other word would do
- fields. He might have been walking past an experi-
mental farm on Earth; each square was a smooth expanse
of carefully levelled earth, the first he had ever seen in
the metallic landscapes of Rama.
 
 The great fields were virgin, lifeless - waiting for crops
that had never been planted. Jimmy wondered what
their purpose could be, since it was incredible that crea-
tures as advanced as the Ramans would engage in any
form of agriculture; even on Earth, farming was no more
than a popular hobby and a source of exotic luxury
foods. But he could swear that these were potential farms,
immaculately prepared. He had never seen earth that
looked so clean; each square was covered with a great
sheet of tough, transparent plastic. He tried to cut
through it to obtain a sample, but his knife would barely
scratch the surface.
 
 Further inland were other fields, and on many of them
were complicated constructions of rods and wires, pre-
sumably intended for the support of climbing plants.
They looked very bleak and desolate, like leafless trees in
the depths of winter. The winter they had known must
have been long and terrible indeed, and these few weeks
of light and warmth might be only a brief interlude be-
fore it came again.
 
 Jimmy never knew what made him stop and look more
closely into the metal maze to the south. Unconsciously,
his mind must have been checking every detail around
him; it had noticed, in this fantastically alien landscape,
something even more anomalous.
 
 About a quarter of a kilometre away, in the middle of
a trellis of wires and rods, glowed a single speck of colour.
It was so small and inconspicuous that it was almost at
the limit of visibility; on Earth, no one would have
looked at it twice. Yet undoubtedly one of the reasons he
had noticed it now was because it reminded him of
Earth ...
 
 He did not report to Hub Control until he was sure
that there was no mistake, and that wishful thinking had
not deluded him. Not until he was only a few metres
away could he be completely sure that life as he knew it
had intruded into the sterile, aseptic world of Rama. For
blooming here in lonely splendour at the edge of the
southern continent was a flower.
 
 As he came closer, it was obvious to Jimmy that some-
thing had gone wrong. There was a hole in the sheathing
that, presumably, protected this layer of earth from con-
tamination by unwanted life-forms. Through this break
extended a green stem, about as thick as a man's little
finger, which twined its way up through the trellis-work.
A metre from the ground it burst into an efflorescence of
bluish leaves, shaped more like feathers than the foliage
of any plant known to Jimmy. The stem ended, at eye-
level, in what he had first taken to be a single flower.
Now he saw, with no surprise at all, that it was actually
three flowers tightly packed together.
 
 The petals were brightly coloured tubes about five
centimetres long; there were at least fifty in each bloom,
and they glittered with such metallic blues, violets and
greens, that they seemed more like the wings of a butter-
fly than anything in the vegetable kingdom. Jimmy knew
practically nothing about botany, but he was puzzled to
see no trace of any structures resembling petals or sta-
mens. He wondered if the likeness to terrestrial flowers
might be a pure coincidence; perhaps this was something
more akin to a coral polyp. In either case, it would seem
to imply the existence of small, airborne creatures to
serve either as fertilizing agents - or as food.
 
 It did not really matter. Whatever the scientific defini-
tion, to Jimmy this was a flower. The strange miracle, the
un-Raman-like accident of its existence here reminded
him of all that he would never see again; and he was
determined to possess it.
 
 That would not be easy. It was more than ten metres
away, separated from him by a lattice-work made of thin
rods. They formed a cubic pattern, repeated over and
over again, less than forty centimetres on either side.
Jimmy would not have been flying sky-bikes unless he
had been slim and wiry, so he knew he could crawl
through the interstices of the grid. But getting out again
might be quite a different matter; it would certainly be
impossible for him to turn around, so he would have to
retreat backwards.
 
 Hub Control was delighted with his discovery, when he
had described the flower and scanned it from every avail-
able angle. There was no objection when he said: 'I'm
going after it.' Nor did he expect there to be; his life was
now his own, to do with as he pleased.
 
 He stripped off all his clothes, grasped the smooth
metal rods, and started to wriggle into the framework. It
was a tight fit; he felt like a prisoner escaping through
the bars of his cell. When he had inserted himself com-
pletely into the lattice he tried backing out again, just to
see if there were any problems. It was considerably more
difficult, since he now had to use his outstretched arms for
pushing instead of pulling, but he saw no reason why he
should get helplessly trapped.
 
 Jimmy was a man of action and impulse, not of intro-
spection. As he squirmed uncomfortably along the nar-
row corridor of rods, he wasted no time asking himself
just why he was performing so quixotic a feat. He had
never been interested in flowers in his whole life, yet now
he was gambling his last energies to collect one.
 It was true that this specimen was unique, and of
enormous scientific value. But he really wanted it be-
cause it was his last link with the world of life and the
planet of his birth.
 
 Yet when the flower was in his grasp, he had sudden
qualms. Perhaps it was the only flower that grew in the
whole of Rama; was he justified in picking it?
 
 If he needed any excuse, he could console himself with
the thought that the Ramans themselves had not in-
cluded it in their plans. It was obviously a freak, growing
ages too late - or too soon. But lie did not really require
an excuse, and his hesitation was only momentary. He
reached out, grasped the stem, and gave a sharp jerk.
 
 The flower came away easily enough; he also collected
two of the leaves, then started to back slowly through the
lattice. Now that he had only one free hand, progress was
extremely difficult, even painful, and he soon had to
pause to regain his breath. It was then that he noticed
that the feathery leaves were closing, and the headless stem
was slowly unwinding itself from its supports. As he
watched with a mixture of fascination and dismay, he
saw that the whole plant was steadily retreating into the
ground, like a mortally injured snake crawling back into
its hole.
 
 I've murdered something beautiful, Jimmy told him-
self. But then Rama had killed him. He was only collect-
ing what was his rightful due.