CHAPTER SIX - Committee


It had been a serious mistake, Dr Bose often thought, to
put the United Planets Headquarters on the Moon. In-
evitably, Earth tended to dominate the proceedings - as
it dominated the landscape beyond the dome. If they had
to build here, perhaps they should have gone to the Far-
side, where that hypnotic disc never shed its rays...
But, of course, it was much too late to change, and in
any case there was no real alternative. Whether the col-
onies liked it or not, Earth would be the cultural and
economic overlord of the solar system for centuries to
come.


 Dr Bose had been born on Earth, and had not emi-
grated to Mars until he was thirty, so he felt that he
could view the political situation fairly dispassionately.
He knew now that he would never return to his home
planet, even though it was only five hours away by shut-
tle. At 115, he was in perfect health, but he could not face
the reconditioning needed to accustom him to three
times the gravity he had enjoyed for most of his life. He
was exiled for ever from the world of his birth; not being
a sentimental man, this -had never depressed him unduly.


 What did depress him sometimes was the need for deal-
ing, year after year, with the same familiar faces. The
marvels of medicine were all very well, and certainly he
had no desire to put back the clock - but there were men
around this conference table with whom he had worked
for more than half a century. He knew exactly what they
would say and how they would vote on any given subject.
He wished that, some day, one of them would do some-
thing totally unexpected - even something quite crazy.


 And probably they felt exactly the same way about
him...


 The Rama Committee was still manageably small,
though doubtless that would soon be rectified. His six
colleagues - the UP representatives for Mercury, Earth,
Luna, Ganymede, Titan and Triton - were all present in
the flesh. They had to be; electronic diplomacy was not
possible over solar system distances. Some elder states-
men, accustomed to the instantaneous communications
which Earth had long taken for granted, had never re-
conciled themselves to the fact that radio waves took
minutes, or even hours, to journey across the gulfs be-
tween the planets. 'Can't you scientists do something
about it?' they had been heard to complain bitterly,
when told that face-to-face conversation was impossible
between Earth and any of its remoter children. Only the
Moon had that barely acceptable one-and-a-half-second
delay - with all the political and psychological conse-
quences which it implied. Because of this fact of astro-
nomical life, the Moon - and only the Moon - would
always be a suburb of Earth.


 Also present in person were three of the specialists who
had been co-opted to the Committee. Professor Davidson,
the astronomer, was an old acquaintance; today, he did
not seem his usual irascible self. Dr Bose knew nothing of
the infighting that had preceded the launch of the first
probe to Rama, but the Professor's colleagues had not let
him forget it.


 Dr Thelma Price was familiar through her numerous
television appearances, though she had first made her
reputation fifty years ago during the archaeological ex-
plosion that had followed the draining of that vast mar-
ine museum, the Mediterranean.


 Dr Bose could still recall the excitement of that time,
when the lost treasures of the Greeks, Romans and a
dozen other civilizations were restored to the light of day.
That was one of the few occasions when he was sorry to
be living on Mars.


 The exobiologist, Carlisle Perera, was another obvious
choice; so was Dennis Solomons, the science historian. Dr
Bose was slightly less happy about the presence of Conrad
Taylor, the celebrated anthropologist, who bad made his
reputation by uniquely combining scholarship and eroti-
cism in his study of puberty rites in late twentieth-cen-
tury Beverley Hills.


 No one, however, could possibly have disputed the
right of Sir Lewis Sands to be on the Committee. A man
whose knowledge was matched only by his urbanity, Sir
Lewis was reputed to lose his composure only when called
the Arnold Toynbee of his age.


 The great historian was not present in person; he stub-
bornly refused to leave Earth, even for so momentous a
meeting as this. His stereo image, indistinguishable from
reality, apparently occupied the chair to Dr Bose's right;
as if to complete the illusion, someone had placed a glass
of water in front of him. Dr Bose considered that this sort
of technological tour de force was an unnecessary gim-
mick, but it was surprising how many undeniably great
men were childishly delighted to be in two places at once.
Sometimes this electronic miracle produced comic dis-
asters; he had been at one diplomatic reception where
somebody had tried to walk through a stereogram - and
discovered, too late, that it was the real person. And it
was even funnier to watch projections trying to shake
hands...


 His Excellency the Ambassador for Mars to the United
Planets called his wandering thoughts to order, cleared
his throat, and said: 'Gentlemen, the Committee is now
in session. I think I am correct in saying that this is a
gathering of unique talents, assembled to deal with a
unique situation. The directive that the Secretary-Gen-
eral has given us is to evaluate that situation, and to ad-
vise Commander Norton when necessary.


 This was a miracle of over-simplification, and everyone
knew it. Unless there was a real emergency, the Commit-
tee might never be in direct contact with Commander
Norton - if, indeed, he ever heard of its existence. For the
Committee was a temporary creation of the United Plan-
ets' Science Organization, reporting through its Director
to the Secretary-General. It was true that the Space Sur-
vey was part of the UP - but on the Operations, not the
Science side. In theory, this should not make much differ-
ence; there was no reason why the Rama Committee - or
anyone else for that matter - should not call up Com-
mander Norton and offer helpful advice.


 But Deep Space Communications are expensive. En-
deavour could be contacted only through PLANETCOM,
which was an autonomous corporation, famous for the
strictness and efficiency of its accounting. It took a long
time to establish a line of credit with PLANETCOM; some-
where, someone was working on this; but at the moment,
PLANETCOM's hard-hearted computers did not recognize
the existence of the Rama Committee.


 'This Commander Norton,' said Sir Robert Mackay,
the Ambassador for Earth. 'He has a tremendous re-
sponsibility. What sort of person is he?'


 'I can answer that,' said Professor Davidson, his fingers
flying over the keyboard of his memory pad. He frowned
at the screenful of information, and started to make an
instant synopsis.


 'William Tsien Norton, Born 2077, Brisbane, Oceana.
Educated Sydney, Bombay, Houston. Then five years at
Astrograd, specializing in propulsion. Commissioned
2102. Rose through usual ranks - Lieutenant on the
Third Persephone expedition, distinguished himself dur-
ing fifteenth attempt to establish base on Venus ... um
um - . . exemplary record . . . dual citizenship, Earth
and Mars ... wife and one child in Brisbane, wife and
two in Port Lowell, with option on third...'


 'Wife?' asked Taylor innocently.


 'No, child of course,' snapped the Professor, before he
caught the grin on the other's face. Mild laughter rippled
round the table, though the overcrowded terrestrials
looked more envious than amused. After a century of de-
termined effort, Earth had still failed to get its popula-
tion below the target of one billion ...


 .... appointed commanding officer Solar Survey Re-
search Vessel Endeavour. First voyage to retrograde sat-
ellites of Jupiter ... um, that was a tricky one.., on aster-
oid mission when ordered to prepare for this operation
... managed to beat deadline...'


 The Professor cleared the display and looked up at his
colleagues.


 'I think we were extremely lucky, considering that he
was the only man available at such short notice. We
might have had the usual run-of-the-mill captain.' He
sounded as if be was referring to the typical peg-legged
scourge of the spaceways, pistol in one hand and cutlass
in the other.


 'The record--only proves that he's competent,' objected
the Ambassador from Mercury (population: i 12,500 but
growing). 'How will be react in a wholly novel situation
like this?'


 On Earth, Sir Lewis Sands cleared his throat. A second
and a half later, he did so on the Moon.


 'Not exactly a novel situation,' he reminded the Her-
mian, 'even though it's three centuries since it last oc-
curred. If Rama is dead, or unoccupied - and so far all
the evidence suggests that it is - Norton is in the position
of an archaeologist discovering the ruins of an extinct
culture.' He bowed politely to Dr Price, who nodded in
agreement. 'Obvious examples are Scbliemann at Troy or
Mouhot at Angkor Vat. The danger is minimal, though
of course accident can never be completely ruled out.'


 'But what about the booby-traps and trigger mechan-
isms these Pandora people have been talking about?'
asked Dr Price.


 'Pandora?' asked the Hermian Ambassador quickly.
'What's that?'


 'It's a crackpot movement,' explained Sir Robert, with
as much embarrassment as a diplomat was ever likely to
show, 'which is convinced that Rama is a grave potential
danger. A box that shouldn't be opened, you know.' He
doubted if the Hermian did know: classical studies were
not encouraged on Mercury.


 'Pandora - paranoia,' snorted Conrad Taylor. 'Oh, of
course, such things are conceivable, but why should any
intelligent race want to play childish tricks?'


 'Well, even ruling out such unpleasantness,' Sir Robert
continued, 'we still have the much more ominous possi-
bility of an active, inhabited Rama. Then the situation is
one of an encounter between two cultures - at very diff-
erent technological levels. Pizzaro and the Incas. Peary
and the Japanese. Europe and Africa. Almost invariably,
the consequences have been disastrous - for one or both
parties. I'm not making any recommendations: I'm mere-
ly pointing out precedents.'


 'Thank you, Sir Robert,' replied Dr Bose. It was a mild
nuisance, he thought, having two 'Sirs' on one small com-
mittee; in these latter days, knighthood was an honour
which few Englishmen escaped. 'I'm sure we've all
thought of these alarming possibilities. But if the creat-
ures inside Rama are - er - malevolent - will it really
make the slightest difference what we do?'


 'They might ignore us if we go away.'


 'What - after they've travelled billions of miles and
thousands of years?'


 The argument had reached the take-off point, and was
now self-sustaining. Dr Bose sat back in his chair, said
very little, and waited for the consensus to emerge.


 It was just as he had predicted. Everyone agreed that,
once he had opened the first door, it was inconceivable
that Commander Norton should not open the second.