CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN - Electric Wind


As Jimmy turned homewards, the northern end of Rama
seemed incredibly far away. Even the three giant stair-
ways were barely visible, as a faint Y etched on the dome
that closed the world. The band of the Cylindrical Sea
was a wide and menacing barrier, waiting to swallow him
up if, like Icarus, his fragile wings should fail.


 But he had come all this way with no problems, and
though he was feeling slightly tired he now felt that he
had nothing to worry about. He had not even touched his
food or water, and had been too excited to rest. On the
return journey, he would relax and take it easy. He was
also cheered by the thought that the homeward trip
could be twenty kilometres shorter than the outward one,
for as long as he cleared the Sea, he could make an
emergency landing anywhere in the northern continent.
That would be a nuisance, because he would have a long
walk - and much worse, would have to abandon Dragon-
fly - but it gave him a very comforting safety margin.


 He was now gaining altitude, climbing back towards
the central spike; Big Horn's tapering needle still
stretched for a kilometre ahead of him, and sometimes he
felt it was the axis on Which this whole world turned.


 He had almost reached the tip of Big Horn when he
became aware of a curious sensation; a feeling of forebod-
ing, and indeed of physical as well as psychological dis-
comfort, had come over him. He suddenly recalled - and
this did nothing at all to help - a phrase he had once
come across: 'Someone is walking over your grave.'


 At first he shrugged it off, and continued his steady
pedalling. He certainly had no intention of reporting
anything as tenuous as a vague malaise to Hub Control,
but as it grew steadily worse he was tempted to do so. It
could not possibly be psychological; if it was, his mind
was much more powerful than he realized. Forte could,
quite literally, feel his skin beginning to crawl


 Now seriously alarmed, he stopped in mid-air and be-
gan to consider the situation. What made it all the more
peculiar was the fact that this depressed heavy feeling was
not completely novel; he had known it before, but could
not remember where.


 He looked around him. Nothing had changed. The
great spike of Big Horn was a few hundred metres above,
with the other side of Rama spanning the sky beyond
that. Eight kilometres below lay the complicated patch-
work of the Southern continent, full of wonders that no
other man would ever see. In all the utterly alien yet now
familiar landscape, he could find no cause for his discom-
fort.


 Something was tickling the back of his hand; for a
moment, he thought an insect had landed there, and
brushed it away without looking. He had only half-com-
pleted the swift motion when he realized what he was
doing and checked himself, feeling slightly foolish. Of
course, no one had ever seen an insect in Rama...


 He lifted his hand, and stared at it, mildly puzzled
because the tickling sensation was still there. It was then
that he noticed that every individual hair was standing
straight upright. All the way up his forearm it was the
same - and so it was with his head, when he checked with
an exploring hand.


 So that was the trouble. He was in a tremendously
powerful electric field; the oppressed, heavy sensation he
had felt was that which sometimes precedes a thunder-
storm on Earth.


 The sudden realization of his predicament brought
Jimmy very near to panic. Never before in his life had he
been in real physical danger. Like all spacemen, he had
known moments of frustration with bulky equipment,
and times when, owing to mistakes or inexperience, he
had wrongly believed he was in a perilous situation. But
none of these episodes had lasted more than a few min-
utes, and usually he was able to laugh at them almost at
once.


 This time there was no quick way out. He felt naked
and alone in a suddenly hostile sky, surrounded by ti-
tanic forces which might discharge their furies at any
moment. Dragonfly - already fragile enough - now
seemed more insubstantial than the finest gossamer. The
first detonation of the gathering storm would blast her to
fragments.


 'Hub Control,' he said urgently. 'There's a static
charge building up around me. I think there's going to
be a thunderstorm at any moment.'


 He had barely finished speaking when there was a
flicker of light behind him; by the time he had counted
ten, the first crackling rumble arrived. Three kilometres -
that put it back around the Little Horns. He looked to-
wards them and saw that every one of the six needles
seemed to be on fire. Brush discharges, hundreds of
metres long, were dancing from their points, as if they
were giant lightning conductors.


 What was happening back there could take place on
an even larger scale near the tapering spike of Big Horn.
His best move would be to get as far as possible from this
dangerous structure, and to seek clear air. He started
to pedal again, accelerating as swiftly as he could with-
out putting too great a strain on Dragonfly. At the
same time he began to lose altitude; even though
this would mean entering the region of higher gravity,
he was now prepared to take such a risk. Eight kilo-
metres was much too far from the ground for his peace of
mind.


 The ominous black spike of Big Horn was still free of
visible discharges, but he did not doubt that tremendous
potentials were building up there. From time to time the
thunder still reverberated behind him, rolling round and
round the circumference of the world. It suddenly oc-
curred to Jimmy how strange it was to have such a storm
In a perfectly clear sky; then he realized that this was not
a meteorological phenomenon at all. In fact, it might be
only a trivial leakage of energy from some hidden source,
deep in the southern cap of Rama. But why now? And,
even more important - what next?


 He was now well past the tip of Big Horn, and hoped
that he would soon be beyond the range of any lightning
discharges. But now he had another problem; the air was
becoming turbulent, and he had difficulty in controlling
Dragonfly. A wind seemed to have sprung up from no-
where, and if conditions became much worse the bike's
fragile skeleton would be endangered. He pedalled
grimly on, trying to smooth out the buffeting by varia-
tions in power and movements of his body. Because
Dragonfly was almost an extension of himself, he was
partly successful; but he did not like the faint creaks of
protest that came from the main spar, nor the way in
which the wings twisted with every gust.
 
 And there was something else that worried him - a
faint rushing sound, steadily growing in strength, that
seemed to come from the direction of Big Horn. It soun-
ded like gas escaping from a valve under pressure, and he
wondered if it had anything to do with the turbulence
which he was battling. Whatever its cause, it gave him yet
further grounds for disquiet.
 
 From time to time he reported these phenomena,
rather briefly and breathlessly, to Hub Control. No one
there could give him any advice, or even suggest what
might be happening; but it was reassuring to hear the
voices of his friends, even though he was now beginning
to fear that he would never see them again.
 The turbulence was still increasing. It almost felt as if
he was entering a jet stream - which he had once done,
in search of a record, while flying a high-altitude glider
on Earth. But what could possibly create a jet stream
inside Rama?


 He had asked himself the right question; as soon as he
had formulated it, he knew the answer.


 The sound he had heard was the electric wind carrying
away the tremendous ionization that must be building
up around Big Horn. Charged air was spraying out along
the axis of Rama, and more air was flowing into the low-
pressure region behind. He looked back at that gigantic
and now doubly threatening needle, trying to visualize
the boundaries of the gale that was blowing from it. Per-
haps the best tactic would be to fly by ear, getting as far
as possible away from the ominous hissing.


 Rama spared him the necessity of choice. A sheet of
flame burst out behind him, filling the sky. He had time
to see it split into six ribbons of fire, stretching from the
tip of Big Horn to each of the Little Horns. Then the
concussion reached him.