CHAPTER THREE - Rama and Sita


The extraordinary meeting of the Space Advisory Coun-
cil was brief and stormy. Even in the twenty-second cen-
tury, no way had yet been discovered of keeping elderly
and conservative scientists from occupying crucial ad-
ministrative positions. Indeed, it was doubted if the prob
lem ever would be solved.


 To make matters worse, the current Chairman of the
SAC was Professor (Emeritus) Olaf Davidson, the distin-
guished astrophysicist. Professor Davidson was not very
much interested in objects smaller than galaxies, and
never bothered to conceal his prejudices. And though he
had to admit that ninety per cent of his science was now
based upon observations from space-borne instruments,
he was not at all happy about it. No less than three
times during his distinguished career, satellites specially
launched to prove one of his pet theories had done pre-
cisely the opposite.


 The question before the Council was straightforward
enough. There was no doubt that Rama was an unusual
object - but was it an important one? In a few months it
would be gone for ever, so there was little time in which
to act. Opportunities missed now would never recur.


 At rather a horrifying cost, a space-probe soon to be
launched from Mars to beyond Neptune could be modi-
fied and sent on a high-speed trajectory to meet Rama.
There was no hope of a rendezvous; it would be the fast-
est fly-by on record, for the two bodies would pass each
other at two hundred thousand kilometres an hour.
Rama would be observed intensively for only a few min-
utes - and in real closeup for less than a second. But with
the right instrumentation, that would be long enough to
settle many questions.


 Although Professor Davidson took a very jaundiced
view of the Neptune probe, it had already been approved
and he saw no point in sending more good money after
bad. He spoke eloquently on the follies of asteroid-chas-
ing, and the urgent need for a new high-resolution inter-
ferometer on the Moon to prove the newly-revived Big
Bang theory of creation, once and for all. -


 That was a grave tactical error, because the three most
ardent supporters of the Modified Steady State Theory
were also members of the Council. They secretly agreed
with Professor Davidson that asteroid-chasing was a waste
of money; nevertheless...


 He lost by one vote.


Three months later the space-probe, rechristened Sita,
was launched from Phobos, the inner moon of Mars. The
flight time was seven weeks, and the instrument was
switched to full power only five minutes before intercep-
tion. Simultaneously, a cluster of camera pods was re-
leased, to sail past Rama so that it could be photo-
graphed from all sides.


 The first images, from ten thousand kilometres away,
brought to a halt the activities of all mankind. On a bib
lion television screens, there appeared a tiny, featureless
cylinder, growing rapidly second by second. By the time
it had doubled its size, no one could pretend any longer
that Rama was a natural object.


 Its body was a cylinder so geometrically perfect that it
might have been turned on a lathe - one with centres
fifty kilometres apart. The two ends were quite flat, apart
from some small structures at the centre of one face, and
were twenty kilometres across; from a distance, when
there was no sense of scale, Rama looked almost comic-
ally like an ordinary domestic boiler.


 Rama grew until it filled the screen. Its surface was a
dull, drab grey, as colourless as the Moon, and completely
devoid of markings except at one point. Halfway along
the cylinder there was a kilometre-wide stain or smear, as
if something had once hit and splattered, ages ago.


 There was no sign that the impact had done the slight-
est damage to Rama's spinning walls; but this mark had
produced the slight fluctuation in brightness that had led
to Stenton's discovery.


 The images from the other cameras added nothing
new. However, the trajectories their pods traced .through
Rama's minute gravitational field gave one other vital
piece of information - the mass of the cylinder.


 It was far too light to be a solid body. To nobody's
great surprise, it was clear that Rama must be hollow.


 The long-hoped-for, long-feared encounter had come at
last. Mankind was about to receive its first visitor from the
stars.