CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO - To Sail the Cylindrical Sea


When they reached the foot of the stairway, they had an-
other shock. At first, it appeared that something had gone
through the camp, overturning equipment, even collect-
ing smaller objects and carrying them away. But after a
brief examination, their alarm was replaced by a rather
shame-faced annoyance.


 The culprit was only the wind; though they had tied
down all loose objects before they left, some ropes must
have parted during exceptionally strong gusts. It was sev-
eral days before they were able to retrieve all their scat-
tered property.


 Otherwise, there seemed no major changes. Even the
silence of Rama had returned, now that the ephemeral
storms of spring were over. And out there at the edge of
the plain was a calm sea, waiting for the first ship in a
million years.
'Shouldn't one christen a new boat with a bottle of cham-
pagne?'


 'Even if we had any on board, I wouldn't allow such a
criminal waste. Anyway, it's too bate. We've already
launched the thing.'


 'At least it does float. You've won your bet, Jimmy. I'll
settle when we get back to Earth.'


 'It's got to have a name. Any ideas?'


 The subject of these unflattering comments was now
bobbing beside the steps beading down into the Cylindri-
cal Sea. It was a small raft, constructed from six empty
storage drums held together by a light metal framework.
Building it, assembling it at Camp Alpha and hauling it
on demountabbe wheels across more than ten kilometres
of plain had absorbed the crew's entire energies for sev-
eral days. It was a gamble that had better pay off.


 The prize was worth the risk. The enigmatic towers of
New York, gleaming there in the shadowless bight five
kilometres away, had taunted them ever since they had
entered Rama. No one doubted that the city - or what-
ever it might be - was the real heart of this world. If they
did nothing else, they must reach New York.


 'We still don't have a name. Skipper - what about it?'


 Norton laughed, then became suddenly serious.


 'I've got one for you. Call it Resolution.'


 'Why?'


 'That was one of Cook's ships. It's a good name - may
she live up to it.'


 There was a thoughtful silence; then Sergeant Barnes,
who had been principally responsible for the design,
asked for three volunteers. Everyone present held up a
hand.


 'Sorry - we only have four life-jackets. Boris, Jimmy,
Pieter - you've all done some sailing. Let's try her out.'


 No one thought it in the least peculiar that an Execu-
tive Sergeant was now taking charge of the proceedings.
Ruby Barnes had the only Master's Certificate aboard, so
that settled the matter. She had navigated racing tri-
marans across the Pacific, and it did not seem likely that a
few kilometres of dead-calm water could present much of
a challenge to her skills.


 Ever since she had set eyes upon the Sea, she had been
determined to make this voyage. In all the thousands of
years that man had had dealings with the waters of his
own world, no sailor had ever faced anything remotely
like this. In the last few days a silly little jingle had been
running through her mind, and she could not get rid of
it. 'To sail the Cylindrical Sea...' Well, that was pre-
cisely what she was going to do.


 Her passengers took their places on the improvised
bucket seats, and Ruby opened the throttle. The twenty-
kilowatt motor started to whirr, the chain-drives of the
reduction gear blurred, and Resolution surged away to
the cheers of the spectators.


 Ruby had hoped to get fifteen kph with this load, but
would settle for anything over ten. A half-kilometre
course had been measured along the cliff, and she made
the round trip in five and a half minutes. Allowing for
turning time, this worked out at twelve kph; she was
quite happy with that.


 With no power, but with three energetic paddlers help-
ing her own more skilful blade, Ruby was able to get a
quarter of this speed. So even if the motor broke down,
they could get back to shore in a couple of hours. The
heavy-duty power cells could provide enough energy to
circumnavigate the world; she was carrying two spares, to
be on the safe side. And now that the fog had completely
burned away, even such a cautious mariner as Ruby was
prepared to put to sea without a compass.


 She saluted smartly as she stepped ashore.


 'Maiden voyage of Resolution successfully completed,
Sir. Now awaiting your instructions.'


 'Very good ... Admiral. When will you be ready to
sail?'


 'As soon as stores can be loaded aboard, and the Har-
bour Master gives us clearance.'


 'Then we leave at dawn.'


 'Aye, aye, Sir.'


Five kilometres of water does not seem very much on a
map; it is very different when one is in the middle of it.
They had been cruising for only ten minutes, and the
fifty-metre cliff facing the Northern Continent already
seemed a surprising distance away. Yet, mysteriously, New
York hardly appeared much closer than before...


 But most of the time they paid little attention to the
land; they were still too engrossed in the wonder of the
Sea. They no longer made the nervous jokes that had
punctuated the start of the voyage; this new experience
was too overwhelming.
 
 Every time, Norton told himself, he felt that he had
grown accustomed to Rama, it produced some new won-
der. As Resolution hummed steadily forward, it seemed
that they were caught in the trough of a gigantic wave - a
wave which curved u~ on either side until it became
vertical - then overhung until the two flanks met in a
liquid arch sixteen kilometres above their heads. Despite
everything that reason and logic told them, none of the
voyagers could for long throw off the impression that at
any minute those millions of tons of water would come
crashing down from the sky.
 
 Yet despite this, their main feeling was one of exhilara-
tion; there was a sense of danger, without any real dan-
ger. Unless, of course, the Sea itself produced any more
surprises.
 
 That was a distinct possibility, for as Mercer had
guessed, the water was now alive. Every spoonful con-
tained thousands of spherical, single-celled micro-organ-
isms, similar to the earliest forms of plankton that had
existed in the oceans of Earth.


 Yet they showed puzzling differences; they lacked a
nucleus, as well as many of the other minimum require-
ments of even the most primitive terrestrial life-forms.
And although Laura Ernst - now doubling as research
scientist as well as ship's doctor - had proved that they
definitely generated oxygen, there were far too few of
them to account for the augmentation of Rama's atmo-
sphere. They should have existed in billions, not mere
thousands.


 Then she discovered that their numbers were dwind-
ling rapidly, and must have been far higher during the
first hours of the Raman dawn. It was as if there had
been a brief explosion of life, recapitulating on a trillion-
fold swifter time-scale the early history of Earth. Now,
perhaps, it had exhausted itself; the drifting micro-organ-
isms were disintegrating, releasing their stores of chemi-
cals back into the Sea.
 
 'If you have to swim for it,' Dr Ernst had warned the
mariners, 'keep your mouths closed. A few drops won't
matter - if you spit them out right away. But all those
weird organo-metallic salts add up to a fairly poisonous
package, and I'd hate to have to work out an antidote.'
 
 This danger, fortunately, seemed very unlikely. Reso-
lution could stay afloat if any two of her buoyancy tanks
were punctured. (When told of this, Joe Calvert had
muttered darkly: 'Remember the Titanic! ') And even if
she sank, the crude but efficient life-jackets would keep
their heads above, water. Although Laura had been re-
luctant to give a firm ruling on this, she did not think
that a few hours' immersion in the Sea would be fatal;
but she did not recommend it.
 
 After twenty minutes of steady progress, New York was
no longer a distant island. It was becoming a real place,
and details which they had seen only through telescopes
and photo-enlargements were now revealing themselves
as massive, solid structures. It was now strikingly appar-
ent that the 'city', like so much of Rama, was triplicated;
it consisted of three identical, circular complexes or super-
structures, rising from a long, oval foundation. Photo-
graphs taken from the Hub also indicated that each com-
plex was itself divided into three equal components, like a
pie sliced into 120-degree portions. This would greatly
simplify the task of exploration; presumably they had to
examine only one ninth of New York to have seen the
whole of it. Even this would be a formidable undertak-
ing; it would mean investigating at least a square kilo-
metre of buildings and machinery, some of which tow-
ered hundreds of metres into the air.


 The Ramans, it seemed, had brought the art of triple-
redundancy to a high degree of perfection. This was
demonstrated in the airlock system, the stairways at the
Hub, the artificial suns. And where it really mattered,
they had even taken the next step. New York appeared to
be an example of triple-triple redundancy.


 Ruby was steering Resolution towards the central com-
plex, where a flight of steps led up from the water to the
very -top of the wall or levee which surrounded the island.
There was even a conveniently-placed mooring post to
which boats could be tied; when she saw this, Ruby be-
came quite excited. Now she would never be content un-
til she found one of the craft in which the Ramans sailed
their extraordinary sea.
 
  Norton was the first to step ashore; he looked back at
his three companions and said: 'Wait here on the boat
until I get to the top -of the wall. When I wave, Pieter
and Boris will join me. You stay at the helm, Ruby, so
that we can cast off at a moment's notice. If anything
happens to me, report to Karl and follow his instructions.
Use your best judgement - but no heroics. Understood?'
'Yes, Skipper. Good luck!'


 Commander Norton did not really believe in luck; he
never got into a situation until he had analysed all the
factors involved and had secured his line of retreat. But
once again Rama was forcing him to break some of his
cherished rules. Almost every factor here- was unknown -
as unknown as the Pacific and the Great Barrier Reef had
been to his hero, three and a half centuries ago... Yes, he
could do with all the luck that happened to be lying
around.
 
 The stairway was a virtual duplicate of the one down
which they had descended on the other side of the Sea;
doubtless his friends over there Were looking straight
across at him through their telescopes. And 'straight' was
now the correct word; in this one direction, parallel to
the axis of Rama, the Sea was indeed completely flat. It
might well be the only body of water in the universe of
which this was true, for on all other worlds, every sea or
lake must follow the surface of a sphere, with equal cur-
vature in all directions.
 
 'Nearly at the top,' he reported, speaking for the record
and for his intently listening second-in-command, five
kilometres away, 'still completely quiet - radiation nor-
mal. I'm holding the meter above my head, just in case
this wall is acting as a shield for anything. And if there
are any hostiles on the other side, they'll shoot that first.'
 
 He was joking, of course. And yet - why take any
chances, when it was just as easy to avoid them?
 
 When he - took the last step, he found that the flat-
topped embankment was about ten metres thick; on the
inner side, an alternating series of ramps and stairways
led down to the main level of the city, twenty metres
below. In effect, he was standing on a high wall which
completely surrounded New York, and so was able to get
a grandstand view of it.
 
 It was a view almost stunning in its complexity, and his
first act was to make a slow panoramic scan with his cam-
era. Then he waved to his companions and radioed back
across the Sea: 'No sign of any activity - everything
quiet. Come on up - we'll start exploring.'