CHAPTER NINE - Reconnaissance


'We have now launched five long-delay flares down the
axis of the cylinder, and so have a good photo-coverage of
its full length. All the main features are mapped; though
there are very few that we can identify, we've given them
provisional names.


 'The interior cavity is fifty kilometres long and sixteen
wide. The two ends are bowl-shaped, with rather compli-
cated geometries. We've called ours the Northern Hemi-
sphere and are establishing our first base here at the axis.


 'Radiating away from the central hub, 120 degrees
apart, are three ladders that are almost a kilometre long.
They all end at a terrace or ring-shaped plateau, that
runs right round the bowl. And leading on from that,
continuing the direction of the ladders, are three enorm-
ous stairways, which go all the way down to the plain. If
you imagine an umbrella with only three ribs, equally
spaced, you'll have a good idea of this end of Rama.


 'Each of those ribs is a stairway, very steep near the axis
and then slowly flattening out as it approaches the plain
below. The stairways - we've called them Alpha, Beta,
Gamma - aren't continuous, but break at five more
circular terraces. We estimate there must be between
twenty and thirty thousand steps . . . presumably they
were only used for emergencies, since it's inconceivable
that the Ramans - or whatever we're going to call them -
had no better way of reaching the axis of their world.


 'The Southern Hemisphere looks quite different; for
one thing, it has no stairways, and no flat central hub.
Instead, there's a huge spike - kilometres long - jutting
along the axis, with six smaller ones around it. The
whole arrangement is very odd, and we can't imagine
what it means.


 'The fifty-kilometre-long cylindrical section between
the two bowls we've called the Central Plain. It may seem
crazy to use the word "plain" to describe something so
obviously curved, but we feel it's justified. It will appear
flat to us when we get down there - just as the interior of
a bottle must seem flat to an ant crawling round inside
it.


 'The most striking feature of the Central Plain is the
ten-kilometre-wide dark band running completely round
it at the half-way mark. It looks like ice, so we've christ-
ened it the Cylindrical Sea. Right out in the middle
there's a large oval island, about ten kilometres long and
three wide, and covered with tall structures. Because it
reminds us of Old Manhattan, we've called it New York.
Yet I don't think it's a city; it seems more like an enorm-
ous factory or chemical processing plant.


 'But there are some cities - or at any rate, towns. At
least six of them; if they were built for human beings,
they could each hold about fifty thousand people. We've
called them Rome, Peking, Paris, Moscow, London,
Tokyo... They are linked with highways and something
that seems to be a rail system.


 'There must be enough material for centuries of re-
search in this frozen carcass of a world. We've four thou-
sand square kilometres to explore, and only a few weeks
to do it in. I wonder if we'll ever learn the answer to the
two mysteries that have been haunting me ever since we
got inside; who were they - and what went wrong?'


 The recording ended. On Earth and Moon, the mem-
bers of the Rama Committee relaxed, then started to ex-
amine the maps and photographs spread in front of them.
Though they had already studied these for many hours,
Commander Norton's voice added a dimension which no
pictures could convey. He had actually been there - had
looked with his own eyes across this extraordinary inside-
out world, during the brief moments while its age-long
night had been illuminated by the flares. And he was the
man who would lead any expedition to explore it.


 'Dr Perera, I believe you have some comments to
make?'


 Ambassador Bose wondered briefly if he should have
first given the floor to Professor Davidson, as senior scien-
tist and the only astronomer. But the old cosmologist still
seemed to be in a mild state of shock, and was clearly out
of his element. All his professional career he had looked
upon the universe as an arena for the titanic impersonal
forces of gravitation, magnetism, radiation; he had never
believed that life played an important role in the scheme
of things, and regarded its appearance on Earth, - Mars
and Jupiter as an accidental aberration.


 But now there was proof that life not only existed out-
side the solar system, but had scaled heights far beyond
anything that man had achieved, or could hope to reach
for centuries to come. Moreover, the discovery of Rama
challenged another dogma that Professor Olaf had
preached for years. When pressed, he would reluctantly
admit that life probably did exist in other star systems -
but it was absurd, he had always maintained to imagine
that it could ever cross the interstellar gulfs...


 Perhaps the Ramans had indeed failed, if Commander
Norton was correct in believing that their world was now
a tomb. But at least they had attempted the feat, on a
scale which indicated a high confidence in the outcome.
If such a thing had happened once, it must surely have
happened many times in this Galaxy of a hundred thou-
sand million suns ... and someone, somewhere, would
eventually succeed.


 This was the thesis which, without proof but with con-
siderable arm-waving, Dr Carlisle Perera had been preach-
ing for years. He was now a very happy man, though also
a most frustrated one. Rama had spectacularly confirmed
his views - but he could never set foot inside it, or even
see it with his own eyes. If the devil had suddenly
appeared and offered him the gift of instantaneous tele-
portation, he would have signed the contract without
bothering to look at the small print.


 'Yes, Mr Ambassador, I think I have some information
of interest. What we have here is undoubtedly a "Space
Ark". It's an old idea in the astronautical literature; I've
been able to trace it back to the British physicist J. D.
Bernal, who proposed this method of interstellar colon-
ization in a book published in 1929 - yes, two hundred
years ago. And the great Russian pioneer Tsiolkovski put
forward somewhat similar proposals even earlier.


 'If you want to go from one star system to another you
have a number of choices. Assuming that the speed of
light is an absolute limit - and that's still not completely
settled, despite anything you may have heard to the con-
trary' - there was an indignant sniff, but no formal pro-
test from Professor Davidson - 'you can make a fast trip
in a small vessel, or a slow journey in a giant one.


 'There seems no technical reason why spacecraft can-
not reach ninety per cent, or more, of the speed of light.
That would mean a travel time of five to ten years be-
tween neighbouring stars - tedious, perhaps, but not
impracticable, especially for creatures whose life spans
might be measured in centuries. One can imagine voyages
of this duration, carried out in ships not much larger than
ours.


 'But perhaps such speeds are impossible, with reason-
able payloads; remember, you have to carry the fuel
to slow down at the end of the voyage, even if you're
on a one-way trip. So it may make more sense to
take your time - ten thousand, a hundred thousand
years...


 'Bernal and others thought this could be done with
mobile worldlets a few kilometres across, carrying thou-
sands of passengers on journeys that would last for gen-
erations. Naturally, the system would have to be rigidly
closed, recycling all food, air and other expendables. But,
of course, that's just how the Earth operates - on a
slightly larger scale.


 'Some writers suggested that these Space Arks should
be built in the form of concentric spheres; others pro-
posed hollow, spinning cylinders so that centrifugal force
could provide artificial gravity - exactly what we've
found in Rama-'


 Professor Davidson could not tolerate this sloppy talk.
 
 'No such thing as centrifugal force. It's an engineer's
phantom. There's only inertia.'


 'You're quite right, of course,' admitted Perera, 'though
it might be hard to convince a man who'd just been slung
off a carousel. But mathematical rigour seems unneces-
sary-
 
 'Hear, hear,' interjected Dr Bose, with some exaspera-
tion. 'We all know what you mean, or think we do. Please
don't destroy our illusions.'


 'Well, I was merely pointing out that there's nothing
conceptually novel about Rama, though its size is start-
ling. Men have imagined such things for two hundred
years.


 'Now I'd like to address myself to another question.
Exactly how long has Rama been travelling through
space?


 'We now have a very precise determination of its orbit
and its velocity. Assuming that it's made no navigational
changes, we can trace its position back for millions of
years. We expected that it would be coming from the
direction of a near-by star - but that isn't the case at
all.


 'It's more than two hundred thousand years since
Rama passed near any star, and that particular one turns
out to be an irregular variable - about the most unsuit-
able sun you could imagine for an inhabited solar system.
It has a brightness range of over fifty to one; any planets
would be alternately baked and frozen every few years.'


 'A suggestion,' put in Dr Price. 'Perhaps that explains
everything. Maybe this was once a normal sun and be-
came unstable. That's why the Ramans had to find a new
one.'


 Dr Perera admired the old archaeologist, so he let her
down lightly. But what would she say, he wondered, if he
started pointing out the instantly obvious in her own
speciality...


 'We did consider that,' he said gently. 'But if our pre-
sent theories of stellar evolution are correct, this star
could never have been stable - could never have had life-
bearing planets. So Rama has been cruising through
space for at least two hundred thousand years, and per-
haps for more than a million.


 'Now it's cold and dark and apparently dead, and I
think I know why. The Ramans may have had no choice
- perhaps they were indeed fleeing from some disaster -
but they miscalculated.


 'No closed ecology can be one hundred per cent effici-
ent; there is always waste, loss - some degradation of the
environment, and build-up of pollutants. It may take bil-
lions of years to poison and wear out a planet - but it
will happen in the end. The oceans will dry up, the at-
mosphere will leak away...


 'By our standards, Rama is enormous - yet it is still a
very tiny planet. My calculations, based on the- leakage
through its hull, and some reasonable guesses about the
rate of biological turnover, indicate that its ecology could
only survive for about a thousand years. At the most, I'll
grant ten thousand...


 'That would be long enough, at the speed Rama is
travelling, for a transit between the closely-packed suns
in the heart of the Galaxy. But not out here, in the scat-
tered population of the spiral arms. Rama is a ship which
exhausted its provisions before it reached its goal. It's a
derelict, drifting among the stars.


 'There's just one serious objection to this theory, and
I'll raise it before anybody else does. Rama's orbit is
aimed so accurately at the solar system that coincidence
seems ruled out. In fact, I'd say it's now heading much
too close to the sun for comfort: Endeavour will have to
break away long before perihelion, to avoid overheating.


 'I don't pretend to understand this. Perhaps, there ma
be some form of automatic terminal guidance still oper-
ating, steering Rama to the nearest suitable star ages
after its builders are dead.


 'And they are dead; I'll stake my reputation on that.
All the samples we've taken from the interior are absol-
utely sterile - we've not found a single micro-organism.
As for the talk you may have heard about suspended
animation, you can ignore it. There are fundamental
reasons why hibernation techniques will only work for a
very few centuries - and we're dealing with time spans a
thousand-fold longer.


 'So the Pandorans and their sympathizers have nothing
to worry about. For my part, I'm sorry. It would have
been wonderful to have met another intelligent species.


 'But at least we have answered one ancient question.
We are not alone. The stars will never again be the same
to us: