CHAPTER THIRTEEN - The Plain of Rama


After those interminable stairs, it was a strange luxury to
walk once more on a horizontal surface. Directly ahead,
the ground was indeed completely flat; to right and left,
at the limits of the floodlit area, the rising curve could
just be detected. They might have been walking along a
very wide, shallow valley; it was quite impossible to be-
lieve that they were really crawling along the inside of a
huge cylinder, and that beyond this little oasis of light
the land rose up to meet - no, to become - the sky.
 
 Though they all felt a sense of confidence and subdued
excitement, after a while the almost palpable silence of
Rama began to weigh heavily upon them. Every footstep,
every word, vanished instantly into the unreverberant
void; after they had gone little more than half a kilo-
metre, Lt Calvert could stand it no longer.
 
 Among his minor accomplishments was a talent now
rare, though many thought not rare enough - the art of
whistling. With or without encouragement he could re-
produce the themes from most of the movies of the last
two hundred years. He started appropriately with Heigh-
ho, heigh-ho, 'tis off to work we go, found that he
couldn't stay down comfortably in the bass with Disney's
marching dwarfs, and switched quickly to River Kwai.
Then he progressed, more or less chronologically, through
half a dozen epics, culminating with the theme from Sid
Krassman's famous late-twentieth-century Napoleon.
 
 It was a good try, but it didn't work, even as a morale-
builder. Rama needed the grandeur of Bach or Beet-
hoven or Sibelius or Tuan Sun, not the trivia of popular
entertainment. Norton was on the point of suggesting
that Joe save his breath for later exertions, when the
young officer realized the inappropriateness of his efforts.
Thereafter, apart from an occasional consultation with
the ship, they marched on in silence. Rama had won this
round.


 On his initial traverse, Norton had allowed for one de-
tour. Paris lay straight ahead, halfway between the foot
of the stairway and the shore of the Cylindrical Sea, but
only a kilometre to the right of their track was a very
prominent, and rather mysterious, feature which had
been christened the Straight Valley. It was a long groove
or trench, forty metres deep and a hundred wide, with
gently sloping sides; it had been provisionally identified
as an irrigation ditch or canal. Like the stairway itself, it
had two similar counterparts, equally spaced around the
curve of Rama.


 The three valleys were almost ten kilometres long, and
stopped abruptly just before they reached the Sea -
which was strange, if they were intended to carry water.
And on the other side of the Sea the pattern was re-
peated: three more ten-kilometre-trenches continued on
to the South Polar region.


 They reached the end of the Straight Valley after only
fifteen minutes' comfortable walking, and stood for a
while staring thoughtfully into its depths. The perfectly
smooth walls sloped down at an angle of sixty degrees;
there were no steps or footholds. Filling the bottom was a
sheet of flat, white material that looked very much like
ice. A specimen could settle a good many arguments;
Norton decided to get one.


 With Calvert and Rodrigo acting as anchors and pay-
ing out a safety rope, he rapelled slowly down the steep
incline. When he reached the bottom, he fully expected
to find the familiar slippery feel of ice underfoot, but he
was mistaken. The friction was too great; his footing was
secure. This material was some kind of glass or trans-
parent crystal; when he touched it with his fingertips, it
was cold, hard and unyielding.


 Turning his back to the searchlight and shielding his
eyes from its glare. Norton tried to peer into the crystal-
line depths, as one may attempt to gaze through the ice of
a frozen lake. But he could see nothing; even when he
tried the concentrated beam of his own helmet-lamp. he
was no more successful. This stuff was translucent, but
not transparent. If it was a frozen liquid, it had a melting-
point very much higher than water.


 He tapped it gently with the hammer from his geology
kit; the tool rebounded with a dull, unmusical 'dunk'.
He tapped harder, with no more result, and was about to
exert his full strength when some impulse made him de-
sist.


 It seemed most unlikely that he could crack this mat-
erial; but what if he did? He would be like a vandal,
smashing some enormous plate-glass window. There would
be a better opportunity later, and at least he had dis-
covered valuable information. It now seemed more un-
likely than ever that this was a canal; it was simply a
peculiar trench that stopped and started abruptly, but
led nowhere. And if at any time it had carried liquid,
where were the stains, the encrustations of dried-up sedi-
ment, that one would expect? Everything was bright and
clean, as if the builders had left only yesterday...


 Once again he was face to face with the fundamental
mystery of Rama, and this time it was impossible to evade
it. Commander Norton was a reasonably imaginative
man, but he would never have reached his present posi-
tion if he had been liable to the wilder flights of fancy.
Yet now, for the first time, he had a sense - not exactly of
foreboding, but of anticipation. Things were not what
they seemed; there was something very, very odd about a
place that was simultaneously brand new - and a million
years old.


 Very thoughtfully, he began to walk slowly along the
length of the little valley, while his companions. still
holding the rope that was attached to his waist, followed
him along the rim. He did not expect to make any
further discoveries, but he wanted to let his curious emo-
tional state run its course. For something else was worry-
ing him; and it had nothing to do with the inexplicable
newness of Rama.


 He had walked no more than a dozen metres when it
hit him like a thunderbolt.


 He knew this place. He had been here before. Even on
Earth, or some familiar planet, that experience is dis-
quieting, though it is not particularly rare. Most men
have known it at some time or other, and usually they
dismiss it as the memory of a forgotten photograph, a
pure coincidence - or, if they are mystically inclined,
some form of telepathy from another mind, or even a
flashback from their own future.


 But to recognize a spot which no other human being
can possibly have seen - that is quite shocking. For sev-
eral seconds, Commander Norton stood rooted to the
smooth crystalline surface on which he had been walk-
ing, trying to straighten out his emotions. His well-ordered
universe had been turned upside down, and he had
a dizzying glimpse of those mysteries at the edge of exist-
ence which he had successfully ignored for most of his
life.


 Then, to his immense relief, common sense came to the
rescue. The disturbing sensation of dÈj‡-vu faded out, to
be replaced by a real and identifiable memory from his
youth.


 It was true - he had once stood between such steeply
sloping walls, watching them drive into the distance until
they seemed to converge at a point indefinitely far ahead.
But they had been covered with neatly trimmed grass;
and underfoot had been broken stone, not smooth crys-
tal.


 It had happened thirty years ago, during a summer
vacation in England. Largely because of another student
(he could remember her face - but he had forgotten her
name) he had taken a course of industrial archaeology,
then very popular among science and engineering gradu-
ates. They had explored abandoned coal-mines and cot-
ton mills, climbed over ruined blast-furnaces and steam-
engines, goggled unbelievingly at primitive (and still dan-
gerous) nuclear reactors, and driven priceless' turbine-
powered antiques along restored motor roads.


 Not everything that they saw was genuine; much had
been lost during the centuries, for men seldom bother to
preserve the commonplace articles of everyday life. But
where it was necessary to make copies, they had been re-
constructed with loving care.


 And so young Bill Norton had found himself bowling
along, at an exhilarating hundred kilometres an hour,
while he furiously shovelled precious coal into the firebox
of a locomotive that looked two hundred years old, but
was actually younger than he was. The thirty-kilometre
stretch of the Great Western Railway, however, was quite
genuine, though it had required a good deal of excavat-
ing to get it back into commission.


 Whistle screaming, they had plunged into a hillside
and raced through a smoky, flame-lit darkness. An aston-
ishingly long time later, they had burst out of the tunnel
into a deep, perfectly straight cutting between steep
grassy banks. The long-forgotten vista was almost identi-
cal with the one before him now.


 'What is it, Skipper?' called Lt Rodrigo. 'Have you
found something?'


 As Norton dragged himself back to present reality,
some of the oppression lifted from his mind. There was
mystery here - yes; but it might not be beyond human
understanding. He had learned a lesson, though it was
not one that he could readily impart to others. At all
costs, he must not let Rama overwhelm him. That way
lay failure - perhaps even madness.


 'No,' he answered, 'there's nothing down here. Haul
me up - we 11 head straight to Paris.'