CHAPTER ELEVEN - Men, Women and Monkeys


Some women, Commander Norton had decided long ago,
should not be allowed aboard ship; weightlessness did
things to their breasts that were too damn distracting. It
was bad enough when they were motionless; but when
they started to move, and sympathetic vibrations set in, it
was more than any warm-blooded male should be asked
to take. He was quite sure that at least one serious space
accident had been caused by acute crew distraction, after
the transit of a well-upholstered lady officer through the
control cabin.


 He had once mentioned this theory to Surgeon-Com-
mander Laura Ernst, without revealing who had inspired
his particular train of thought. There was no need; they
knew each other much too well. On Earth, years ago, in a
moment of mutual loneliness and depression, they had
once made love. Probably they would never repeat the
experience (but could one ever be quite sure of that?)
because so much had changed for both of them. Yet
whenever the well-built Surgeon oscillated into the Com-
mander's cabin, he felt a fleeting echo, of an old passion,
she knew that he felt it, and everyone was happy.


 'Bill,' she began, 'I've checked our mountaineers, and
here's my verdict. Karl and Joe are in good shape - all
indications normal for the work they've done. But Will
shows signs of exhaustion and body-loss - I won't bother
about the details. I don't believe he's been getting all the
exercise he should, and he's not the only one. There's
been some cheating in the centrifuge; if there's any more,
heads will roll. Please pass the word.'


 'Yes, Ma'am. But there's some excuse. The men have
been working very hard.'


 'With their brains and fingers, certainly. But not with
their bodies - not real work in kilogramme-metres. And
that's what we'll be dealing with, if we're going to ex-
plore Rama.'


 'Well, can we?'


 'Yes, if we proceed with caution. Karl and I have
worked out a very conservative profile - based on the
assumption that we can dispense with breathing gear be-
low Level Two. Of course, that's an incredible stroke of
luck, and changes the whole logistics picture. I still can't
get used to the idea of a world with oxygen... So we only
need to supply food and water and thermosuits, and
we re in business. Going down will be easy; it looks as if
we can slide most of the way, on that very convenient
banister.'


 'I've got Chips working on a sled with parachute brak-
ing. Even if we can't risk it for crew, we can use it for
stores and equipment.'


 'Fine; that should do the trip in ten minutes; otherwise
it will take about an hour.


 'Climbing up is harder to estimate; I'd like to allow six
hours, including two one-hour periods. Later, as we get
experience - and develop some muscles - we may be able
to cut this back considerably.'


 'What about psychological factors?'


 'Hard to assess, in such a novel environment. Darkness
may be the biggest problem.


 'I'll establish searchlights on the Hub. Besides its own
lamps, any party down there will always have a beam play-
ing on it.'


 'Good - that should be a great help.'


 'One other point: should we play safe and send a party
only halfway down the stair - and back - or should we go
the whole way on the first attempt?'


 'If we had plenty of time, I'd be cautious. But time is
short, and I can see no danger in going all- the way - and
looking around when we get there.'


 'Thanks, Laura - that's all I want to know. I'll get the
Exec working on the details. And I'll order all hands to
the centrifuge - twenty minutes a day at half a gee. Will
that satisfy you?'


 'No. It's point six gee down there in Rama, and I want
a safety margin. Make it three quarters-'


 'Ouch!'


 '-for ten minutes-'


 I'll settle for that-'


 '-twice a day.'


 'Laura, you're a cruel, hard woman. But so be it. I'll
break the news just before dinner. That should spoil a
few appetites.'
It was the first time that Commander Norton had ever
seen Karl Mercer slightly ill at ease. He had spent the
fifteen minutes discussing the logistics problem in his
usual competent manner, but something was obviously
worrying him. His captain, who had a shrewd idea of
what it was, waited patiently until he brought it out.


 'Skipper,' Karl said at length, 'are you sure you should
lead this party? If anything goes wrong, I'm considerably
more expendable. And I've been further inside Rama
than anyone else - even if only by fifty metres.'


 'Granted. But it's time the commander led his troops,
and we've decided that there's no greater risk on this trip
than on the last. At the first sign of trouble, I'll be back
up that stairway fast enough to qualify for the Lunar
Olympics.'


 He waited for any further objections, but none came,
though Karl still looked unhappy. So he took pity on him
and added gently: 'And I bet Joe will beat me to the
top.'


 The big man relaxed, and a slow grin spread across his
face. 'All the same, Bill, I wish you'd taken someone else.'
'I wanted one man who'd been down before, and we
can' t both go. As for Herr Doctor Professor Sergeant
Myron, Laura says he's still two kilos overweight. Even
shaving off that moustache didn't help.'


 'Who's your number three?'


 'I still haven't decided. That depends on Laura.'


 'She wants to go herself.'


 'Who doesn't? But if she turns up at the top of her own
fitness list, I'll be very suspicious.


 As Lieut-Commander Mercer gathered up his papers
and launched himself out of the cabin, Norton felt a
brief stab of envy. Almost all the crew - about eighty-five
per cent, by his minimum estimate - had worked out
some sort of emotional accommodation. He had known
ships where the captain had done the same, but that was
not his way. Though discipline aboard the Endeavour
was based very largely on the mutual respect between
highly trained and intelligent men and women, the com-
mander needed something more to underline his posi-
tion. His responsibility was unique, and demanded a cer-
tain degree of isolation, even from his closest friends. Any
liaison could be damaging to morale, for it was almost
impossible to avoid charges of favouritism. - For this rea-
son, affairs spanning more than two degrees of rank were
firmly discouraged; but apart from this, the only rule
regulating shipboard sex was 'So long as they don't do it
in the corridors and frighten the simps'.


 There were four superchimps aboard Endeavour,
though strictly speaking the name was inaccurate, be-
cause the ship's non-human crew was not based on chim-
panzee stock. In zero gravity, a prehensile tail is an
enormous advantage, and all attempts to supply these to
humans had turned into embarrassing failures. After
equally unsatisfactory results with the great apes, the
Superchimpanzee Corporation had turned to the monkey
kingdom.


 Blackie, Blondie, Goldie and Brownie had family trees
whose branches included the most intelligent of the Old
and New World monkeys, plus synthetic genes that had
never existed in nature. Their rearing and education had
probably cost as much as that of the average spaceman,
and they were worth it. Each weighed less than thirty
kilos and consumed only half the food and oxygen of a
human being, but each could replace 2.75 men for house-
keeping, elementary cooking, tool-carrying and dozens of
other routine jobs.


 That 2.75 was the Corporation's claim, based on in-
numerable time-and-motion studies. The figure, though
surprising and frequently challenged, appeared to be ac-
curate, for simps were quite happy to work fifteen hours a
day and did not get bored by the most menial and repeti-
tious tasks. So they freed human beings for human work;
and on a spaceship, that was a matter of vital importance.


 Unlike the monkeys who were their nearest relatives
Endeavour's simps were docile, obedient and uninquisi-
tive. Being cloned, they were also sexless, which elimi-
nated awkward behavioural problems. Carefully house-
trained vegetarians, they were very clean and didn't
smell; they would have made perfect pets, except that
nobody could possibly have afforded them.


 Despite these advantages, having simps on board in-
volved certain problems. They had to have their own
quarters - inevitably labelled 'The Monkey House'.
Their little mess-room was always spotless, and was well-
equipped with TV, games equipment and programmed
teaching machines. To avoid accidents, they were absol-
utely forbidden - to enter the ship's technical areas; the
entrances to all these were colour-coded in red, and the
simps were conditioned so that it was psychologically im-
possible for them to pass the visual barriers.


 There was also a communications problem. Though
they had an equivalent IQ of sixty, and could understand
several hundred words of English, they were unable to
talk. It had proved impossible to give useful vocal chords
either to apes or monkeys, and they therefore had to ex-
press themselves in sign language.


 The basic signs were obvious and easily learned, so that
everyone on board ship could understand routine mes-
sages. But the only man who could speak fluent Simpish
was their handler - Chief Steward McAndrews.


 It was a standing joke that Sergeant Ravi McAndrews
looked rather like a simp - which was hardly an insult,
for with their short, tinted pelts and graceful movements
they were very handsome animals. They were also affec-
tionate, and everyone on board had his favourite; Com-
mander Norton's was the aptly-named Goldie.


 But the warm relationship which one could so easily
establish with simps created another problem, often used
as a powerful argument against their employment in
space. Since they could only be trained for routine, low-
grade tasks, they were worse than useless in an emerg-
ency; they could then be a danger to themselves and to
their human companions. In particular, teaching them to
use spacesuits had proved impossible, the concepts in-
volved being quite beyond their understanding.


 No one liked to talk about it, but everybody knew
what had to be done if a hull was breached or the order
came to abandon ship. It had happened only once; then
the simp handler had carried out his instructions more
than adequately. He was found with his charges, killed
by the same poison. Thereafter the - job of euthing was
transferred to the chief medical officer, who it was felt
would have less emotional involvement.
 
 Norton was very thankful that this responsibility, at
least, did not fall upon the captain's shoulders. He had
known men he would have killed with far fewer qualms
than he would Goldie.