CHAPTER FORTY-SIX - Interlude


'Come in,' said Commander Norton absentmindedly at
the quiet knock on his door.


 'Some news for you, Bill. I wanted to give it first, before
the crew gets into the act. And anyway, it's my depart-
ment.'


 Norton still seemed far away. He was lying with his
hands clasped under his head, eyes half shut, cabin light
low - not really drowsing, but lost in some reverie or
private dream.


 He blinked once or twice, and was suddenly back in his
body.


 'Sorry Laura - I don't understand. What's it all
about?'


 'Don't say you've forgotten!'


 'Stop teasing, you wretched woman. I've had a few
things on my mind recently.'


 Surgeon-Commander Ernst slid a captive chair across
in its slots and sat down beside him.


 'Though interplanetary crises come and go, the wheels
of Martian bureaucracy grind steadily away. But I sup-
pose Rama helped. Good thing you didn't have to get
permission from the Hermians as well.'


 Light was dawning.


 'Oh - Port Lowell has issued the permit!'


 'Better than that - it's already being acted On.' Laura
glanced at the slip of paper in her hand. 'Immediate,' she
read. Probably right now, your new son is being con-
ceived. Congratulations.'


 Thank you. I hope he hasn't minded the wait.'


 Like every astronaut, Norton had been sterilized when
he entered the service; for a man who would spend years
in space, radiation-induced mutation was not a risk - it
was a certainty. The spermatazoon that had just deliv-
ered its cargo of genes on Mars, two hundred million
kilometres away, had been frozen for thirty years, await-
ing its moment of destiny.


 Norton wondered if he would be home in time for the
birth. He had earned rest, relaxation - such normal fam-
ily life as an astronaut could ever know. Now that the
mission was essentially over, he was beginning to unwind,
and to think once more about his own future, and
that of both his families. Yes, it would be good to be
home for a while, and to make up for lost time - in many
ways...


 'This visit,' protested Laura rather feebly, 'was purely
in a professional capacity.'


 'After all these years,' replied Norton, 'we know
each other better than that. Anyway, you're off duty
now.'


'Now what are you thinking?' demanded Surgeon-Com-
mander Ernst, very much later. 'You're not becoming
sentimental, I hope.'


 'Not about us. About Rama. I'm beginning to miss it.'


 'Thanks very much for the compliment.'


 Norton tightened his arms around her. One of the nic-
est things about weightlessness, he often thought, was
that you could really hold someone all night, without
cutting off the circulation. There were those who claimed
that love at one gee was so ponderous that they could no
longer enjoy it.


 'It's a well-known fact, Laura, that men, unlike women,
have two-track minds. But seriously - well, more seriously
- I do feel a sense of loss.'


 'I can understand that.'


 'Don't be so clinical; that's not the only reason. Oh,
never mind.' He gave up. It was not easy to explain, even
to himself.


 He had succeeded beyond all reasonable expectation;
what his men had discovered in Rama would keep scien-
tists busy for decades. And, above all, he had done it
without a single casualty.


 But he had also failed. One might speculate endlessly,
but the nature and the purpose of the Ramans was still
utterly unknown. They had used the solar system as a
refuelling stop - as a booster station - call it what you
will, and had then spurned it completely, on their way to
more important business. They would probably never
even know that the human race existed; such monu-
mental indifference was worse than any deliberate insult.


 When Norton bad glimpsed Rama for the last time, a
tiny star hurtling outwards beyond Venus, he knew that
part of his life was over. He was only fifty-five, but he felt
he had left his youth down there on the curving plain,
among mysteries and wonders now receding inexorably
beyond the reach of man. Whatever honours and achieve-
ments the future brought him, for the rest of his life he
would be haunted by a sense of anticlimax, and the
knowledge of opportunities missed.


 So he told himself; but even then, he should have
known better.


 And on far-off Earth, Dr Carlisle Perera had as yet told
no one how he had woken from a restless sleep with the
message from his subconscious still echoing in his brain:


 The Ramans do everything in threes.


-- 
EOF