CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO - The Wave


Yet even in that moment of shock, Norton's first concern
was for his ship.


 'Endeavour!' he called. 'Situation report!'


 'All OK, Skipper,' was the reassuring answer from the
Exec. 'We felt a slight tremor, but nothing that could
cause any damage. There's been a small change of atti-
tude - the bridge says about point two degrees. They also
think the spin rate has altered slightly - we'll have an
accurate reading on that in a couple of minutes.'


 So it's beginning to happen, Norton told himself, and a
lot earlier than we expected; we're still a long way from
perihelion, and the logical time for an orbit change. But
some kind of trim was undoubtedly taking place - and
there might be more shocks to come.


 Meanwhile, the effects of this first one were all too ob-
vious, up there on the curving sheet of water which
seemed perpetually falling from the sky. The wave was
still about ten kilometres away, and stretched the full
width of the Sea from northern to southern shore. Near
the land, it was a foaming wall of white, but in deeper
water it was a barely visible blue line, moving much
faster than the breakers on either flank. The drag of the
shoreward shallows was already bending it into a bow,
with the central portion getting further and further
ahead.


 'Sergeant,' said Norton urgently. 'This is your job.
What can we do?'


 Sergeant Barnes had brought the raft completely to
rest and was studying the situation intently. Her expres-
sion, Norton was relieved to see, showed no trace of alarm
- rather a certain zestful excitement, like a skilled athlete
about to accept a challenge.


 'I wish we had some soundings,' she said. 'If we're in
deep water, there's nothing to worry about.'


 'Then we're all right. We're still four kilometres from
shore.'


 'I hope so, but I want to study the situation.'


 She applied power again, and swung Resolution
around until it was just under way, heading directly to-
wards the approaching wave. Norton judged that the
swiftly moving central portion would reach them in less
than five minutes, but he could also see that it presented
no serious danger. It was only a racing ripple a fraction
of a metre high, and would scarcely rock the boat. The
walls of foam lagging far behind it were the real menace.


 Suddenly, in the very centre of the Sea, a line of
breakers appeared. The wave had. clearly hit a submerged
wall, several kilometres in length, not far below the sur-
face. At the same time; the breakers on the two flanks
collapsed, as they ran into deeper water.


 Anti-slosh plates, Norton told himself. Exactly the
same as in Endeavour's own propellant tanks - but on a
thousand-fold greater scale. There must be a complex
pattern of them all around the Sea, to damp out any
waves as quickly as possible. The only thing that matters
now is: are we right on top of one?


 Sergeant Barnes was one jump ahead of him. She
brought Resolution to a full stop and threw out the an-
chor. It hit bottom at only five metres.


 'Haul it up!' she called to her crewmates. 'We've got to
get away from here!'


 Norton agreed heartily; but in which direction? The
Sergeant was headed full speed towards the wave, which
was now only five kilometres away. For the first time, he
could hear the sound of its approach - a distant, unmistak-
able roar which he had never expected to hear inside
Rama. Then it changed in intensity; the central portion
was collapsing once more - and the flanks were building
up again.


 He tried to estimate the distance between the sub-
merged baffles, assuming that they were spaced at equal
intervals. If he was right, there should be one more to
come; if they could station the raft in the deep water
between them, they would be perfectly safe.


 Sergeant Barnes cut the motor, and threw out the an-
chor again. It went down thirty metres without hitting
bottom.


 "We're OK,' she said, with a sigh of relief. 'But I'll keep
the motor running.'


 Now there were only the lagging walls of foam along
the coast; out here in the central Sea it was calm again,
apart from the inconspicuous blue ripple still speeding
towards them. The Sergeant was just holding Resolution
on course towards the disturbance, ready to pour on full
power at a moment's notice.


 Then, only two kilometres ahead of them, the Sea
started to foam once more. It humped up in white-maned
fury, and now its roaring seemed to fill the world. Upon
the sixteen-kilometre-high wave of the Cylindrical Sea, a
smaller ripple was superimposed, like an avalanche thun-
dering down a mountain slope. And that ripple was quite
large enough to kill them.


 Sergeant Barnes must have seen the expressions on the
faces of her crewmates. She shouted above the roar:
'What are you scared about? I've ridden bigger ones than
this.' That was not quite true; nor did she add that her
earlier experience had been in a well-built surf-boat, not
an improvised raft. 'But if we have to jump, wait until I
tell you. Check your life-jackets.'


 She's magnificent, thought the Commander - obviously
enjoying every minute, like a Viking warrior going into
battle. And she's probably right - unless we've miscalcu-
lated badly.


 The wave continued to rise, curving upwards and over.
The slope above them probably exaggerated its height,
but it looked enormous - an irresistible force of nature
that would overwhelm everything in its path.


 Then, within seconds, it collapsed, as if its foundations
had been pulled out from underneath it. It was over the
submerged barrier, in deep water again. When it reached
them a minute later Resolution merely bounced up and
down a few times before Sergeant Barnes swung the raft
around and set off at top speed towards the north.


 'Thanks, Ruby - that was splendid. But will we get
home before it comes round for the second time?'


 'Probably not; it will be back in about twenty minutes.
But it will have lost all its strength then; we'll scarcely
notice it.'


 Now that the Wave had passed, they could relax and
enjoy the voyage - though no one would be completely at
ease until they were back on land. The disturbance had
left the water swirling round in random eddies, and had
also stirred up a most peculiar acidic smell - 'like crushed
ants', as Jimmy aptly put it. Though unpleasant, the
odour caused none of the attacks of sea-sickness that
might have been expected; it was something so alien that
human physiology could not respond to it.


 A minute later, the wave front hit the next underwater
barrier, as it climbed away from them and up the sky.
This time, seen from the rear, the spectacle was unim-
pressive and the voyagers felt ashamed of their previous
fears. They began to feel themselves masters of the Cylin-
drical Sea.


 The shock was therefore all the greater when, not more
than a hundred metres away, something like a slowly ro-
tating wheel began to rear up out of the water. Glittering
metallic spokes. five metres long, emerged dripping from
the sea, spun for a moment in the fierce Raman glare,
and splashed back into the water. It was 'as if a giant
starfish with tubular arms had broken the surface.


 At first sight, it was impossible to tell whether it was an
animal or a machine. Then it flopped over and lay half-
awash, bobbing up and down in the gentle aftermath of
the wave.


 Now they could see that there were nine arms, appar-
ently jointed, radiating from a central disc. Two of the
arms were broken, snapped off at the outer joint. The
others ended at a complicated collection of manipula-
tors that reminded Jimmy very strongly of the crab he
had encountered. The two creatures came from the same
line of evolution - or the same drawing-board.


 At the middle of the disc was a small turret, bearing
three large eyes. Two were closed, one open - and even
that appeared to be blank and unseeing. No one doubted
that they were watching the death-throes of some strange
monster, tossed up to the surface by the submarine dis-
turbance that had just passed.


 Then they saw that it was not alone. Swimming round
it, and snapping at its feebly moving limbs, were two
small beasts like overgrown lobsters. They were efficiently
chopping up the monster, and it did nothing to resist,
though its own claws seemed quite capable of dealing
with the attackers.


 Once again, Jimmy was reminded of the crab that had
demolished Dragonfly. He watched intently as the one-
sided conflict continued, and quickly confirmed his im-
pression.


 'Look, Skipper,' he whispered. 'Do you see - they're not
eating it. They don't even have any mouths. They're
simply chopping it to pieces. That's exactly what hap-
pened to Dragonfly.'


 'You're right. They're dismantling it - like - like a
broken machine.' Norton wrinkled his nose. 'But no dead
machine ever smelled like that!'


 Then another thought struck him.


 'My God - suppose they start on us! Ruby, get us back
to shore as quickly as you can!'


 Resolution surged forward with reckless disregard for
the life of her power cells. Behind them, the nine spokes
of the great starfish - they could think of no better name
for it - were clipped steadily shorter, and presently the
weird tableau sank back into the depths of the Sea.


 There was no pursuit, but they did not breathe com-
fortably again until Resolution had drawn up to the
landing stage and they had stepped thankfully ashore. As
he looked back across that mysterious and now 'suddenly
sinister band of water, Commander Norton grimly de-
termined that no one would ever sail it again. There
were too many unknowns, too many dangers...


 He looked back upon the towers and ramparts of New
York, and the dark cliff of the continent beyond. They
were safe now from inquisitive man.


 He would not tempt the gods of Rama again.