CHAPTER SIXTEEN - Kealakekua


'As you know perfectly well, Dr Perera,' said Ambassador
Bose in a tone of patient resignation, 'few of us share your
knowledge of mathematical meteorology. So please take
pity on our ignorance.'


 'With pleasure,' answered the exobiologist, quite un-
abashed. 'I can explain it best by telling you what is go-
ing to happen inside Rama - very soon.


 'The temperature is now about to rise, as the solar heat
pulse reaches the interior. According to the latest in-
formation I've received, it's already above freezing point.
The Cylindrical Sea will soon start to thaw; and unlike
bodies of water on Earth, it will melt from the bottom
upwards. That may produce some odd effects; but I'm
much more concerned with the atmosphere.


 'As it's heated, the air inside Rama will expand - and
will attempt to rise towards the central axis. And this is
the problem. At ground level, although it's apparently
stationary, it's actually sharing the spin of Rama - over
eight hundred kilometres an hour. As it rises towards the
axis it will try to retain that speed - and it won't be able
to do so, of course. The result will be violent winds and
turbulence; I estimate velocities of between two and
three hundred kilometres an hour.


 'Incidentally, very much the same thing occurs on
Earth. The heated air at the Equator - which shares the
Earth's sixteen-hundred-kilometres-an-hour spin - runs
into the same problem when it rises and flows north and
south.'


 'Ah, the Trade Winds! I remember that from my
geography lessons'


 'Exactly, Sir Robert. Rama will have Trade Winds,
with a vengeance. I believe they'll last only a few hours,
and then spine kind of equilibrium will be restored.
Meanwhile, I should advise Commander Norton to evac-
uate - as soon as possible. Here is the message I propose
sending.'


With a little imagination, Commander Norton told him-
self, he could pretend that this was an improvised night
camp at the foot of some mountain in a remote region of
Asia or America. The clutter of sleeping pads, collapsible
chain and tables, portable power plant, lighting equip-
ment, electrosan toilets, and miscellaneous scientific ap-
paratus would not have looked out of place on Earth -
especially as there were men and women working here
without life-support systems.


 Establishing Camp Alpha had been very hard work, for
everything had had to be man-handled through the chain
of airlocks, sledded down the slope from the Hub, and
then retrieved and unpacked. Sometimes, when the brak-
ing parachutes had failed, a consignment had ended up a
good kilometre away out on the plain: Despite this, sev-
ual crew members had asked permission to make the
ride; Norton had firmly forbidden it. In an emergency,
however, he might be prepared to reconsider the ban.


 Almost all this equipment would stay here, for the lab-
our of carrying it back was unthinkable - in fact, impos-
sible. There were times when Commander Norton felt an
irrational shame at leaving so much human litter in this
strangely immaculate place. When they finally departed,
he was prepared to sacrifice some of their precious time to
leave everything in good order. Improbable though it
was, perhaps millions of years hence, when Rama shot
through some other star system, it might have visitors
again. He would like to give them a good impression of
Earth.


 Meanwhile, he had a rather more immediate problem.
During the last twenty-four hours he had received almost
identical messages from both Mars and Earth. It seemed
an odd coincidence; perhaps they had been commiserat-
ing with each other, as wives who lived safely on different
planets were liable to do under sufficient provocation.
Rather pointedly, they had reminded him that even
though he was now a great hero, he still had family re-
sponsibilities.


 The Commander picked up a collapsible chair, and
walked out of the pool of light into the darkness sur-
rounding the camp. It was the only way he could get any
privady, and he could also think better away from the
turmoil. Deliberately turning his back on the organized
confusion behind him, he began to speak into the re-
corder slung around his neck.


 'Original for personal file, dupes to Mars and Earth.
Hello, darling - yes, I know I've been a lousy correspond-
ent, but I haven't been aboard ship for a week. Apart
from a skeleton crew, we're all camping inside Rama, at
the foot of the stairway we've christened Alpha.


 'I have three parties out now, scouting the plain, but
we've made disappointingly slow progress, because every-
thing has to be done on foot. If only we had some means
of transport! I'd be very happy to settle for a few electric
bicycles ... they'd be perfect for the job.


 'You've met my medical officer, Surgeon-Commander
Ernst-' He paused uncertainly; Laura had met one of
his wives, but which? Better cut that out--


 Erasing the sentence, he began again.


 'My MO, Surgeon-Commander Ernst, led the first
group to reach the Cylindrical Sea, fifteen kilometres
from here. She found that it was frozen water, as we'd
expected - but you wouldn't want to drink it. Dr Ernst
says it's a dilute organic soup, containing traces of almost
any carbon compound you care to name, as well as phos-
phates and nitrates and dozens of metallic salts. There's
not the slightest sign of life - not even any dead micro-
organisms. So we still know nothing about the biochemis-
try of the Ramans ... though it was probably not wildly
different from ours.


 Something brushed lightly against his hair; he had
been too busy to get it cut, and would have to do some-
thing about that before he next put on a space-helmet ...


 'You've seen the viddies of Paris and the other towns
we've explored on this side of the Sea ... London, Rome,
Moscow. It's impossible to believe that they were ever
built for anything to live in. Paris looks like a giant stor-
age depot. London is a collection of cylinders linked to-
gether by pipes connected to what are obviously pumping
stations. Everything is sealed up, and there's no way of
finding what's inside without explosives or lasers. We
won t try these until there are no alternatives.


 'As for Rome and Moscow-'


 'Excuse me, Skipper. Priority from Earth.'


 What now? Norton asked himself. Can't a man get a
few minutes to talk to his families?


 He took the message from the Sergeant, and scanned it
quickly, just to satisfy himself that it was not immediate.
Then he read it again, more slowly.


 What the devil was the Rama Committee? And why
had he never heard of it? He knew that all sorts of
associations, societies, and professional groups - some
serious, some completely crackpot - had been trying to
get in touch with him; Mission Control had done a good
job of protection, and would not have forwarded this
message unless it was considered important.


 'Two-hundred-kilometre winds - probably sudden on-
set' - well, that was something to think about. But it was
hard to take it too seriously, on this utterly calm night;
and it would be ridiculous to run away like frightened
mice, when they were just starting effective exploration.


 Commander Norton lifted a hand to brush aside his
hair, which had somehow fallen into his eyes again. Then
he froze, the gesture uncompleted.


 He had felt a trace of wind, several times in the last
hour. It was so slight that he had completely ignored it;
after all, he was the commander of a spaceship, not a
sailing ship. Until now the movement of air had not been
of the slightest professional concern. What would the
long-dead captain of that earlier Endeavour have done in
a situation such as this?


 Norton had asked himself that question at every mo-
ment of crisis in the last few years. It was his secret, which
he had never revealed to anyone. And like most of the
important things in life, it had come about quite by acci-
dent.


 He had been captain of Endeavour for several months
before he realized that it was named after one of the most
famous ships in history. True, during the last four hun-
dred years there had been a dozen Endeavours of sea and
two of space, but the ancestor of them all was the 370-ton
Whitby collier that Captain James Cook, RN, had sailed
round the world between 1768 and 1771.


 With a mild interest that had quickly turned to an
absorbing curiosity - almost an obsession - Norton had
begun to read everything he could find about Cook. He
was now probably the world's leading authority on the
greatest explorer of all time, and knew whole sections of
the Journals by heart.


 It still seemed incredible that one man could have
done so much, with such primitive equipment. But Cook
had been not only a supreme navigator, but a scientist
and - in an age of brutal discipline - a humanitarian. He
treated his own men with kindness, which was unusual;
what was quite unheard of was that he behaved in ex-
actly the same way to the often hostile savages in the new
lands he discovered.


 It was Norton's private dream, which he knew he
would never achieve, to retrace at least one of Cook's voy-
ages around the world. He had made a limited but
spectacular start, which would certainly have astonished
the Captain, when he once flew a polar orbit directly
above the Great Barrier Reef. It had been early morning
on a clear day, and from four hundred kilometres up he
had had a superb view of that deadly wall of coral,
marked by its line of white foam along the Queensland
coast.


 He had taken just under five minutes to travel the
whole two thousand kilometres of the Reef. In a single
glance he could span weeks of perilous voyaging for that
first Endeavour. And through the telescope, he had
caught a glimpse of Cooktown and the estuary where the
ship had been dragged ashore for repairs, after her near-
fatal encounter with the Reef.


 A year later, a visit to the Hawaii Deep-Space Tracking
Station had given him an even more unforgettable ex-
perience. He had taken the hydrofoil to Kealakekua Bay,
and as he moved swiftly past the bleak volcanic cliffs, he
felt a depth of emotion that had surprised and even dis-
concerted him. The guide had led his group of scientists,
engineers and astronauts past the glittering metal pylon
that had replaced the earlier monument, destroyed by
the Great Tsunami of '68. They had walked on for a few
more yards across black, slippery lava to the small plaque
at the water's edge. Little waves were breaking over it,
but Norton scarcely noticed them as he bent down to
read the words:




                       NEAR THIS SPOT


                 CAPTAIN JAMES COOK


                             WAS KILLED


                         14 FEBRUARY, 1779


ORIGINAL TABLET DEDICATED 28 AUGUST, 1928


 BY COOK SESQUICENTENNIAL COMMISSION.


REPLACED BY TRICENTENNIAL COMMISSION


                    14 FEBRUARY, 2079


  That was years ago, and a hundred million kilometres
away. But at moments like this, Cook's reassuring pres-
ence seemed very close. In the secret depths of his mind,
he would ask: 'Well, Captain - what is your advise?' It
was a little game he played, on occasions when there were
not enough facts for sound judgement, and one had to
rely on intuition. That had been part of Cook's genius;
he always made the right choice - until the very end, at
Kealakekua Bay.


 The Sergeant waited patiently, while his Commander
stared silently out into the night of Rama. It was no
longer unbroken, for at two spots about four kilometres
away, the faint patches of light of exploring parties could
be clearly seen.


 In an emergency, I can recall them within the hour,
Norton told himself. And that, surely, should be good
enough.


 He turned to the Sergeant, 'Take this message. Rama
Committee, care of Spacecom. Appreciate your advice and
will take precautions. Please specify meaning of phrase
"sudden onset". Respectfully, Norton, Commander, En-
deavour.'


 He waited until the Sergeant had disappeared towards
the blazing lights of the camp, then switched on his re-
corder again. But the train of thought was broken, and
he could not get back into the mood. The letter would
have to wait for some other time.


 It was not often that Captain Cook came to his aid
when he was neglecting his duty. But he suddenly re-
membered how rarely and briefly poor Elizabeth Cook
had seen her husband in sixteen years of married life. Yet
she had borne him six children - and outlived them all.


 His wives, never more than ten minutes away at the
speed of light, had nothing to complain about...