CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX - The Voice of Rama


The real magnitude of his adventure did not hit Jimmy
Pak until he reached the coast of the Cylindrical Sea.
Until now, he had been over known territory; barring a
catastrophic structural failure, he could always land and
walk back to base in a few hours.


 That -option no longer existed. If he came down in the
Sea, he would probably drown, quite unpleasantly, in its
poisonous waters. And even if he made a safe landing in
the southern continent, it might be impossible to rescue
him before Endeavour had to break away from Rama's
sunward orbit.
 
 He was also acutely aware that the foreseeable disasters
were the ones most unlikely to happen. The totally un-
known region over which he was flying might produce
any number of surprises; suppose there were flying crea-
tures here, who objected to his intrusion? He would hate
to engage in a dog-fight with anything larger than a
pigeon. A few well-placed pecks could destroy Dragonfly's
aerodynamics.
 
 Yet, if there were no hazards, there would be no
achievement - no sense of adventure. Millions of men
would gladly have traded places with him now. He was
going not only where no one had ever been before - but
where no one would ever go again. In all of history, he
would be the only human being to visit the southern re-
gions of Rama. Whenever he felt fear brushing against
his mind, he could remember that.
 
 He had now grown accustomed to sitting in mid-air,
with the world wrapped around him. Because he had
dropped two kilometres below the central axis, he had
acquired a definite sense of 'up' and 'down'. The ground
was only six kilometres below, but the arch of the sky was
ten kilometres overhead. The 'city' of London was hang-
ing up there near the zenith; New York, on the other
hand, was the right way up, directly ahead.


 'Dragonfly,' said Hub Control, 'you're getting a little
low. Twenty-two hundred metres from the axis.'


 'Thanks,' he replied. 'I'll gain altitude. Let me know
when I'm back at twenty.'


 This was something he'd have to watch. There was a
natural tendency to lose height - and he had no instru-
ments to tell him exactly where he was. If he got too far
away from the zero-gravity of the axis, he might never be
able to climb back to it. Fortunately, there was a wide
margin for error, and there was always someone watching
his progress through a telescope at the Hub.


 He was now well out over the Sea, pedalling along at a
steady twenty kilometres an hour. In five minutes, he
would be over New York; already the island looked
rather like a ship, sailing for ever round and round the
Cylindrical Sea.


 When he reached New York, he flew a circle over it,
stopping several times so that his little TV camera could
send back steady, vibration-free images. The panorama of
buildings, towers, industrial plants, power stations - or
whatever they were - was fascinating but essentially
meaningless. No matter how long he stared at its com-
plexity, he was unlikely to learn anything. The camera
would record far more details than he could possibly as-
similate; and one day - perhaps years hence - some stu-
dent might find in them the key to Rama's secrets.


 After leaving New York, he crossed the other half of
the Sea in only fifteen minutes. Though he was not aware
of it, he had been flying fast over water, but as soon as he
reached the south coast he unconsciously relaxed and his
speed dropped by several kilometres an hour. He might
be in wholly alien territory - but at least he was over
land.
 
 As soon as he had crossed the great cliff that formed the
Sea's southern limit, he panned the TV camera com-
pletely round the circle of the world.


 'Beautiful!' said Hub Control. 'This will keep the map-
makers happy. How are you feeling?'


 'I'm fine - just a little fatigue, but no more than I
expected. How far do you make me from the Pole?'


 'Fifteen point six kilometres.'
 
 'Tell me when I'm at ten; I'll take a rest then. And
make sure I don't get low again. I'll start climbing when
I've five to go.'


 Twenty minutes later the world was closing in upon
him; he had come to the end of the cylindrical section,
and was entering the southern dome.


 He had studied it for hours through the telescopes at
the other end of Rama, and had learned its geography by
heart. Even so, that had not fully prepared him for the
spectacle all around him.


 In almost every way the southern and northern ends of
Rama differed completely. Here was no triad of stair-
ways, no series of narrow, concentric plateaux, no sweep-
ing curve from hub to plain. Instead, there was an im-
mense central spike, more than five kilometres long, ex-
tending along the axis. Six smaller ones, half this size,
were equally spaced around it; the whole assembly
looked like a group of remarkably symmetrical stalactites,
hanging from the roof of a cave. Or, inverting the point
of view, the spires of some Cambodian temple, set at the
bottom of a crater...


 Linking these slender, tapering towers, and curving
down from them to merge eventually in the cylindrical
plain, were flying buttresses that looked massive enough
to bear the weight of a world. And this, - perhaps, was
their function, if they were indeed the elements of some
exotic drive units, as some had suggested.


 Lieutenant Pak approached the central spike cautiously,
stopped pedalling while he was still a hundred metres
away, and let Dragonfly drift to rest. He checked the
radiation level, and found only Rama's very low back-
ground. There might be forces at work here which no
human instruments could detect, but that was another
unavoidable risk.


 'What can you see?' Hub Control asked anxiously.


 'Just Big Horn - it's absolutely smooth - no markings -
and the point's so sharp you could use it as a needle. I'm
almost scared to go near it.'


 He was only half joking. It seemed incredible that so
massive an object should taper to such a geometrically
perfect point. Jimmy had seen collections of insects im-
paled upon pins, and he had no desire for his own Drag-
onfly to meet a similar fate.
 
 He pedalled slowly forward until the spike had flared
out to several metres in diameter, then stopped again.
Opening a small container, he rather gingerly extracted a
sphere about as big as a baseball, and tossed it towards
the spike. As it drifted away, it played out a barely visible
thread.


 The sticky-bomb hit the smoothly curving surface -
and did not rebound. Jimmy gave the thread an experi-
mental twitch, then a harder tug. Like a fisherman haul-
ing in his catch, he slowly wound Dragonfly across to the
tip of the appropriately christened 'Big Horn', until he
was able to put out his hand and make contact with it.


 'I suppose you could call this some kind of touchdown,'
he reported to Hub Control. 'It feels like glass - almost
frictionless, and slightly warm. The sticky-bomb worked
fine. Now I'm trying the mike ... let's see if the suction
pad holds as well ... plugging in the leads ... anything
coming through?'
 
 There was a long pause from the Hub; then Control
said disgustedly: 'Not a damn thing, except the usual
thermal noises. Will you tap it with a piece of metal?
Then at least we'll find if it's hollow.'


 'OK. Now what?'


 'We'd like you to fly along the spike, making a com-
plete scan every half-kilometre, and looking out for any-
thing unusual. Then, if you're sure it's safe, you might go
across to one of the Little Horns. But only if you're cer-
tain you can get back to zero gee without any problems.'


 'Three kilometres from the axis - that's slightly above
lunar gravity. Dragonfly was designed for that. I'll just
have to work harder.'


 'Jimmy, this is the Captain. I've got second thoughts on
that. Judging by your pictures, the smaller spikes are just
the same as the big one. Get the best coverage of them
you can with the zoom lens. I don't want you leaving the
low-gravity region ... unless you see something that looks
very important. Then we'll talk it over.


 'OK, Skipper,' said Jimmy, and perhaps there was just
a trace of relief in his voice. 'I'll stay close to Big Horn.
Here we go again.'


 He felt he was dropping straight downwards into a
narrow valley between a group of incredibly tall and
slender mountains. -Big Horn now towered a kilometre
above him, and the six spikes of the Little Horns were
looming up all around. The complex of buttresses and
flying arches which surrounded the lower slopes was ap-
proaching rapidly; he wondered if he could make a safe
landing somewhere down there in that Cyclopean archi-
tecture. He could no longer land on Big Horn itself, for
the gravity on its widening slopes was now too power-
ful to be counteracted by the feeble force of the sticky-
bomb.


 As he came even closer to the South Pole, he began to
feel more and more like a sparrow flying beneath the
vaulted roof of some great cathedral - though no cathe-
dial ever built had been even one hundredth the size of
this place. He wondered if it was indeed a religious
shrine, or something remotely analogous, but quickly dis-
missed the idea. Nowhere in Rama had there been any
trace of artistic expression; everything was purely func-
tional. Perhaps the Ramans felt that they already knew
the ultimate secrets of the universe, and were no longer -
haunted by the yearnings and aspirations that drove
mankind.


 That was a chilling thought, quite alien to Jimmy's
usual not-very-profound philosophy; he felt an urgent
need to resume contact, and reported his situation back
to his distant friends.


 'Say again, Dragonfly,' replied Hub Control. 'We can't
understand you - your transmission is garbled.'


 'I repeat - I'm near the base of Little Horn number
Six, and am using the sticky-bomb to haul myself in.'


 'Understand only partially. Can you hear me?'


 'Yes, perfectly. Repeat, perfectly.'


 Please start counting numbers.'


 'One, two, three, four...'


 'Got part of that. Give us beacon for fifteen seconds,
then go back to voice.'


 'Here it is.'


 Jimmy switched on the low-powered beacon which
would locate him anywhere inside Rama, and counted off
the seconds. When he went over to voice again he asked
plaintively: 'What's happening? Can you hear me now?'


 Presumably Hub didn't, because the controller then
asked for fifteen seconds of TV. Not until Jimmy had re-
peated the question twice did the message get through.


 'Glad you can hear us OK, Jimmy. But there's some-
thing very peculiar happening at your end. Listen.'


 Over the radio, he heard the familiar whistle of his
own beacon, played back to him. For a moment it was
perfectly normal; then a weird distortion crept into it.
The thousand-cycle whistle became modulated by a deep,
throbbing pulse so low that it was almost beneath the
threshold of hearing; it was a kind of basso-profundo
flutter in which each individual vibration could be
heard. And the modulation was itself modulated; it rose
and fell, rose and fell with a period of about five seconds.


 Never for a moment did it occur to Jimmy that there
was something wrong with his radio transmitter. This
was from outside; though what it was, and what it meant,
was beyond his imagination.


 Hub Control was not much wiser, but at least it had a
theory.


 'We think you must be in some kind of very intense
field - probably magnetic - with a frequency of about ten
cycles. It may be strong enough to be dangerous. Suggest
you get Out right away - it may only be local. Switch on
your beacon again, and we'll play it back to you. Then you
can tell when you're getting clear of the interference.


 Jimmy hastily jerked the sticky-bomb loose and aban-
doned his attempt to land. He swung Dragonfly round in
a wide circle, listening as he did so to the sound that wav-
ered in his earphones. After flying only a few metres, he
could tell that its intensity was falling rapidly; as Hub
Control had guessed, it was extremely localized.


 He paused for a moment at the last spot where he
could hear it, like a faint throbbing deep in his brain. So
might a primitive savage have listened in awestruck ig-
norance to the low humming of a giant power trans-
former. And even the savage might have guessed that the
sound he heard was merely the stray leakage from colossal
energies, fully controlled, but biding their time...


 Whatever this sound meant, Jimmy was glad to be
clear of it. This was no place, among the overwhelming
architecture of the South Pole, for a lone man to listen to
the voice of Rama.