CHAPTER FORTY - Saboteur


The scooter had been stripped of all unnecessary equip-
ment; it was now merely an open framework holding to-
gether propulsion, guidance and life-support systems.
Even the seat for the second pilot had been removed, for
every kilogramme of extra mass had to be paid for in mis-
sion time.


 That was one of the reasons, though not the most im-
portant, why Rodrigo had insisted on going along. It was
such a simple job that there was no need for any extra
hands, and the mass of a passenger would cost sev-
eral minutes of flight time. Now the stripped-down
scooter could accelerate at over a third of a gravity;
it could make the trip from Endeavour to the bomb
in four minutes. That left six to spare; it should. be
sufficient.


 Rodrigo looked back only once when he had left the
ship; he saw that, as planned, it had lifted from the cen-
tral axis and was thrusting gently away across the spin-
ning disc of the North Face. By the time he reached the
bomb, it would have placed the thickness of Rama be-
tween them.


 He took his time, flying over the polar plain. There was
no hurry here, because the bomb's cameras could not yet
see him, and he could therefore conserve fuel. Then he
drifted over the curving rim of the world - and there was
the missile, glittering in sunlight fiercer even than that
shining cm the planet of its birth.


 Rodrigo had already punched in the guidance instruc-
tions. He initiated the sequence; the scooter spun on its
gyros, and came up to full thrust in a matter of seconds.
At first the sensation of weight seemed crushing; then ~
Rodrigo adjusted to it. He had, after all, comfortably en-
dured twice as much inside Rama - and had been born
under three times as much on Earth.


 The huge, curving exterior wall of the fifty-kilometre
cylinder was slowly falling away beneath him as the
scooter aimed itself directly at the bomb. Yet it was im-
possible to judge Rama's size, since it was completely
smooth and featureless - so featureless, indeed, that it
was difficult to tell that it was spinning.


 One hundred seconds into the mission; he was ap-
proaching the halfway point. The bomb was still too far
away to show any details, but it was much brighter
against the let-black sky. It was strange to see no stars -
not even brilliant Earth or dazzling Venus; the dark
filters which protected his eyes against the deadly glare
made that impossible. Rodrigo guessed that he was break-
ing a record; probably no other man had ever engaged in
extra-vehicular work so close to the sun. It was lucky for
him that solar activity was low.


 At two minutes ten seconds the flip-over light started
flashing, thrust dropped to zero, and the scooter spun
through 180 degrees. -Full thrust was back in an instant,
but now he was decelerating at the same mad rate Of
three metres per second squared - rather better than that,
in fact, since he had lost almost half his propellent mass.
The bomb was twenty-five kilometres away; he would be
there in another two minutes. He had hit a top speed of
fifteen hundred kilometres an hour - which, for a space-
scooter, was utter insanity, and probably another record.
But this was hardly a routine EVA, and he knew pre-
cisely what he was doing.


 The bomb was growing; and now he could see the
main antenna, holding steady on the invisible star of
Mercury. Along that beam, the image of his approaching
scooter had been flashing at the speed of- light for the last
three minutes. There were still two to go, before it
reached Mercury.


 What would the Hermians do, when they saw him?
There would be consternation, of course; they would
realize instantly that he had made a rendezvous with the
bomb several minutes before they 'even knew he was on
the way. Probably some stand-by observer would call
higher authority - that would take more time. But even
in the worst possible case - even if the officer on duty had
authority to detonate the bomb, and pressed the button
immediately - it would take another five minutes for the
signal to arrive.


 Though Rodrigo was not gambling on it - Cosmo-
Christers never gambled - he was quite sure that there
would be no such instantaneous reaction. The Hermians
would hesitate to destroy a reconnaissance vehicle from
Endeavour, even if they suspected its motives. They
would certainly attempt some form of communication
first - and that would mean more delay.


 And there was an even better reason; they would not
waste a gigaton bomb on. a mere scooter. Wasted it would
be, if it was detonated twenty kilometres from its target.
They would have to move it first. Oh, he had plenty of
time. . . but he would still assume the very worst.


 He would act as if the triggering impulse would arrive
in the shortest possible time - just five minutes.


 As the scooter closed in across the last few hundred
metres, Rodrigo quickly matched the details he could now
see with those he had studied in the photographs taken
at long range. What had been only a collection of pic-
tures became hard metal and smooth plastic - no longer
abstract, but a deadly reality.


 The bomb was a cylinder about ten metres long and
three in diameter - by a strange coincidence, almost the
same proportions as Rama itself. It was attached to the
framework of the carrier vehicle by an open lattice-work
of short I-beams. For some reason, probably to do with the
location of the centre of mass, it was supported at right
angles to the axis of the carrier, so that it conveyed an
appropriately sinister hammer-head impression. It was
indeed a hammer, one powerful enough to smash a world.


 From each end of the bomb, a bundle of braided cables
ran along the cylindrical side and disappeared through
the lattice-work into the interior of the vehicle. All com-
munication and control was here; there was no antenna
of any kind on the bomb itself. Rodrigo had only to cut
those two sets of cables and there would be nothing here
but harmless, inert metal.


 Although this was exactly what he had expected, it still
seemed a little too easy. He glanced at his watch; it
would be another thirty seconds before the Hermians,
even if they had been watching when he rounded the
edge of Rama, could know of his existence. He had an
absolutely certain five minutes for uninterrupted work -
and a ninety-nine per cent probability of much longer
than that. -


 As soon as the scooter had drifted to a complete halt,
Rodrigo grappled it to the missile framework so that the
two formed a rigid structure. That took only seconds; he
had already chosen his tools, and was out of the pilot's
seat at once, only slightly hampered by the stiffness of his
heavy-insulation suit.


 The first thing he found himself inspecting was a small
metal plate bearing the inscription:


  DEPARTMENT OF POWER ENGINEERING


                         Section D,


                47, Sunset Boulevard,


                Vulcanopolis, 17464


   For information apply to Mr Henry K. Jones


 Rodrigo suspected that, in a very few minutes, Mr
Jones might be rather busy.


 The heavy wire-cutters made short work of the cable.
As the fist strands parted, Rodrigo gave scarcely a
thought to the fires of hell that were pent up only centi-
metres away; if his actions triggered them, he would never
know.


 He glanced again at his watch; this had taken less than
a minute, which meant that he was on schedule. Now for
the back-up cable - and then he could head for home, in
full view of the furious and frustrated Hermians.,


 He was just beginning to work on the second cable
assembly when he felt a faint vibration in the metal he
was touching. Startled, he looked back along the body of
the missile.


 The characteristic blue-violet glow of a plasma thruster
in action was hovering round one of the attitude control
jets. The bomb was preparing to move.
The message from Mercury was brief, and devastating. It
arrived two minutes after Rodrigo had disappeared
around the edge of Rama.


 COMMANDER ENDEAVOUR FROM MERCURY SPACE CONTROL,


 INFERNO WEST. YOU HAVE ONE HOUR FROM RECEIPT OF


 THIS MESSAGE TO LEAVE VICINITY OF RAMA. SUGGEST YOU


 PROCEED MAXIMUM ACCELERATION ALONG SPIN AXIS. RE-


 QUEST ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. MESSAGE ENDS.


 Norton read it with sheer disbelief, then anger. He felt
a childish impulse to radio back that all his crew were
inside Rama, and it would take hours to get everyone
out. But that would achieve nothing - except perhaps to
test the will and nerve of the Hermians.


 And why, several days before perihelion, had they de-
cided to act? He wondered if the mounting pressure of
public opinion was becoming too great, and they decided
to present the rest of the human race with a fait accom-
pli. It seemed an unlikely explanation; such sensitivity
would have been uncharacteristic.


 There was no way in which he could recall Rodrigo,
for the scooter was now in the radio shadow of Rama and
would be out of contact until they were in line of sight
again. That would not be until the mission was com-
pleted - or had failed.


 He would have to wait it out; there was still plenty of
time - a full fifty minutes. Meanwhile, he had decided on
the most effective answer to Mercury.


 He would ignore the message completely, and see what
the Hermians did next.
Rodrigo's first sensation, when the bomb started to move,
was not one of physical fear; it was something much more
devastating. He believed that the universe operated ac-
cording to strict laws, which not even God Himself could
disobey - much less the Hermians. No message could
travel faster than light; he was five minutes ahead of any-
thing that Mercury could do.


 This could only be a coincidence - fantastic, and per-
haps deadly, but no more than that. By chance, a control
signal must have been sent to the bomb at about the time
he was leaving Endeavour; while he was travelling fifty
kilometres, it had covered eighty million.


 Or perhaps this was only an automatic change of atti-
tude, to counter over-heating somewhere in the vehicle.
There were places where the skin temperature ap-
proached fifteen hundred degrees, and Rodrigo had been
very careful to keep in the shadows as far as possible.


 A second thruster started to fire, checking the spin
given by the first. No, this was not a mere thermal adjust-
ment. The bomb was re-orientating itself, to point to-.
wards .......


 Useless to wonder why this was happening at this pre-
cise moment in time. There was one thing in his favour;
the missile was a low acceleration device. A tenth of a
gee was the most that it could manage. He could hang
on.


 He checked the grapples attaching the scooter to the
bomb framework, and re-checked the safety line on his
own suit. A cold anger was growing in his mind, adding
to his determination. Did this manoeuvre mean that the
Hermians were going to explode the bomb without warn-
ing, giving Endeavour no chance to escape? That seemed
incredible - an act not only of brutality but of folly, cal-
culated to turn the rest of the solar system against them.
And what would have made them ignore the solemn
promise of their own Ambassador?


 Whatever their plan, they would not get away with it.


The second message from Mercury was identical with the
first, and arrived ten minutes later. So they had extended
the deadline - Norton still had one hour. And they had
obviously waited until a reply from Endeavour could
have reached them before calling him again.


 Now there was another factor; by this time they must
have seen Rodrigo, and would have had several minutes
in which to take action. Their instructions could already
be on the way. They could arrive at any second.


 He should be preparing to leave. At any moment, the
sky-filling bulk of Rama might become incandescent
along the edges, blazing with a transient glory that would
far outshine the sun.


When the main thrust came on, Rodrigo was securely
anchored. Only twenty seconds later, it cut off again. He
did a quick mental calculation; the delta vee could not
have been more than fifteen kilometres an hour. The
bomb would take over an hour to reach Rama; perhaps it
was only moving in close to get a quicker reaction. If so,
that was a wise precaution; but the Hermians had left it
too late.


 Rodrigo glanced at his watch, though by now he was
almost aware of the time without having to check. On
Mercury, they would now be seeing him heading pur-
posefully towards the bomb, and less than two kilometres
away from it. They could have no doubt of his inten-
tions, and would be wondering if he had already carried
them out.


 The second set of cables went as easily as the first; like
any good workman, Rodrigo had chosen his tools well.
The bomb was disarmed; or, to be more accurate, it
could no longer be detonated by remote command.


 Yet there was one other possibility, and he could not
afford to ignore it. There were no external contact fuses,
but there might be internal ones, armed by the shock of
impact. The Hermians still had control over their veh-
icle's movements, and could crash it into Rama whenever
they wished. Rodrigo's work was not yet completely fin-
ished.


 Five minutes from now, in that control room some-
where on Mercury, they would see him crawling back
along the exterior of the missile, carrying the modestly-
sized wire-cutters that had neutralized the mightiest wea-
pon ever built by man. He was almost tempted to wave at
the camera, but decided that it would seem undignified;
after all, he was making history, and millions would
watch this scene in the years to come. Unless, of course,
the Hermians destroyed the recording in a fit of pique;
he would hardly blame them.


 He reached the mounting of the long-range antenna,
and drifted hand-over-hand along it to the big dish. His
faithful cutters made short work of the multiplex feed
system, chewing up cables and laser wave guides alike.
When he made the last snip, the antenna started to swing
slowly around; the unexpected movement took him by
surprise, until he realized that he had destroyed its auto-
matic lock on Mercury. Just five minutes from now, the
Hermians would lose all contact with their servant. Not
only was it impotent; now it was blind and deaf.


 Rodrigo climbed slowly back to the scooter, released
the shackles, and swung it round until the forward
bumpers were pressing against the missile, as close as pos-
sible to its centre of mass. He brought thrust up to full
power, and held it there for twenty seconds.


 Pushing against many times its own mass, the scooter
responded very sluggishly. When Rodrigo cut the thrust
back to zero, he took a careful reading of the bomb's new
velocity vector.


 It would miss Rama by a wide margin - and it could
be located again with precision at any future time. It was,
after all, a very valuable piece of equipment.


 Lieutenant Rodrigo was a man of almost pathological
honesty. He would not like the Hermians to accuse him
of losing their property.