CHAPTER FIVE - First EVA
 
Rama was as silent as a tomb - which, perhaps, it was. No
radio signals, on any frequency; no vibrations that the
seismographs could pick up, apart from the micro-tremors
undoubtedly caused by the sun's increasing heat; no elec-
trical currents; no radioactivity. It was almost ominously
quiet; one might have expected that even an asteroid
would be noisier.


 What did we expect? Norton asked himself. A com-
mittee of welcome? He was not sure whether to be dis-
appointed or relieved. The initiative, at any rate, ap
peared up to him.


 His orders were to wait for twenty-four hours, then to
go out and explore. Nobody slept much that first day;
even the crew members not on duty spent their time
monitoring the ineffectually probing instruments, or
simply looking out of the observation ports at the starkly
geometrical landscape. Is this world alive? they asked
themselves, over and over again. Is it dead? Or is it
merely sleeping?
 
 On the first EVA, Norton took only one companion -
Lieut-Commander Karl Mercer, his tough and resource-
ful life-support officer. He had no intention of getting out
of sight of the ship, and if there was any trouble, it was
unlikely that a larger party would be safe. As a pre-
caution, however, he had two more crew members, al-
ready suited up, standing by in the airlock.


 The few grammes of weight that Rama's combined
gravitational and centrifugal fields gave them were
neither help nor hindrance; they had to rely entirely on
their jets. As soon as possible, Norton told himself, he
would string a cat's-cradle of guide ropes between the
ship and the pill-boxes, so that they could move around
without wasting propellants.
 
 The nearest pill-box was only ten metres from the air-
lock, and Norton's first concern was to check that the con-
tact had caused no damage to the ship. Endeavour's hull
was resting against the curving wall with a thrust of see-
real tons, but the pressure was evenly distributed. Re-
assured, he began to drift around the circular structure,
trying to determine its purpose.
 
 Norton had travelled only a few metres when he came
across an interruption in the smooth, apparently metallic
wall. At first, he thought it was some peculiar decoration,
for it seemed to serve no useful function. Six radial
grooves, or slots, were deeply recessed in the metal, and
lying in them were six crossed bars like the spokes of a
rimless wheel, with a small hub at the centre. But there
was no way in which the wheel could be turned, as it was
embedded in the wall.
 
 Then he noticed, with growing excitement, that there
were deeper recesses at the ends of the spokes, nicely
shaped to accept a clutching hand (claw? tentacle?). If
one stood so, bracing against the wall, and pulled on the
spoke so...


 Smooth as silk, the wheel slid out of the wall. To his
utter astonishment - for he had been virtually certain
that any moving parts would have become vacuum-
welded ages ago - Norton found himself holding a spoked
wheel. He might have been the captain of some old wind-
jammer standing at the helm of his ship.
He was glad that his helmet sunshade did not allow
Mercer to read his expression.


 He was startled, but also angry with himself; perhaps
he had already made his first mistake. Were alarms now
sounding inside Rama, and had his thoughtless action
already triggered some implacable mechanism?


 But Endeavour reported no change; its sensors still de-
tected nothing but faint thermal crepitations and his
own movements.


  'Well, Skipper - are you going to turn it?'


 Norton thought once more of his instructions. 'Use
your own discretion, but proceed with caution.' If he
checked every single move with Mission Control, he
would never get anywhere.


 'What's your diagnosis, Karl?' he asked Mercer.
'It's obviously a- manual control for an airlock - prob-
ably an emergency back-up system in case of power fail-
ure. I can't imagine any technology, however advanced,
that wouldn't take such precautions.'
 
 'And it would be fail-safe,' Norton told himself. 'It
could only be operated if there was no possible danger to
the system...'


 He grasped two opposing spokes of the windlass,
braced his feet against the ground, and tested the wheel.
It did not budge.


 'Give me a hand,' he asked Mercer. Each took a spoke;
exerting their utmost strength, they were unable to pro-
duce the slightest movement.
 
 Of course, there was no reason to suppose that clocks
and corkscrews on Rama turned in the same direction as
they did on Earth... -
 
 'Let's try the other way,' suggested Mercer.
This time, there was no resistance. The wheel rotated
almost effortlessly through a full circle. Then, very
smoothly, it took up the load.
 
 Half a metre away, the curving wall of the pill-box
started to move, like a slowly opening clamshell. A few
particles of dust, driven by wisps of escaping air, streamed
outwards like dazzling diamonds as the brilliant sunlight
caught them.


 The road to Rama lay open.