CHAPTER EIGHTEEN - Dawn


The light was so brilliant that for a full minute Norton
had to keep his eyes clenched tightly shut. Then he risked
opening them, and stared through barely-parted lids at
the wall a few centimetres in front of his face. He blinked
several times, waited for the involuntary tears to drain
away, and then turned slowly to behold the dawn.


 He could endure the sight for only a few seconds; then
he was forced to close his eyes again. It was not the glare
that was intolerable - he could grow accustomed to that -
but the awesome spectacle of Rama, now seen for the first
time in its entirety.


 Norton had known exactly what to expect; neverthe-
less the sight had stunned him. He was seized by a spasm
of uncontrollable trembling; his hands tightened round
the rungs of the ladder with the violence of a drowning
man clutching at a lifebelt. The muscles of his forearms
began to knot, yet at the same time his legs - already
fatigued by hours of steady climbing - seemed about to
give way. If it had not been for the low gravity, he might
have fallen.


 Then his training took over, and he began to apply the
first remedy for panic. Still keeping his eyes closed and
trying to forget the monstrous spectacle around him, he
started to take deep, long breaths, filling his lungs with
oxygen and washing the poisons of fatigue out of his sys-
tem.


 Presently he felt much better, but he did not open his
eyes until he had performed one more action. It took a
major effort of will to force his right hand to open - he
had to talk to it like a disobedient child - but presently
he manoeuvred it down to his waist, unclipped the safety
belt from his harness, and hooked the buckle to the
nearest rung. Now, whatever happened, he could not
fall.


 Norton took several more deep breaths; then - still
keeping his eyes closed - he switched on his radio. He
hoped his voice sounded calm and authoritative as he
called: 'Captain here. Is everyone OK?'


 As he checked off the names one by one, and received
answers - even if somewhat tremulous ones - from every-
body, his own confidence and self-control came swiftly
- back to him. All his men were safe, and were looking
to him for leadership. He was the commander once
more.


 'Keep your eyes closed until you're quite sure you can
take it,' he called. 'The view is - overwhelming. If anyone
finds that it's too much, keep on climbing without look-
ing back. Remember, you'll soon be at zero gravity, so
you can't possibly fall.'


 It was hardly necessary to point out such an elementary
fact to trained spacemen, but Norton had to remind him-
self of it every few seconds. The thought of zero-gravity
was a kind of talisman, protecting him from harm. What-
ever his eyes told him, Rama could not drag him down to
destruction on the plain eight kilometres below.


 It became an urgent matter of pride and self-esteem
that he should open his eyes once more and look at the
world around him. But first, he had to get his body under
control.


 He let go of the ladder with both hands, and hooked
his left arm under a rung. Clenching and unclenching his
fats, he waited until the muscle cramps had faded away;
then, when he felt quite comfortable, he opened his eyes
and slowly turned to face Rama.


 His fist impression was one of blueness. The glare that
filled the sky could not have been mistaken for sunlight;
it might have been that of an electric arc. So Rama's sun,
Norton told himself,' must be hotter than ours. That
should interest the astronomers...


 And now he understood the purpose of those mysteri-
ous trenches, the Straight Valley and its five companions;
they were nothing less than gigantic strip-lights. Rama
had six linear suns, symmetrically ranged around its in-
terior. From each, a broad fan of light was aimed across
the central axis, to shine upon the far side of the world.
Norton wondered if they could be switched alternately to
produce a cycle of light and darkness, or whether this was
a planet of perpetual day.


 Too much staring at those blinding bars of light had
made his eyes hurt again; he was not sorry to have a good
excuse to close them for a while. It was not until then,
when he had almost recovered from this initial visual
shock, that he was able to devote himself to a much more
serious problem.


 Who or what, had switched on the lights of Rama?


 This world was sterile, by the most sensitive tests that
man could apply to it. But now something was happen-
ing that could not be explained by the action of natural
forces. There might not be life here, but there could be
consciousness, awareness; robots might be waking after a
sleep of aeons. Perhaps this outburst of light was an un-
programmed, random spasm - a last dying gasp of mach-
ines that were responding wildly to the warmth of a new
sun, and would soon lapse again into quiescence, this
time for ever.


 Yet Norton could not believe such a simple explana-
tion. Bits of the jigsaw puzzle were beginning to fall into
place, though many were still missing. The absence of all
signs of wear, for example - the feeling of nearness, as if
Rama had just been created ...


 These thoughts might have inspired fear, even terror.
Somehow, they did nothing of the sort. On the contrary,
Norton felt a sense of exhilaration - almost of delight.
There was far more here to discover than they had ever
dared to hope. 'Wait,' he said to himself, 'until the Rama
Committee hears about this!'


 Then, with a calm determination, he opened his eyes
again and began a careful inventory of everything he
saw.


 First, he had to establish some kind of reference system.
He was looking at the largest enclosed space ever seen by
man, and needed a mental map to find his way around
it.


 The feeble gravity was very little help, for with an
effort of will he could switch Up and Down. in any direc-
tion he pleased. But some directions were psychologically
dangerous; whenever his mind skirted these, he had to
vector it hastily away.


 Safest of all was to imagine that he was at the bowl-
shaped bottom of a gigantic well, sixteen kilometres wide
and fifty deep. The advantage of this image was that
there could be no danger of falling further, nevertheless,
it had some serious defects.


 He could pretend that the scattered towns and cities,
and the differently coloured and textured areas, were all
securely fixed to the towering walls. The various complex
structures that could be seen hanging from the dome
overhead were perhaps no more disconcerting than the
pendent candelabra in some great concert-ball on Earth.
What was quite unacceptable was the Cylindrical Sea


 There it was, halfway up the well-shaft - a band of
water, wrapped completely round it, with no visible
means of support. There could be no doubt that it was
water; it was a vivid blue, flecked with brilliant sparkles
from the few remaining ice-floes. But a vertical sea
forming a complete circle twenty kilometres up in the
sky was such an unsettling phenomenon that after a
while he began to seek an alternative.


 That was when his mind switched the scene through
ninety degrees. Instantly, the deep well became a long
'tunnel, capped at either end. 'Down' was obviously in the
direction of the ladder and the stairway he had just as-
cended; and now with this perspective, Norton was at last
able to appreciate the true vision of the architects who
had built this place.


 He was clinging to the face of a curving sixteen-kilo-
metre-high cliff, the upper half of which overhung com-
pletely until it merged into the arched roof of What was
now the sky. Beneath him, the ladder descended more
than five hundred metres, until it ended at the first ledge
or terrace. There the stairway began, continuing almost
vertically at first in this low-gravity regime, then slowly
becoming less and less steep until, after breaking at five
more platforms, it reached the distant plain. For the first
two or three kilometres he could see the individual steps,
but thereafter they had merged into a continuous band.


 The downward swoop of that immense stairway was so
overwhelming that it was impossible to appreciate its
true scale. Norton had once flown round Mount Everest,
and had been awed by its size. He reminded himself that
this stairway was as high as the Himalayas, but the com-
parison was meaningless.


 And no comparison at all was possible with the other
two stairways, Beta and Gamma, which slanted up into
the sky and then curved far out over his head. Norton
had now acquired enough confidence to lean back and
glance up at them - briefly. Then he tried to forget that
they were there...


 For too much thinking along those lines evoked yet a
third image of Rama, which he was anxious to avoid at
all costs. This was the viewpoint that regarded it once
again as a vertical cylinder or well - but now he was at
the top, not the bottom, like a fly crawling upside down
on a domed ceiling, with a fifty-kilometre drop immedi-
ately below. Every time Norton found this image creeping
up on him, it needed all his willpower not to cling to the
ladder again in mindless panic.


 In time, he was sure, all these fears would ebb. The
wonder and strangeness of Rama would banish its ter-
rors, at least for men who were trained to face the reali-
ties of space. Perhaps no one who had never left Earth,
and had never seen the stars all around him, could en-
dure these vistas. But if any men could accept them, Nor-
ton told himself with grim determination, it would be
the captain and crew of Endeavour.


 He looked at his chronometer. This pause had lasted
only two minutes, but it had seemed a lifetime. Exerting
barely enough effort to overcome his inertia and the fad-
ing gravitational field, he started to pull himself slowly
up the last hundred metres of the ladder. Just before he
entered the airlock and turned his back upon Rama, he
made one final swift survey of the interior.


 It had changed, even in the last few minutes; a mist
was rising from the Sea. For the first few hundred metres
the ghostly white columns were tilted sharply forward in
the direction of .Rama's spin; then they started to dissolve
in a swirl of turbulence, as the uprushing air tried to
jettison its excess velocity. The Trade Winds of this cyl-
indrical world were beginning to etch their patterns in
its sky; the first tropical storm in unknown ages was
about to break.


  CHAPTER NINE TEEN - A Warning from Mercury


It was the first time in weeks that every member of the
Rama Committee had made himself available. Professor
Solomons had emerged from the depths of the Pacific,
where he had been studying mining operations along the
mid-ocean trenches. And to nobody's surprise, Dr Taylor
had reappeared, now that there was at least a possibility
that Rama held something more newsworthy than lifeless
artifacts.


 The Chairman had fully expected Dr Carlisle Perera
to be even more dogmatically assertive than usual, now
that his prediction of a Raman hurricane had been con-
firmed. To His Excellency's great surprise, Perera was re-
markably subdued, and accepted the congratulations of
his colleagues in a manner as near to embarrassment as
he was ever likely to achieve.


 The exobiologist, in fact, was deeply mortified. The
spectacular break-up of the Cylindrical Sea was a much
more obvious phenomenon than the hurricane winds - yet
he had completely overlooked it. To have remembered
that hot air rises, but to have forgotten that hot ice con-
tracts, was not an achievement of which he could be very
proud. However, he would soon get over it, and revert to
his normal Olympian self-confidence.


 When the Chairman offered him the floor, and asked
what further climatic changes he expected, he was very
careful to hedge his bets.


 'You must realize,' he explained, 'that the meteorology
of a world as strange as Rama may have many other sur-
prises. But if my calculations are correct, there will be no
further storms, and conditions will soon be stable. There
will be a slow temperature rise until perihelion - and
beyond - but that won't concern us, as Endeavour will
have had to leave long before then.'


 'So it should soon be safe to go back inside?'
 'Er - probably. We should certainly know in forty-
eight hours.'


 'A return is imperative,' said the Ambassador for Mer-
cury. 'We have to learn everything we possibly can about
Rama. The situation has now changed completely.'


 'I think we know what you mean, but would you care
to elaborate?'


 'Of course. Until now, we have assumed that Rama is
lifeless - or at any rate uncontrolled. But we can no
longer pretend that it is a derelict. Even if there are no
life-forms aboard, it may be directed by robot mech-
anisms, programmed to carry out 'some mission - per-
haps one highly disadvantageous to us. Unpalatable
though it may be, we must consider the question of self-
defence.'
 
 There was a babble of protesting voices, and the
Chairman had to hold up his hand to restore order.


 'Let His Excellency finish!' he pleaded. 'Whether we
like the idea or not, it should be considered seriously.'
 
 'With all due respect to the Ambassador,' said Dr Con-
rad Taylor in his most disrespectful voice, 'I think we can
rule out as naÔve the fear of malevolent intervention.
Creatures as advanced as the Ramans must have corres-
pondingly developed morals. Otherwise, they would have
destroyed themselves - as we nearly did in the twentieth
century. I've made that quite clear in my new book Ethos
and Cosmos. I hope you received your copy.


 'Yes, thank you, though I'm afraid the pressure of other
matters has not allowed me to read beyond the introduc-
tion. However, I'm familiar with the general thesis. We
may have no malevolent intentions towards an ant-heap.
But if we want to build a house on the same site ...
 
 'This is as bad as the Pandora Party! It's nothing less
than interstellar xenophobia!'
 
 'Please, gentlemen! This is getting us nowhere. Mr
Ambassador, you still have the floor.'


 The Chairman glared across three hundred and
eighty thousand kilometres of space at Conrad Taylor,
who reluctantly subsided, like a volcano biding its
tune.


 'Thank you,' said the Ambassador for Mercury. 'The
danger may be unlikely, but where the future of the
human race is involved, we can take no chances. And,
if I may say so, we Hermians may be particularly con-
cerned. We may have more cause for alarm than anyone
else.'


 Dr Taylor snorted audibly, but was quelled by another
glare from the Moon.


 'Why Mercury, more than any other planet?' asked the
Chairman.


 'Look at the dynamics of the situation. Rama is already
inside our orbit. It is only an assumption that it will go
round the sun and head on out again into space. Suppose
it carries out a braking manoeuvre? If it does so, this will
be at perihelion, about thirty days from now. My scien-
tists tell rue that if the entire velocity change is carried
out there, Rama will end up in a circular orbit only
twenty-five million kilometres from the sun. From here, it
could dominate the solar system.'


 For a long time nobody - not even Conrad Taylor -
spoke a word. Ml the members of the Committee were
marshalling their thoughts about those difficult people
the Hermians, so ably represented here by their Am-
bassador.


 To most people, Mercury was a fairly good approxi-
mation of Hell; at least, it would do until something
worse came along. But the Hermians were proud of their
bizarre planet, with its days longer than its years, its
double sunrises and sunsets, its rivers of molten metal ...
By comparison, the Moon and Mars had been almost tri-
vial challenges. Not until men landed on Venus (if they
even did) would they encounter an environment - more
hostile than that of Mercury.


 And yet this world had turned out to be, in many ways,
the key to the solar system. This seemed obvious in retro-
spect, but the Space Age had been almost a century old
before the fact was realized. Now the Hermians never let
anyone forget it.


 Long before men reached the planet, Mercury's ab-
normal density hinted at the heavy elements it con-
tained; even so, its wealth was still a source of astonish-
ment, and had postponed for a thousand years any fears
that the key metals of human civilization would be ex-
hausted. And these treasures were in the best possible
place, where the power of the Sun was ten times greater
than on frigid Earth.


 Unlimited energy - unlimited metal; that was Mer-
cury. Its great magnetic launchers could catapult manu-
factured products to any point in the solar system. It
could also export energy, in synthetic transuranium iso-
topes or pure radiation. It had even been proposed that
Hermian lasers would one day thaw out gigantic Jupiter,
but this idea had not been well received on the other
worlds. A technology that could cook Jupiter had too
many tempting possibilities for interplanetary black-
mail.


 That such a concern had ever been expressed said a
good deal about the general attitude towards the Her-
mians. They were respected for their toughness and engi-
neering skills, and admired for the way in which they had
conquered so fearsome a world. But they were not liked,
and still less were they completely trusted.
- At the same time, it was possible to appreciate their
point of view. The Hermians, it was often joked, some-
times behaved as if the Sun was their, personal property.
They were bound to it in an intimate love-hate relation-
ship - as the Vikings had once been linked to the sea, the
Nepalese to the Himalayas, the Eskimos to the Tundra.
They would be most unhappy if something came be-
tween them and the natural force that dominated and
controlled their lives.


 At last, the Chairman broke the long silence. He still
remembered the sun of India, and shuddered to contem-
plate the sun of Mercury. So he took the Hermians very
seriously indeed, even though he considered them un-
couth technological barbarians.


 'I think there is some merit in your argument, Mr Am-
bassador,' he said slowly. 'Have you any proposals?'


 'Yes, sir. Before we know what action to take, we must
have the facts. We know the geography of Rama - if one
can use that term - but we have no idea of its capabili-
ties. And the key to the whole problem is this: does
Rama have a propulsion system? Can it change orbit? I'd
be very interested in Dr Perera's views.'


 'I've given the subject a good deal of thought,' an-
swered the exobiologist. 'Of course, Rama must have
been given its original impetus by some launching device,
but that could have been an external booster. If it does
have onboard propulsion, we've found no trace of it. Cer-
tainly there are no rocket exhausts, or anything similar,
anywhere on the outer shell.'


 'They could be hidden.'


 'True, but there would seem little point in it. And
where are the propellant tanks, the energy sources? The
main hull is solid - we've checked that with seismic sur-
veys. The cavities in the northern cap are all accounted
for by the airlock systems.


 'That leaves the southern end of Rama, which Com-
mander Norton has been unable to reach, owing to that
ten-kilometre-wide band of water. There are all sorts of
curious mechanisms and structures up on the South Pole
- you've seen the photographs. What they are is any-
body's guess.


 'But I'm reasonably sure of this. If Rama does have a
propulsion system, it's something completely outside our
present knowledge. In fact, it would have to be the fabu-
bus "Space Drive" people have been talking about for
two hundred years.


 'You wouldn't rule that out?'


 'Certainly not. If we can prove that Rama has a Space
Drive - even if we learn nothing about its mode of opera-
tion - that would be a major discovery. At least we'd
know that such a thing is possible.'


 'What is a Space Drive?' asked the Ambassador for
Earth, rather plaintively.


 'Any kind of propulsion system, Sir Robert, that doesn't
work on the rocket principle. Anti-gravity - if it is pos-
sible - would do very nicely. At present, we don't know
where to look for such a drive, and most scientists doubt
if it exists.'


 'It doesn't,' Professor Davidson interjected. 'Newton
settled that. You can't have action without reaction.
Space Drives are nonsense. Take it from me.'


 'You may be right,' Perera replied with unusual bland-
ness. 'But if Rama doesn't have a Space Drive, it has no
drive at all. There's simply no room for a conventional
propulsion system, with its enormous fuel tanks.'


 'It's hard to imagine a whole world being pushed
around,' said Dennis Solomons. "What would happen to
the objects inside it? Everything would have to be bolted
down. Most inconvenient.'


 'Well, the acceleration would probably be very low.
The biggest problem would be the water in the Cylindri-
cal Sea. How would you stop that from...'


 Perera's voice suddenly faded away, and his eyes
glazed over. He seemed to be in the throes of an incipient
epileptic fit, or even a heart attack. His colleagues looked
at him in alarm; then he made a sudden recovery, banged
his fist on the table and shouted: 'Of course! That ex-
plains everything! The southern cliff - now it makes
sense!'


 'Not to rue,' grumbled the Lunar Ambassador, speak-
ing for all the diplomats present.


 'Look at this longitudinal cross-section of Rama,' Per-
era continued excitedly, unfolding his 'map. 'Have you
got your copies? The Cylindrical Sea is enclosed between
two cliffs, which completely circle the interior of Rama.
The one on the north is only fifty metres high. The
southern one, on the other hand, is almost half a kilo-
metre high. Why the big difference? No one's been able
to think of a sensible reason.


 'But suppose Rama is able to propel itself - accelerat-
ing so that the northern end is forward. The water in the
Sea would tend to move back; the level at the south would
rise - perhaps hundreds of metres. Hence the cliff. Let's
see-'


 Perera started scribbling furiously. After an astonish-
ingly short time - it could not have been more than
twenty seconds - he looked up in triumph.-


 'Knowing the height of those cliffs, we can calculate the
maximum acceleration Rama can take. If it was more
than two per cent of a gravity, the Sea would slosh over
into the southern continent.'


 'A fiftieth of a gee? That's not very much.'


 'It is - for a mass of ten million megatons. And it's all
you need for astronomical manoeuvring.'


 'Thank you very much, Dr Perera,' said the Hermian
Ambassador. 'You've given us a lot to think about. Mr
Chairman - can we impress on Commander Norton the
importance of looking at the South Polar region?'


 'He's doing his best. The Sea is the obstacle, 'of course.
They're trying to build some kind of raft - so that they can
at least reach New York.'


 'The South Pole may be even more important. Mean-
while, I am going to bring these matters to the attention
of the General Assembly. Do I have your approval?'


 There were no objections, not even from Dr Taylor.
But just as the Committee members were about to switch
out of circuit, Sir Lewis raised his hand. 


 The old historian very seldom spoke; when he did,
everyone listened.
 
 'Suppose we do find that Rama is - active - and has these
capabilities. There is an old saying in military affairs that
capability does not imply intention.'


  'How long should we wait to find what its intentions
are?' asked the Hermian. 'When we discover them, it may
be far too bate.'


 'It is already too late. There is nothing we can do to
affect Rama. Indeed, I doubt if there ever was.'


  'I do not admit that, Sir Lewis. There are many things
we can do - if it proves necessary. But the time is desper-
ately short. Rama is a cosmic egg, being warmed by the
fires of the sun. It may hatch at any moment.'


 The Chairman of the Committee looked at the Ambas-
sador for Mercury in frank astonishment. He bad seldom
been so surprised in his diplomatic career.


  He would never have dreamed that a Hermian was
capable of such a poetic flight of imagination.