CHAPTER ONE - Spaceguard


 Sooner or later, it was bound to happen. On 30 June 1908,
Moscow escaped destruction by three hours and four
thousand kilometres - a margin invisibly small by the
standards of the universe. Again, on 12 February 1947,
yet another Russian city had a still narrower escape,
when the second great meteorite of the twentieth century
detonated less than four hundred kilometres from Vladi-
vostok, with an explosion rivalling that of the newly
invented uranium bomb.


 In those days, there was nothing that men could do to
protect themselves against the last random shots in the
cosmic bombardment that had once scarred the face of
the Moon. The meteorites of 1908 and 1947 had struck
uninhabited wilderness; but by the end of the twenty-
first century, there was no region left on Earth that could
be safely used for celestial target practice. The human
race had spread from pole to pole. And so, inevitably.


 At 09.46 GMT on the morning of 11 September, in the
exceptionally beautiful summer of the year 2077, most of
the inhabitants of Europe saw a dazzling fireball appear
in the eastern sky. Within seconds it was brighter than
the sun, and as it moved across the heavens - at first in
utter silence - it left behind it a churning column of dust
and smoke.


 Somewhere above Austria it began to disintegrate, pro-
ducing a series of concussions so violent that more than a
million people had their hearing permanently damaged.
They were the lucky ones.


 Moving at fifty kilometres a second, a thousand tons of
rock and metal impacted on the plains of northern Italy,
destroying in a few flaming moments the labour of cen-
turies. The cities of Padua and Verona were wiped from
the face of the earth; and the last glories of Venice sank
for ever beneath the sea as the waters of the Adriatic came -
thundering landwards after the hammer-blow from space.


 Six hundred thousand people died, and the total dam
age was more than a trillion dollars. But the loss to art, to
history, to science - to the whole human race, for the rest
of time - was beyond all computation. It was as if a great
war had been fought and lost in a single morning; and
few could draw much pleasure from the fact that, as the
dust of destruction slowly settled, for months the whole
world witnessed the most splendid dawns and sunsets
since Krakatoa. -


 After the initial shock, mankind reacted with a de-
termination and a unity that no earlier age could have
shown. Such a disaster, it was realized, might not occur
again for a thousand years - but it might occur tomor-
row. And the next time, the consequences could be even
worse.


 Very well; there would be no next time.


 A hundred years earlier a much poorer world, with far
feebler resources, had squandered its wealth attempting to
destroy weapons launched, suicidally, by mankind
against itself. The effort had never been successful, but
the skills acquired then had not been forgotten. Now
they could be used for a far nobler purpose, and on an
infinitely vaster stage. No meteorite large enough to
cause catastrophe would ever again be allowed to breach
the defences of Earth.


 So began Project SPACEGUARD. Fifty years later - and
in a way that none of its designers could ever have an-
ticipated - it justified its existence.