CHAPTER TWELVE - The Stairway of the Gods


In the clear, cold atmosphere of Rama, the beam of the
searchlight was completely invisible. Three kilometres
down from the central Hub, the hundred-metre wide oval
of light lay across a section of that colossal stairway. A
brilliant oasis in the surrounding darkness, it was sweep-
ing slowly towards the curved plain still five kilometres
below; and in its centre moved a trio of ant-like figures,
casting long shadows before them.


 It had been, just as they had hoped and expected, a
completely uneventful descent. They had paused briefly
at the first platform, and Norton had walked a few hun-
dred metres along the narrow, curving ledge before start-
ing the slide down to the second level. Here they had
discarded their oxygen gear, and revelled in the strange
luxury of being able to breathe without mechanical aids.
Now they could explore in comfort, freed from the great-
est danger that confronts a man in space, and forgetting
all worries about suit integrity and oxygen reserve.


 By the time they had reached the fifth level, and there
was only one more section to go, gravity had reached al-
most half its terrestrial value. Rama's centrifugal spin
was at last exerting its real strength; they were surrender-
ing themselves to the implacable force which rules every
planet, and which can exert a merciless price for the
smallest slip. It was still very easy to go downwards; but
the thought of the return, up those thousands upon thou-
sands of steps, was already beginning to prey upon their
minds.


 The stairway had long - ago ceased its vertiginous
downward plunge and was now flattening out towards
the horizontal. The gradient was now only about s in 5;
at the beginning, it had been 5 in i. Normal walking was
now both physically, and psychologically, acceptable;
only the lowered gravity reminded them that they were
not descending some great stairway on Earth. Norton had
once visited the ruins of an Aztec temple, and the feelings
he had then experienced came echoing back to him -
amplified a hundred times. Here was the same sense of
awe and mystery, and the sadness of the irrevocably van-
ished past. Yet the scale here was so much greater, both in
time and space, that the mind was unable to do it justice;
after a while, it ceased to respond. Norton wondered if,
sooner or later, he would take even Rama for granted.


 And there was another respect in which the parallel
with terrestrial ruins failed completely. Rama was hun-
dreds of times older than any structure that had survived
on Earth - even the Great Pyramid. But everything
looked absolutely new; there was no sign of wear and
tear.


 Norton had puzzled over this a good deal, and had
arrived at a tentative explanation. Everything that they
had so far examined was part of an emergency back-up
system, very seldom put to actual use. He could not imag-
ine that the Ramans - unless they were physical fitness
fanatics of the kind not uncommon on Earth - ever
walked up and down this incredible stairway, or its two
identical companions completing the invisible Y far
above his head. Perhaps they had only been required
during the actual construction of Rama, and had served
no purpose since that distant day. That theory would do
for the moment, yet it did not feel right. There was some-
thing wrong, somewhere...


 They did not slide for the last kilometre but went
down the steps two at a time in long, gentle strides; this
way, Norton decided, they would give more exercise to
muscles that would soon have to be used. And so the end
of the stairway came upon them almost unawares; sud-
denly, there were no more steps - only a flat plain, dull
grey in the now weakening beam of the Hub searchlight,
fading away into the darkness a few hundred metres
ahead.


 Norton looked back along the beam, towards its source
up on the axis more than eight kilometres away. He knew
that Mercer would be watching through the telescope, so
he waved to him cheerfully.


 'Captain here,' he reported over the radio. 'Everyone in
fine shape - no problems. Proceeding as planned.'


 'Good,' replied Mercer. 'We'll be watching.'


 There was a brief silence; then a new voice cut in.
'This is the Exec, on board ship. Really, Skipper, this
isn't good enough. You know the news services have been
screaming at us for the last week. I don't expect deathless
prose, but can't you do better than that?'


 'I'll try,' Norton chuckled. 'But remember there's
nothing to see yet. It's like - well, being on a huge, dark-
ened stage, with a single spotlight. The first few hundred
steps of the stairway, rise out of it until they disappear
into the darkness overhead. What we can see of the plain
looks perfectly flat - the curvature's too small to be vis-
ible over this limited area. And that's about it.'


 'Like to give any impressions?'


 'Well, it's still very cold - below freezing - and we're
glad of our thermosuits. And quiet of course; quieter than
anything I've ever known on Earth, or in space, where
there's always some background noise. Here, every sound
is swallowed up; the space around us is so enormous that
there aren't any echoes. It's weird, but I hope we'll get
used to it.'


 'Thanks, Skipper. Anyone else - Joe, Boris?'


 Lt Joe Calvert, never at a loss for words, was happy to
oblige.


 'I can't help thinking that this is the first time - ever
- that we've been able to walk on another world, breath-
ing its natural atmosphere - though I suppose "natural" is
hardly the word you can apply to a place like this. Still,
Rama must resemble the world of its builders; our own
spaceships are all miniature earths. Two examples are
damned poor statistics, but does this mean that all in-
telligent life-forms are oxygen eaters? What we've seen of
their work suggests that the Ramans were humanoid,
though perhaps about fifty per cent taller than we are.
Wouldn't you agree, Boris?'


 Is Joe teasing Boris? Norton asked himself. I wonder
how he's going to react? ...


 To all his shipmates, Boris Rodrigo was something of
an enigma. The quiet, dignified communications officer
was- popular with the rest of the crew, but he never en-
tered fully into their activities and always seemed a little
apart - marching to the music of a different drummer.


 As indeed he was, being a devout member of the Fifth
Church of Christ, Cosmonaut. Norton had never been
able to discover what had happened to the earlier four,
and he was equally in the dark about the Church's rituals
and ceremonies. But the main tenet of its faith was well
known: it believed that Jesus Christ was a visitor from
space, and had constructed an entire theology on that
assumption.


 It was perhaps not surprising that an unusually high
proportion of the Church's devotees worked in space in
some capacity or other. Invariably, they were efficient,
conscientious and absolutely reliable. They were univers-
ally respected and even liked, especially as they made no
attempt to convert others. Yet there was also something
slightly spooky about them; Norton could never under-
stand how men with advanced scientific and technical
training could possibly believe some of the things he had
heard Christers state as incontrovertible facts.


 As he waited for Lt Rodrigo to answer Joe's possibly
loaded question, the commander had a sudden insight
into his own hidden motives. He had chosen Boris be-
cause he was physically fit, technically qualified, and
completely dependable. At the same time, he wondered if
some part of his mind had not selected the lieutenant out
of an almost mischievous curiosity. How would a man
with such religious beliefs react to the awesome reality
of Rama? Suppose he encountered something that con-
founded his theology ... or, for that matter, confirmed
it?


 But Boris Rodrigo, with his usual caution, refused to be
drawn.


 'They were certainly oxygen breathers, and they could
be humanoid. But let's wait and see. With any luck, we
should discover what, they were like. There may be pic-
tures, statues - perhaps even bodies, over in those towns.
If they are towns.'


 'And the nearest is only eight kilometres away,' said
Joe Calvert hopefully.


 Yes, thought the commander, but it's also eight kilo-
metres back - and then there's that overwhelming stair-
way to climb again. Can we take the risk?


 A quick sortie to the 'town' which they had named
Paris had been among the first of his contingency plans,
and now he had to make his decision. They had ample
food and water for a stay of twenty-four hours; they
would always be in full view of the back-up team on the
Hub, and any kind of accident seemed virtually impos-
sible on this smooth, gently curving, metal plain. The only
foreseeable danger was exhaustion; when they got to
Paris, which they could do easily enough, could they do
more than take a few photographs and perhaps collect
some small artifacts, before they had to return?


 But even such a brief foray would be worth it; there
was so little time, as Rama hurtled sunwards towards a
perihelion too dangerous for Endeavour to match.


 In any case, part of the decision was not his to make.
Up in the ship, Dr Ernst would be watching the outputs
of the bio-telemetering sensors attached to his body. If
she turned thumbs-down, that would be that.


 'Laura, what do you think?'


 'Take thirty minutes' rest, and a five hundred calorie
energy module. Then you can start.'


 'Thanks, Doc,' interjected Joe Calvert. 'Now I can die
happy. I always wanted to see Paris. Montmartre, here we    
come.'