CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR - His Excellency Regrets...


'As you are all aware, gentlemen,' said the Martian Am-
bassador, 'a great deal has happened since our last meet-
ing. We have much to discuss - and to decide. I'm there-
fore particularly sorry that our distinguished colleague
from Mercury is not here.'


 That last statement was not altogether accurate. Dr
Bose was not particularly sorry that HE the Hermian
Ambassador was absent. It would have been much more
truthful to say that he was worried. All his diplomatic
instincts told him that something was happening, and
though his sources of information were excellent, he could
gather no hints as to what it might be.


 The Ambassador's letter of apology had been cour-
teous and entirely uncommunicative. His Excellency
had regretted that urgent and unavoidable business had
kept him from attending the meeting, either in per-
son or by video. Dr Bose found it very hard to think
of anything more urgent - or more important - than
Ram a.


 'Two of our members have statements to make. 1
would first like to call on Professor Davidson.'


 There was a rustle of excitement among the other scien-
tists on the Committee. Most of them had felt that the
astronomer, with his well-known cosmic viewpoint, was
not the right man to be Chairman of the Space Advisory
Council. He sometimes gave the impression that the activi-
ties of intelligent life were an unfortunate irrelevance in
the majestic universe of stars and galaxies, and that it was
bad manners to pay too much attention to it. This had
not endeared him to exobiologists such as Dr Perera, who
took exactly the opposite view. To them, the only pur-
pose of the Universe was the production of intelligence,
and they were apt to talk sneeringly about purely astro-
rjomical phenomena. 'Mere dead matter' was one of their
favourite phrases.


 'Mr Ambassador,' the scientist began, 'I have been
analysing the curious behaviour of Rama during the last
few days, and would like to present my conclusions. Some
of them are rather startling.'


 Dr Perera looked surprised, then rather smug. He
strongly approved of anything that startled Professor
Davidson.


 'First of all, there was the remarkable series of events
when that young lieutenant flew over to the Southern
hemisphere. The electrical discharges themselves, though
spectacular, are not important; it is easy to show that
they contained relatively little energy. But they coin-
cided with a change in Rama's rate of spin, and its atti-
tude - that is, its orientation in space. This must have
involved an enormous amount of energy; the discharges
which nearly cost Mr - er Pak his life were merely a
minor by-product - perhaps a nuisance that had to be
minimized by those giant lightning conductors at the
South Pole.


 'I draw two conclusions from this. When a spacecraft -
and we must call Rama a spacecraft, despite its fantastic
size - makes a change of attitude, that usually means it is
about to make a change of orbit. We must therefore take
seriously the views of those who believe that Rama may
be preparing to become another planet of our sun, in-
stead of going back to the st4rs.


 'If this is the case, Endeavour must obviously be pre-
pared to cast off - is that what spaceships do? - at a mo-
ment's notice. She may be in very serious danger while
she is still physically attached to Rama. I imagine that
Commander Norton is already well aware of this possi-
bility, but I think we should send him an additional
warning.'


 'Thank you very much, Professor Davidson. Yes - Dr
Solomons?'


 'I'd like to comment on that,' said the science historian.
'Rama seems to have made a change of spin without us-
ing any jets or reaction devices. This leaves only two
possibilities, it seems to me.


 'The first one is that it has internal gyroscopes, or their
equivalent. They must be enormous; where are they?


 'The second possibility - which would turn all our
physics upside down - is that it has a reactionless propul-
sion system. The so-called Space Drive, which Professor
Davidson doesn't believe in. If this is the case, Rama may
be able to do almost anything. We will be quite unable
to anticipate its behaviour, even on the gross physical
level.'


 The diplomats were obviously somewhat baffled by
this exchange, and the astronomer refused to be drawn.
He had gone out on enough limbs for one day.


 'I'll stick to the laws of physics, if you don't mind, until
I'm forced to give them up. If we've not found any gyro-
scopes in Rama, we may not have looked hard enough, or
in the right place.'


 Ambassador Bose could see that Dr Perera was getting
impatient. Normally, the exobiologist was as happy as
anyone else to engage in speculation; but now, for the
first time, he had some solid facts. His long-impoverished
science had become wealthy overnight.


 'Very well - if there are no other comments - I know
that Dr Perera has some important information.'


 'Thank you, Mr Ambassador. As you've all seen, we
have at last obtained a specimen of a Raman life-form,
and have observed several others at close quarters. Sur-
geon-Commander Ernst, Endeavour's medical officer, has
sent a full report on the spider-like creature she dis-
sected.


 'I must say at once that some of her results are baffling,
and in any other circumstances I would have refused to
believe them.


 'The spider is definitely organic, though its chemistry
differs from ours in many respects - it contains consider-
able quantities of light metals. Yet I hesitate to call it an
animal, for several fundamental reasons.


 'In the first place, it seems to have no mouth, no stom-
ach, no gut - no method of ingesting food! Also no air
intakes, no lungs, no blood, no reproductive system...


 'You may wonder what it has got. Well, there's a simple
musculature, controlling its three legs and the three whip-
like tendrils or feelers. There's a brain - fairly complex,
mostly concerned with the creature's remarkably devel-
oped triocular vision. But eighty per cent of the body
consists of a honeycomb of large cells, and this is what
gave Dr Ernst such an unpleasant surprise when she
started her dissection. If she'd been luckier she might have
recognized it in time, because it's the one Raman struc-
ture that does exist on Earth - though only in a handful
of marine animals.


 'Most of the spider is simply a battery, very much like
that found in electric cells and rays. But in this case, it's
apparently not used for defence. It's the creature's
source of energy. And that is why it has no provisions for
eating and breathing; it doesn't need such primitive
arrangements. And incidentally, this means that it would
be perfectly at home in a vacuum...


 'So we have a creature which, to all intents and pur-
poses, is nothing more than a mobile eye. It has no organs
of manipulation; those tendrils are much too feeble. If I
had been given its specifications, I would have said it was
merely a reconnaissance device.


 'Its behaviour certainly fits that description. All the
spiders ever do is to run around and look at things.
That's all they can do ...


 'But the other animals are different. The crab, the star-
fish, the sharks - for want of better words - can obviously
manipulate their environment and appear to be special-
ized for various functions. I assume that they are also
electrically powered since, like the spider, they appear to
have no mouths.


 'I'm sure you'll appreciate the biological problems
raised by all this. Could such creatures evolve naturally?
I really don't think so. They appear to be designed like
machines, for specific jobs. If I had to describe them, I
would say that they are robots - biological robots - some-
thing that has no analogy on Earth.


 'If Rama is a spaceship, perhaps they are part of its
crew. As to how they are born - or created - that's some-
thing I can't tell you. But I can guess that the answer's
over there in New York. If Commander Norton and his
men can wait long enough, they may encounter increas-
ingly more complex creatures, with unpredictable be-
haviour. Somewhere along the line they may meet the
Ramans themselves - the real makers of this world.


 'And when that happens, gentlemen, there will be no
doubt about it at all...'