CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN - Missile


The missile was still five million kilometres away when
the glare of its plasma braking jets became clearly visible
in Endeavour's main telescope. By that time the secret was
already out, and Norton had reluctantly ordered the sec-
ond and perhaps final evacuation of Rama; but he had
no intention of leaving until events gave him no alterna-
tive.


 When it had completed its braking manoeuvre, the
unwelcome guest from Mercury was only fifty kilometres
from Rama, and apparently carrying out a survey
through its TV cameras. These were clearly visible - one
fore and One aft - as were several small omni-antennas
and one large directional dish, aimed steadily at the dis-
tant star of Mercury. Norton wondered what instructions
were coming down that beam, and what information was
going back.


 Yet the Hermians could learn nothing that they did
not already know; all that Endeavour had discovered had
been broadcast throughout the solar system. This space-
craft - which had broken all speed records to get here -
could only be an extension of its makers' will, an instru-
ment of their purpose. That purpose would soon be
known, for in three hours the Hermian Ambassador to
the United Planets would be addressing the General As-
sembly.


 Officially, the missile did not yet exist. It bore no
identification marks, and was not radiating on any stan-
dard beacon frequency. This was a serious breach of law,
but even SPACEGUARD had not yet issued a formal protest.
Everyone was waiting, with nervous impatience, to see
what Mercury would do next.


 It had been three days since the missile's existence -
and origin - had been announced; all that time, the Her-
mians had remained stubbornly silent. They ,could be
very good at that, when it suited them.


 Some psychologists had claimed that it was almost im-
possible to understand fully the mentality of anyone
born and bred on Mercury. Forever exiled from Earth by
its three-times-more-powerful gravity, Hermians could
stand on the Moon and look across the narrow gap to the
planet of their ancestors - even of their own parents -
but they could never visit it. And so, inevitably, they
claimed that they did not want to.


 The pretended to despise the soft rains, the rolling
fields, the lakes and seas, the blue skies - all the things
that they could know only through recordings. Because
their planet was drenched with such solar energy that the
day time temperature often reached six hundred degrees,
they affected a rather swaggering roughness that did not
bear a moment's serious examination. In fact, they
tended to be physically weak, since they could only sur-
vive if they were totally insulated from their environ-
ment. Even if he could have tolerated the gravity, a Her-
mian would have been quickly incapacitated by a hot
day in any equatorial country on Earth.


 Yet in matters that really counted, they were tough.
The psychological pressures of that ravening star so close
at hand, the engineering problems of tearing into a stub-
born planet and wrenching from it all the necessities of
life - these had produced a spartan and in many ways
highly admirable culture. You could rely on the Her-
mians; if they promised something, they would do it -
though the bill might be considerable. It was their own
joke that, if the sun ever showed signs of going nova, they
would contract to get it under control - once the fee had
been settled. It was a non-Hermian joke that any child
who showed signs of interest in art, philosophy or ab-
stract mathematics was ploughed straight back into the
hydroponic farms. As far as criminals and psychopaths
were concerned, this was not a joke at all. Crime was one
of the luxuries that Mercury could not afford.


 Commander Norton had been to Mercury once, had
been enormously impressed - like most visitors - and had
acquired many Hermian friends. He had fallen in love
with a girl in Port Lucifer, and had even contemplated
signing a three-year contract, but parental disapproval of
anyone from outside the orbit of Venus had been too
strong. It was just as well.


 'Triple A message from Earth, Skipper,' said the
bridge. 'V9ice and back-up text from Commander-in-
Chief. Ready to accept?'


 'Check and file text; let me have the voice.


 'Here it comes.'


 Admiral Hendrix sounded calm and matter-of-fact, as if
he was issuing a routine fleet order, instead of handling a
situation unique in the history of space. But then, he was
not ten kilometres from the bomb.


 'C-in-C to Commander, Endeavour. This is a quick
summary of the situation as we see it now. You know that
the General Assembly meets at i4.oo and you'll be listen-
ing to the proceedings. It is possible that you may then
have to take action immediately, without consultation;
hence this briefing.


 'We've analysed the photos you have sent us; the veh-
icle is a standard space-probe, modified for high-impulse
and probably laser-riding for initial boost. Size and mass
are consistent with fusion bomb in the 500 to 1,ooo mega-
ton range; the Hermians use up to 1oo megatons rou-
tinely in their mining operations, so they would have had
no difficulty in assembling such a warhead.


 'Our experts also estimate that this would be the min-
imum size necessary to assure destruction of Rama. If it
was detonated against the thinnest part of the shell -
underneath the Cylindrical Sea - the hull would be rup-
tured and the spin of the body would complete its disin-
tegration.


 'We assume that the Hermians, if they are planning
such an act, will give you ample time to get clear. For
your information, the gamma-ray flash from such a bomb
could be dangerous to you up to a range of a thousand
kilometres.


 'But that is not the most serious danger. The fragments
of Rama, weighing tons and spinning off at almost a
thousand kilometres an hour, could destroy you at an
unlimited distance. We therefore recommend that you
proceed along the spin axis, since no fragments will be
thrown off in that direction. Ten thousand kilometres
should give an adequate safety margin.


 'This message cannot be intercepted; it is going by
multiple-pseudo-random routing, so I can talk in clear
English. Your reply may not be secure, so speak with dis-
cretion and use code when necessary. I will call you im-
mediately after the General Assembly discussion. Message
concluded. C-in-C, out.'