CHAPTER TWO - Intruder


 By the year 2130, the Mars-based radars were discovering
new asteroids at the rate of a dozen a day. The SPACE-
GUARD computers automatically calculated their orbits,
and stored away the information in their enormous mem-
ories, so that every few months any interested astronomer
could have a look at the accumulated statistics. These
were now quite impressive.


 It had taken more than a hundred and twenty years to
collect the first thousand asteroids, since the discovery of
Ceres, largest of these tiny worlds, on the very first day of
the nineteenth century. Hundreds had been found and
lost and found again; they existed in such swarms that
one exasperated astronomer had christened them 'vermin
of the skies'. He would have been appalled to know that
SPACEGUARD was now keeping track of half a million.
  
  Only the five giants - Ceres, Pallas, Juno, Eunomia and
Vesta - were more than two hundred kilometres in dia-
meter; the vast majority were merely oversized boulders
that would fit into a small park. Almost all moved in
orbits that lay beyond Mars; only the few that came far
enough sunwards to be a possible danger to Earth were
the concern of SPACEGUARD. And not one in a thousand of
these, during the entire future history of the solar system,
would pass within a million kilometres of Earth.
 
 The object first catalogued as 31/439, according to the
year and the order of its discovery, was detected while
still outside the orbit of Jupiter. There was nothing un-
usual about its location; many asteroids went beyond
Saturn before turning once more towards their distant
master, the sun. And Thule II, most far-ranging of all,
travelled so close to Uranus that it might well have been
a lost moon of that planet.
 
 But a first radar contact at such a distance was un-
precedented; clearly, 31/439 must be of exceptional size.
From the strength of the echo, the computers deduced a
diameter of at least forty kilometres; such a giant had not
- been discovered for a hundred years. That it had been
overlooked for so long seemed incredible.


 Then the orbit was calculated, and the mystery was
resolved - to be replaced by a greater one. 31/439 was not
travelling on a normal asteroidal path, along an ellipse
which it retraced with clockwork precision every few
years. It was a lonely wanderer between the stars, making
its first and last visit to the solar system - for it was mov-
ing so swiftly that the gravitational field of the sun could
never capture it. It would flash inwards past the orbits of
Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus and Mercury, gaining speed -
as it did so, until it rounded the sun and headed out once
again into the unknown.


 It was at this point that the computers started flashing
their 'Hi there! We have something interesting' sign,
and for the first time 31/439 came to the attention of
human beings. There was a brief flurry of excitement at
SPACEGUARD Headquarters, and the interstellar vagabond
was quickly dignified by a name instead of a mere num-
ber. Long ago, the astronomers had exhausted Greek and
Roman mythology; now they were working through
the Hindu pantheon. And so 31/439 was christened
Rama.


 For a few days, the news media made a fuss of the
visitor, but they were badly handicapped by the sparsity
of information. Only two facts were known about Rama
- its unusual orbit, and its approximate size. Even this
was merely an educated guess, based upon the strength of
the radar echo. Through the telescope, Rama still ap-
peared as a faint, fifteenth magnitude star - much too
small to show a visible disc But as it plunged in towards
the heart of the solar system, it would grow brighter and
larger, month by month; before it vanished for ever, the
orbiting observatories would be able to gather more pre-
cise information about its shape and size. There was
plenty of time, and perhaps during the next 'few years
some spaceship on its ordinary business might be routed
close enough to get good photographs. An actual rendez-
vous was most unlikely; the energy cost would be far too
great to permit physical contact with an object cutting
across the orbits of the planets at more than a hundred
thousand kilometres an hour.


 So the world soon forgot about Rama; but the as-
tronomers did not. Their excitement grew with the pass- 
ing months, as the new asteroid presented them with
more and more puzzles.


 First of all, there was the problem of Rama's light
curve. it didn't have one.


 All known asteroids, without exception, showed a slow
variation in their brilliance, waxing and waning within a
period of a few hours. It had been recognized for more
than two centuries that this was an inevitable result of
their spin, and their irregular shape. As they toppled end
over end along their orbits the reflecting surfaces they
presented to the sun were continually changing, and
their brightness varied accordingly.


 Rama showed no such changes. Either it was not spin-
ning at all or it was perfectly symmetrical. Both explana-
tions seemed equally unlikely.


 There the matter rested for several months, because
none of the big orbiting telescopes could be spared from
their regular job of peering into the remote depths of
the universe. Space astronomy was an expensive hobby,
and time on a large instrument could easily cost a thou-
sand dollars a minute. Dr William Stenton would never
have been able to grab the Farside two-hundred-metre
reflector for a full quarter of an hour, if a more impor-
tant programme had not been temporarily derailed by
the failure of a fifty cent capacitor. One astronomer's bad
luck was his good fortune.


 Bill Stenton did not know what he had caught until
the next day, when he was able to get computer time to
process his results. Even when they were finally flashed on
his display screen, it took him several minutes to under-
stand what they meant.


 The sunlight reflected from Rama was not, after all,
absolutely constant in its intensity. There was a very
small variation - hard to detect, but quite unmistakable,
and extremely regular. Like all the other asteroids, Rama
was indeed spinning. But whereas the normal 'day' for an
asteroid was several hours, Rama's was only four minutes.


 Dr Stenton did some quick calculations, and found it
hard to believe the results. At its equator, this tiny world
must be spinning at more than a thousand kilometres an
hour; it would be rather unhealthy to attempt a landing
anywhere except at the poles. The centrifugal force at
Rama's equator must be powerful enough to flick any
loose objects away from it at an acceleration of almost one
gravity. Rama was a rolling stone that could never have
gathered any cosmic moss; it was surprising that such a
body had managed to hold itself together, and- had not
long ago shattered into a million fragments.


 An object forty kilometres across, with a rotation period
of only four minutes - where did that fit into the astro-
nomical scheme of things? Dr Stenton was a somewhat
imaginative man, a little too prone to jump to conclusions.
He now jumped to one which gave him a very uncom-
fortable few minutes indeed.


 The only specimen of the celestial zoo that fitted this
description was a collapsed star. Perhaps Rama was a
dead sun - a madly spinning sphere of neutronium, every
cubic centimetre weighing billions of tons...
 
 At this point, there flashed briefly through Dr Stenton's
horrified mind the memory of that timeless classic, H. G.
Wells's The Star. He had first read it as a very small boy,
and it had helped to spark his interest in astronomy.
Across more than two centuries of time, it had lost none
of its magic and terror. He would never forget the images
of hurricanes and tidal waves, of cities sliding into the
sea, as that other visitor from the stars smashed into
Jupiter and then fell sunwards past the Earth. True, the
star that old Wells described was not cold, but incandes-
cent, and wrought much of its destruction by heat. That
scarcely mattered; even if Rama was a cold body, reflect-
ing only the light of the sun, it could kill by gravity as
easily as by fire.


 Any stellar mass intruding into the solar system would
completely distort the orbits of the planets. The Earth
had only to move a few million kilometres sunwards - or
starwards - for the delicate balance of climate to be
destroyed. The Antarctic icecap could melt and flood all
:low4ying land; or the oceans could freeze and the whole
world be locked in an eternal winter. Just a nudge in
either direction would be enough


 Then Dr Stenton relaxed and breathed a sigh of relief.
This was all nonsense; he should be ashamed of himself.


 Rama could not possibly be made of condensed matter.
No star-sized mass could penetrate so deeply into the
solar system without producing disturbances which
would have betrayed it long ago. The orbits of all the
planets would have been affected; that, after all, was how
Neptune, Pluto and Persephone had been discovered.
No, it was utterly impossible for an object as massive as a
dead sun to sneak up unobserved.


 In a way, it was a pity. An encounter with a dark star
would have been quite exciting.


 While it lasted...