CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT - Icarus


Jimmy Pak had barely time to radio: 'The wing's buck-
ling - I'm going to crash - I'm going to crash!' when
Dragonfly started to fold up gracefully around him. The
left wing snapped cleanly in the middle, and the outer
section drifted away like a gently falling leaf. The right
wing put up a more complicated performance. It twisted
round at the root, and angled back so sharply that its
tip became entangled in the tail. Jimmy felt that
he was sitting in a broken kite, slowly falling down the
sky.


 Yet he was not quite helpless; the airscrew still worked,
and while he had power there was still some measure of
control. He had perhaps five minutes in which to use it.


 Was there any hope of reaching the Sea? No - it was
much too far away. Then he remembered that he was still
thinking in terrestrial terms; though he was a good swim-
mer, it would be hours before he could possibly be res-
cued, and in that time the poisonous waters would un-
doubtedly have killed him. His only hope was to come
down on land; the problem of the sheer southern cliff he
would think about later - if there was any 'later'.
 He was falling very slowly, here in this tenth-of-a-grav-
ity zone, but would soon start to accelerate as he got fur-
ther away from the axis. However, air-drag would com-
plicate the situation, and would prevent him from build-
ing up too swift a rate of descent. Dragonfly, even without
power, would act as a crude parachute. The few kilo-
grammes of thrust he could still provide might make all the
difference between life and death; that was his only hope.


 Hub had stopped talking; his friends could see exactly
what was happening to him and knew that there was no
way their words could help. Jimmy was now doing the
most skilful flying of, his life; it was too bad, he thought
with grim humour, that his audience was so small, and
could not appreciate the finer details of his performance.


 He was going down in a wide spiral, and as long as its
pitch remained fairly flat his chances of survival were
good. His pedalling was helping to keep Dragonfly air-
borne, though he was afraid to exert maximum power in
case the broken wings came completely adrift And every
time he swung southwards, he could appreciate the fan-
tastic display that Rama had kindly arranged for his
benefit.
 The streamers of lightning still played from the tip of
Big Horn down to the lesser peaks beneath, but now the
whole pattern was rotating. The six-pronged crown of fire
was turning against the spin of Rama, making one revo-
lution every few seconds. Jimmy felt that he was watch-
ing a giant electric motor in operation. and perhaps that
was not hopelessly far from the truth.


 He was halfway down to the plain, still orbiting in a
fiat spiral, when the firework display suddenly ceased. He
could feel the tension drain from the sky and knew, with-
out looking, that the hairs on his arms were no longer
straining upright. There was nothing to distract or
hinder him now, during the last few minutes of his fight
for life.


 Now that he could be certain of the general area in
which he must land, he started to study it intently. Much
of this region was a checkerboard of totally conflicting
environments, as if a mad landscape gardener had been
given a free hand and told to exercise his imagination to
the utmost. The squares of the checkerboard were almost
a kilometre on a side, and though most of them were flat
he could not be sure if they were solid, their colours and
textures varied so greatly. He decided to wait until the
last possible minute before making a decision - it in-
deed he had any choice.


 When there were a few hundred metres to go, he made
a last call to the Hub.


 'I've still got some control - will be down in half a
minute - will call you then.'


 That was optimistic, and everyone knew it. But he re-
fused to say goodbye; he wanted his comrades to know
that he had gone down fighting, and without fear.


 Indeed, he felt very little fear, and this surprised him,
for he had never thought of himself as a particularly
brave man. It was almost as if he was watching the strug-
gles of a complete stranger, and was not himself person-
ally involved. Rather, he was studying an interesting
problem in aerodynamics, and changing various para-
meters to see what would happen. Almost the only emo-
tion he felt was a certain remote regret for lost oppor-
tunities - of which the most important was the forthcom-
ing Lunar Olympics. One future at least was decided;
Dragonfly would never show her paces on the Moon.


 A hundred metres to go; his ground speed seemed
acceptable, but how fast was he falling? And here was
one piece of luck - the terrain was completely flat. He
would put forth all his strength in a final burst of power,
starting - NOW!


 The right wing, having done its duty, finally tore off at
the roots. Dragonfly started to roll over, and he tried to
correct by throwing the weight of his body against the
spin. He was looking directly at the curving arch of land-
scape sixteen kilometres away when he hit.
 It seemed altogether unfair and unreasonable that the
sky should be so hard.