CHAPTER EIGHT - Through the Hub


Never before had Norton felt so strongly his kinship with
that long dead Egyptologist. Not since Howard Carter
had first peered into the tomb of Tutankhamen could
any man have known a moment such as this - yet the
comparison was almost laughably ludicrous.


 Tutankhamen had been buried only yesterday - not
even four thousand years ago; Rama might be older than
mankind. That little tomb in the Valley of the Kings
could have been lost in the corridors through which they
had already passed, yet the space that lay beyond this
final seal was at least a million times greater. And as for
the treasure it might hold - that was beyond imagina-
tion.


 No one had spoken over the radio circuits for at least
five minutes; the well-trained team had not even re-
ported verbally when all the checks were complete.
Mercer had simply given him the OK sign and waved
him towards the open tunnel. It was as if everyone real-
ized that this was a moment for History, not to be spoiled
by unnecessary small-talk. That suited Commander Nor-
ton, for at the moment he too had nothing to say. He
flicked on the beam of his flashlight, triggered his jets,
and drifted slowly down the short corridor, trailing his
safety line behind him. Only seconds later, he was inside.


 Inside what? All before him was total darkness; not a
glimmer of light was reflected back from the beam. He
bad expected this, but he had not really believed it. All
the calculations had shown that the far wail was tens of
kilometres away; now his eyes told him that this was in-
deed the truth. As he drifted slowly into that darkness, he
felt a sudden need for the reassurance of his safety line,
stronger than any he had ever experienced before, even
on his very first EVA. And that was ridiculous; he had
looked out across the light-years and the megaparsecs
without vertigo; why should he be disturbed by a few
cubic kilometres of emptiness?


 He was still queasily brooding over this problem when
the momentum damper at the end of the line braked him
gently to a halt, with a barely perceptible rebound. He
swept the vainly-probing beam of the flashlight down
from the nothingness ahead, to examine the surface from
which he had emerged.


 He might have been hovering over the centre of a
small crater, which was itself a dimple in the base of a
much larger one. On either side rose a complex of ter-
races and ramps - all geometrically precise and obviously
artificial - which extended for as far as the beam could
reach. About a hundred metres away he could see the exit
of the other two airlock systems, identical with this one.


 And that was all. There was nothing particularly ex-
otic or alien about the scene: in fact, it bore a consider-
able resemblance to an abandoned mine. Norton felt a
vague sense of disappointment; after all this effort, there
should have been some dramatic, even transcendental
revelation. Then he reminded himself that he could see
only a couple of hundred metres. The darkness beyond
his field of view might yet contain more wonders than he
cared to face.


 He reported briefly to his anxiously-waiting compan-
ions, then added: 'I'm sending out the flare - two min-
utes delay. Here goes.' -


 With all his strength, he threw the little cylinder
straight upwards - or outwards - and started to count
seconds as it dwindled along the beam. Before he had
reached the quarter minute it was out of sight; when he
had got to a hundred be shielded his eyes and aimed the
camera. He had always been good at estimating time; ht
was only two seconds off when the world exploded with
light. And this time there was no cause for disappoint-
ment.


 Even the millions of candlepower of the flare could not
light up the whole of this enormous cavity, but now he
could see enough to grasp its plan and appreciate its ti-
tanic scale. He was at one end of a hollow cylinder at
least ten kilometres wide, and of indefinite length. From
his viewpoint at the central axis he could see such a mass
of detail on the curving walls surrounding him that his
mind could not absorb more than a minute fraction of it.;
he was looking at the landscape of an entire world by a
single flash of lightning, and he tried by a deliberate
effort of will to freeze the image in his mind.


 All round him, the terraced slopes of the 'crater' rose
up until they merged into the solid 'wall that rimmed the
sky. No - that impression was false; he must discard the
instincts both of earth and of space, and reorientate him-
self to a new system of coordinates.


 He was not at the lowest point of this strange, inside-
out world, but the highest. From here, all directions were
down, not up. If he moved away from this central axis,
towards the curving wall which he must no longer think
of as a wall, gravity would steadily increase. When he
reached the inside surface of the cylinder, he could stand
upright on it at any point, feet towards the stars and
head towards the centre of the spinning drum. The con-
cept was familiar enough; since the earliest dawn of
spaceflight, centrifugal force had been used to simulate
gravity. It was only the scale of this application which
was so overwhelming, so shocking. The largest of all space-
stations, Syncsat Five, was less than two hundred metres
in diameter. It would take some little while to grow ac-
customed to one a hundred times that size.


 The tube of landscape which enclosed him was mottled
with areas of light and shade that could have been for-
ests, fields, frozen lakes or towns; the distance, and the
fading illumination of the flare, made identification im-
possible. Narrow lines that could be highways, canals, or
well-trained rivers formed a faintly visible geometrical
network; and far along the cylinder, at the very limit of
vision, was a band of deeper darkness. It formed a com-
plete circle, ringing the interior of this world, and Nor-
ton suddenly recalled the myth of Oceanus, the sea
which, the ancients believed, surrounded the Earth.


 Here, perhaps, was an even stranger sea - not circular,
but cylindrical. Before it became frozen in the inter-
- stellar night, did it have waves and tides and currents -
and fish?


 The flare guttered and died; the moment of revelation
was over. But Norton knew that as long as he lived these
images would be burned on his mind. Whatever discov-
eries the future might bring, they could never erase this
first impression. And History could never take from him
the privilege of being the first of all mankind to gaze
upon the works of an alien civilization.