CHAPTER FOUR - Rendezvous


Commander Norton remembered those first TV trans-
missions, which he had replayed so many times, during
the final minutes of the rendezvous. But there was one
thing no electronic image could possibly convey - and
that was Rama's overwhelming size.


 He had never received such an impression when land-
ing on a natural body like the Moon or Mars. Those were
worlds, and one expected them to be big. Yet he had also
landed on Jupiter VIII, which was slightly larger than
Rama - and that had seemed quite a small object.


 It was very easy to resolve the paradox. His judgement
was wholly altered by the fact that this was an artifact,
millions of times heavier than anything that Man had
ever put into space. The mass of Rama was at least ten
million million tons; to any spaceman, that was not only
an awe-inspiring, but a terrifying thought. No wonder
that he sometimes felt a sense of insignificance, and even
depression, as that cylinder of sculptured, ageless metal
filled more and more of the sky.


 There was also a sense of danger here, that was wholly
novel to his experience. In every earlier landing he had
known what to expect; there was always the possibility of
accident, but never of surprise. With Rama, surprise was
the only certainty.


 Now Endeavour was hovering less than a thousand
metres above the North Pole of the cylinder, at the very
centre of the slowly turning disc. This end has been
chosen because it was the one in sunlight; as Rama
rotated, the shadows of the short enigmatic structures near
the axis swept steadily across the metal plain. The north-
ern face of Rama was a gigantic sundial, measuring out
the swift passage of its four-minute day.


 Landing a five-thousand-ton spaceship at the centre of
a spinning disc was the least of Commander Norton's
worries. It was no different from docking at the axis of a
large space-station; Endeavour's lateral jets had - already
given her a matching spin, and he could trust Lieutenant
Joe Calvert to put her down as gently as a snowflake, with
or without the aid of the nay computer.


 'In three minutes,' said Joe, without taking his eyes
from the display, 'we'll know if it's made of anti-matter.'


 Norton grinned, as he recalled some of the more hair-
raising theories about Rama's origin. If that unlikely
speculation was true, in a few seconds there would be the
biggest bang since the solar system was formed. The total
annihilation of ten thousand tons would, briefly, provide
the planets with a second sun. -


 Yet the mission profile had allowed even for this re-
mote contingency; Endeavour had squirted Rama with
one of her jets from a safe thousand kilometres away.
Nothing whatsoever had happened when the expanding
cloud of vapour arrived on target - and a matter-anti-
matter reaction involving even a few milligrams would
have produced an awesome firework display.


 Norton, like all space commanders, was a cautious
man. He had looked long and hard at the northern face
of Rama, choosing the point of touchdown. After much
thought, he had decided to avoid the obvious spot - the
exact centre, on the axis itself. A clearly marked circular
disc, a hundred metres in diameter, was centred on the
Pole, and Norton had a strong suspicion that this must be
the outer seal of an enormous airlock. The creatures who
had built this hollow world must have had some way of
taking' their ships inside. This was the logical place for
the main entrance, and Norton thought it might be UN-
wise to block the front door with his own vessel.


 But this decision generated other problems. If Endive-
our touched down even a few metres from the axis,
Rama's rapid spin would start her sliding away from
the pole. At first, the centrifugal force would be very
weak, but it would be continuous and inexorable. Com-
mannered Norton did not relish the thought of 'his ship
slithering across the polar plain, gaining speed minute
by minute until it was slung off into space at a thou-
sand kilometres an hour when it reached the edge of the
disc.


 It was possible that Rama's minute gravitational field -
about one thousandth of Earth's - might prevent this
from happening. It would hold Endeavour against the
plain with a force of several tons, and if the surface was
sufficiently rough the ship might stay near the Pole. But
Commander Norton had no intention of balancing an UN-
known frictional force against a quite certain centrifugal
one.


 Fortunately, Rama's designers had provided an answer.
Equally spaced around the polar axis were three low, pill-
box shaped structures, about ten metres in diameter. If
Endeavour touched down between any two of these, the
centrifugal drift would fetch her up against them and she
would be held firmly in place, like a ship glued against
a quayside by the incoming waves.


 'Contact in fifteen seconds,' said Joe. As he tensed him-
self. above the duplicate controls, which he hoped he
would not have to touch, Commander Norton became
acutely aware of all that had come to focus on this instant
of time. This, surely, was the most momentous landing
since the first touchdown on the Moon, a century and a
half ago.


 The grey pill-boxes drifted slowly upwards outside the
control port. There was the last hiss of a reaction jet, and
a barely perceptible jar.


 In the weeks that had passed, Commander Norton had
often wondered what he would say at this moment. But
now that it was upon him, History chose his words, and
he spoke almost automatically, barely aware of the echo
from the past:


 'Rama Base. Endeavour has landed.'
As recently as a month ago, he would never have believed
it possible. The ship had been on a routine mission,
checking and emplacing asteroid warning beacons, when
the order had come. Endeavour was the only spacecraft in
the solar system which could possibly make a rendezvous
with the intruder before it whipped round the sun and
hurled itself back towards the stars. Even so, it had been
necessary to rob three other ships of the Solar Survey,
which were now drifting helplessly until tankers could
refuel them. Norton feared that it would be a long time
before the skippers of Calypso, Beagle and Challenger
would speak to him again.


 Even with all this extra propellant, it had been a long
hard chase; Rama was already inside the orbit of Venus
when Endeavour caught up with her. No other ship
could ever do so; this -privilege was unique, and not a
moment of the weeks ahead was to be wasted. A thousand
scientists on Earth would have cheerfully mortgaged
their souls for this opportunity; now they could only
watch over the TV circuits, biting their lips and thinking
how much better they could do the job. They were prob-
ably fight, but there was no alternative. The inexorable
laws of celestial mechanics had decreed that Endeavour
was the first, and the last, of all Man's ships that would
ever make contact with Rama.


 The advice he was continually receiving from Earth did
little to alleviate Norton's responsibility. If split-second
decisions had to be made, no one could help him; the
radio time-lag to Mission Control was already ten min-
utes, and increasing. He often envied the great navigators
of the past, before the days of electronic communications,
who could interpret their sealed orders without continual
monitoring from headquarters. Why they made mistakes,
no one ever knew.


 Yet at the same time, he was glad that some decisions
could be delegated to Earth. Now that Endeavour's orbit
had coalesced with Rama's they were heading sunwards
like a single body; in forty days they would reach peri-
helion, and pass within twenty million kilometres of the
sun. That was far too close for comfort; long before then,
Endeavour would have to use her remaining fuel to
nudge herself into a safer orbit. They would have per-
haps three weeks of exploring time, before they - parted
from Rama for ever.


 After that, the problem would be Earth's. Endeavour
would be virtually helpless, speeding on an orbit which
could make her the first ship to reach the stars - in ap-
proximately fifty thousand years. There was no need to
worry, Mission Control had promised. Somehow, regard-
less of cost, Endeavour would be refuelled - even if it
proved necessary to send tankers after her, and abandon
them in space once they had transferred every gramme of
propellant. Rama was a prize worth any risk, short of a
suicide mission.


 And, of course, it might even come to that. Com-
mander Norton had no illusions on this score. For the
first time in a hundred years an element of total un-
certainty had entered human affairs. Uncertainty was one
thing that neither scientists nor politicians could toler-
ate. If that was the price of resolving it, Endeavour and
her crew would be expendable.