CHAPTER TWENTY - Book of Revelation


When one of his crew called him 'Commander', or, worse
still 'Mister Norton', there was always something serious
afoot. He could not recall that Boris Rodrigo had ever
before addressed him in such a fashion, so this must be
doubly serious. Even in normal times, Lieut-Commander
Rodrigo was a very grave and sober person.


 'What's the problem, Boris?' he asked when the cabin
door closed behind them.


 'I'd like permission, Commander, to use Ship Priority
for a direct message to Earth.'


 This was unusual, though not unprecedented. Routine
'signals went to the nearest 'planetary relay - at the mo-
ment, they were working through Mercury - and even
though the transit time was only a matter of minutes, it
was often five or six hours before a message arrived at the
desk of the person for whom it was intended. Ninety-nine
per cent of the time, that was quite good enough; but in
an emergency more direct, and much more expensive,
channels could be employed, at the captain's discretion.


 'You know, of course, that you have to give me a good
reason. All our available bandwidth is already clogged
with data transmissions. Is this a personal emergency?'


 'No, Commander. It is much more important than
that. I want to send a message to the Mother Church.'


 Uh-uh, said Norton to himself. How do I handle this?


 'I'd be glad if you'll explain.'


 It was not mere curiosity that prompted Norton's re-
quest - though that was certainly' present. If be gave
Boris the priority he asked, he would have to justify his
action.


 The calm, blue eyes stared into his. He had never
known Boris to lose control, to be other than completely
self-assured. All the Cosmo-Christers were bike this; it was
one of the benefits of their faith, and it helped to make
them good spacemen. Sometimes, however, their unques-
tioning certainty was just a little annoying to those un-
fortunates who had not been vouchsafed the Revelation.


 'It concerns the purpose of Rama, Commander. I be-
lieve I have discovered it.'


 'Go on.'


 'Look at the situation. Here is a completely empty, life-
less world - yet it is suitable for human beings. It has
water, and an atmosphere we can breathe. It comes from
the remote depths of space, aimed precisely at the solar
system - something quite incredible, if it was a matter of
pure chance. And it appears not only new; it looks as if it
has never been used.'


 We've all been through this dozens of times, Norton
told himself. What could Boris add to it?


 'Our faith has told us to expect such a visitation
though we do not know exactly what form it will take.
The Bible gives hints. If this is not the Second Coming, it
may be the Second Judgement; the story of Noah des-
cribes the first. I believe that Rama is a cosmic Ark, sent
here to save - those who are worthy of salvation.'


 There was silence for quite a while in the Captain's
cabin. It was not that Norton was at a loss for words;
rather, he could think of too many questions, but he was
not sure which ones it would be tactful to ask.


 Finally he remarked, in as mild and non-committal a
voice as he could manage: 'That's a very interesting con-
cept, and though I don't go along with your faith, it's a
tantalizingly plausible one.' He was not being hypocriti-
cal or flattering; stripped of its religious overtones, Rod-
rigo's theory was at beast as convincing as half a dozen
others he had heard. Suppose some catastrophe was about
to befall the human race, and a benevolent higher in-
telligence knew all about it? That would explain every-
thing, very neatly. However, there were still a few prob-
lems...


 'A couple of questions, Boris. Rama will be at peri-
helion in three weeks; then it will round the 'sun and
leave the solar system just as fast as it came in. There's
not much time for a Day of Judgement or for shipping
across those who are, er, selected - however that's going to
be done.'


 'Very true. So when it reaches perihelion, Rama will
have to decelerate and go into a parking orbit - probably
one with aphelion at Earth's orbit. There it might make
another velocity change, and rendezvous with Earth.'


 This was disturbingly persuasive. If Rama wished to
remain in, the solar system, it was going the right way
about it. The most efficient way to slow down was to get
as close to the sun as possible, and carry out the braking
manoeuvre there. If there was any truth in Rodrigo's
theory - or some variant of it - it would soon be put to
the test.


 'One other point, Boris. What's controlling Rama
now?'


 'There is no doctrine to advise on that. It could be a
pure robot. Or it could be - a spirit. That would explain
why there are no signs of biological life-forms.'


 The Haunted Asteroid; why had that phrase popped
up from the depths of memory? Then be recalled a silly
story he had read years ago; he thought it best not to ask
Boris if he had ever run into it. He doubted if the other's
tastes ran to that sort of reading.


 'I'll tell you what we'll do, Boris,' said Norton, ab-
ruptly making up his mind. He wanted to terminate this
interview before it got too difficult, and thought he had
found a good compromise.


 'Can you sum up your ideas in less than - oh, a thou-
sand bits?'


 'Yes, I think so.'


 'Well, if you can make it sound like a straightforward
scientific theory, I'll send it, top priority, to the Rama
Committee. Then a copy can go to your Church at the
same time, and everyone will be happy.'


 'Thank you, Commander, I really appreciate it.'


 'Oh, I'm not doing this to save my conscience. I'd just
bike to see what the Committee makes of it. Even if I
don't agree with you all along the line, you may have hit
on something important.'


 'Well, we'll know at perihelion, won't we?'


 'Yes. We'll know at perihelion.'


 When Boris Rodrigo had left, Norton called the bridge
and gave the necessary authorization. He thought he had
solved the problem rather neatly; besides, just suppose
that Boris was right.


 He might have increased his chances of being among
the saved.