CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE - Phoenix


As the details of its new orbit became more and more
clearly defined, it was hard to see how Rama could pos-
sibly escape disaster. Only a handful of comets had ever
passed as close to the sun; at perihelion, it would be less
than half a million kilometres above that inferno of fus-
ing hydrogen. No solid material could withstand the
temperature of such an approach; the tough alloy that
comprised Rama's hull would start to melt at ten times
that distance.


 Endeavour had now passed its own perihelion, to every-
one's relief, and was slowly increasing its distance from
the sun. Rama was far ahead on its closer, swifter orbit,
and already appeared well inside the outermost fringes of
the corona. The ship would have a grandstand view of
the drama's final stage.


  Then, five million kilometres from the sun, and still
accelerating, Rama started to spin its cocoon. Until now,,
it had been visible under the maximum power of En-
deavour's telescopes as a tiny bright bar; suddenly it be-
gan to scintillate, like a star seen through horizon mists.
It almost seemed as if it was disintegrating; When he saw
the image breaking up, Norton felt a poignant sense of
grief at the loss of so much wonder. Then he realized that
Rama was still there, but that it was surrounded by a
shimmering haze.


 And then it was gone. In its place was a brilliant, star-
like object, showing no visible disc - as if Rama had sud-
denly contracted into a tiny ball.


 It was some time before they realized what had hap-
pened. Rama had indeed disappeared: it was now sur-
rounded by a perfectly reflecting sphere, about a hundred
kilometres in diameter. All that they could now see was
the reflection of the sun itself, on the curved portion that
was closest to them. Behind this protective bubble, Rama
was presumably safe from the solar inferno.


 As the hours passed, the bubble changed its shape. The
image of the sun became elongated, distorted. The sphere
was turning into an ellipsoid, its long axis pointed in the
direction of Rama's flight. It was then that the first ano-
malous reports started coming in from the robot observa-
tories, which, for almost two hundred years, had been
keeping a permanent watch on the sun.


 Something was happening to the solar magnetic field,
in the region around Rama. The million-kilometre-long
lines of force that threaded the corona, and drove its
wisps of fiercely ionized gas at speeds which sometimes de-
fied even the crushing gravity of the sun, were shaping
themselves around that glittering ellipsoid. Nothing was
yet visible to the eye, but the orbiting instruments re-
ported every change in magnetic flux and ultra-violet
radiation.


 And presently, even the eye could see the changes in
the corona. A faintly-glowing tube or tunnel, a hundred
thousand kilometres long, had appeared high in the
outer atmosphere of the sun. It was slightly curved, bend-
ing along the orbit which Rama was tracing, and Rama
itself - or the protective cocoon around it - was visible as a
glittering head racing faster and faster down that ghostly
tube through the corona.


 For it was still gaining speed; now it was moving at
more than two thousand kilometres a second, and there
was no question of it ever remaining a captive of the sun.
Now, at last, the Raman strategy was obvious; they had
come so close to the sun merely to tap its energy at the
source, and to speed themselves even faster on the way to
their ultimate unknown goal ...


 And presently it seemed that they were tapping more
than energy. No one could ever be certain of this, be-
cause the nearest observing instruments were thirty
million kilometres away, but there were definite indica-
tions that matter was flowing from the sun into Rama
itself, as if it was replacing the leakages and losses of ten
thousand centuries in space.


 Faster and faster Rama swept around the sun moving
now more swiftly than any object that had ever travelled
through the solar system. In less than two hours, its direc-
tion of motion had swung through more than ninety de-
grees, and it had given a final, almost contemptuous
proof of its total lack of interest in all the worlds whose
peace of mind it had so rudely disturbed.


 It was dropping out of the Ecliptic, down into the
southern sky, far below the plane in which all the planets
move. Though that, surely, could not be its ultimate goal,
it was aimed squarely at the Greater Magellanic Cloud,
and the lonely gulfs beyond the Milky Way.