CHAPTER FORTY-TWO - Temple of Glass
  
 'If we try it,' said Karl Mercer, 'do you think the bio
will stop us?'


 'They may; that's one of the things I want to find out
Why are you looking at me like that?'


 Mercer gave his slow, secret grin, which was liable to be
set off at any moment by a private joke he might or might
not share with his shipmates.


 'I was wondering, Skipper, if you think you own
Rama. Until now, you've vetoed any attempt to cut into
buildings. Why the switch? Have the Hermians given
you ideas?'


 Norton laughed, then suddenly checked himself. It was
a shrewd question, and he was not sure if the obvious
answers were the right ones.


 'Perhaps I have been ultra-cautious - I've tried to
avoid trouble. But this is our last chance; if we're forced
to retreat we won't have lost much.'


 'Assuming that we retreat in good order.'


 'Of course. But the biots have never shown hostility;
and except for the Spiders, I don't believe there's any-
thing here that can catch us - if we do have to run for
it.'


 'You may run, Skipper, but I intend to leave with dig-
nity. And incidentally, I've decided why the biots are so
polite to us.'


 'It's a little late for a new theory.'


 'Here it is, anyway. They think we're Ramans. They
can't tell the difference between one oxy-eater and an-
other.'


 'I don't believe they're that stupid.'


 'It's not a matter of stupidity. They've beep program-
med for their particular jobs, and we simply don't come
into their frame of reference.'


 'Perhaps you're right. We may find out - as soon as we
start to work on London.'


 Joe Calvert had always enjoyed those old bank-robbery
movies, but he had never expected to be involved in one.
Yet this was, essentially, what he was doing now.


 The. deserted streets of 'London' seemed full of men-
ace, though he knew that was only his guilty conscience.
He did not really believe that the sealed and windowless
structures ranged all around them were full of watchful
inhabitants, waiting to emerge in angry hordes as soon as
the invaders laid a hand on their property. In fact, he was
quite certain that this whole complex - like all the other
towns - was merely some kind of storage area.


 Yet a second fear, also based on innumerable ancient
crime dramas, could be better grounded. There might be
no clanging alarm bells and screaming sirens, but it was
reasonable to assume that Rama would have some kind
of warning system. How otherwise did the biots know
when and where their services were needed?


 'Those without goggles, turn your backs,' ordered Serg-
eant Myron. There was a smell of nitric oxides as the air
itself started to burn in the beam of the laser torch, and a
steady sizzling as the fiery knife sliced towards secrets that
had been hidden since the birth of man.


 Nothing material could resist this concentration
of power, and the cut proceeded smoothly at a rate of
several metres a minute. In a remarkably short time,
a section large enough to admit a man had been sliced
out.


 As the cut-away section showed no signs of moving,
Myron tapped it gently - then harder - then banged on
it with all his strength. It fell inwards with a hollow,
reverberating crash.


 Once again, as he had done during that very first en-
trance into Rama, Norton remembered the archaeologist
who had opened the old Egyptian tomb. He did not ex-
pect to see the glitter of gold; in fact, he had no precon-
ceived ideas at all, as he crawled through the opening, his
flashlight held in front of him.


 A Greek temple made of glass - that was his first im-
pression. The building was filled with row upon row of
vertical crystalline columns, about a metre wide and
stretching from floor to ceiling. There were hundreds of
them, marching away into the darkness beyond the reach
of his light.


 Norton walked towards the nearest column and dir-
ected his beam into its interior. Refracted as through a
cylindrical lens, the light fanned out on the far side to be
focused and refocused, getting fainter with each repeti-
tion, in the array of pillars beyond. He felt that he was in
the middle of some complicated demonstration in optics.


 'Very pretty,' said the practical Mercer, 'but what does
it mean? Who needs a forest of glass pillars?'


 Norton rapped gently on one column. It sounded solid,
though more metallic than crystalline. He was completely
baffled, and so followed a piece of useful advice he had
heard long ago: 'When in doubt, say nothing and move
on.


 As he reached the next column, which looked exactly
like the first, he heard an exclamation of surprise from
Mercer.


 'I could have sworn this pillar was empty - now there's
something inside it.'


 Norton glanced quickly back.


 'Where?' he said. 'I don't see anything.'


 He followed the direction of Mercer's pointing finger.
It was aimed at nothing; the column was still completely
transparent.


 'You can't see it?' said Mercer incredulously. 'Come
around this side. Damn - now I've lost it!'


 'What's going on here?' demanded Calvert. It was


 several minutes before he got even the first approxima-
tion to an answer.


 The columns were not transparent from every angle or
under all illuminations. As one walked around them, ob-
jects would suddenly flash into view, apparently em-
bedded in their depths like flies in amber - and would
then disappear again. There were dozens of them, all
different. They looked absolutely real and solid, yet many
seemed to occupy the identical volume of space.


 'Holograms,' said Calvert. 'Just like a museum on
Earth.'


 That was the obvious explanation, and therefore Nor-
ton viewed it with suspicion. His doubts grew as he exam-
ined the other columns, and conjured up the images
stored in their interiors.


 Hand-tools (though for huge and peculiar hands), con-
tainers, small machines with keyboards that appeared to
have been made for more than five fingers, scientific in-
struments, startlingly conventional domestic utensils, in-
cluding knives and plates which apart from their size
would not have attracted a second glance on any terres-
trial table ... they were all there, with hundreds of less
identifiable objects, often jumbled up together in the
same pillar. A museum, surely, would have some logical
arrangement, some segregation of related items. This
seemed to be a completely random collection of hard-
ware.


 They had photographed the elusive images inside a
score of the crystal pillars when the sheer variety of items
gave Norton a clue. Perhaps this was not a collection, but
a catalogue, indexed according to some arbitrary but per-
fectly logical system. He thought of the wild juxtaposi-
tions that any dictionary or alphabetized list will give,
and tried the idea on his companions.


 'I see what you mean,' said Mercer. 'The Ramans
might be equally surprised to find us putting - ah - cam-
shafts next to cameras.'


 'Or books beside boots', added Calvert, after several
seconds' hard thinking. One could play this game for
hours, he decided, with increasing degrees of impropriety.


 'That's the idea,' replied Norton. 'This may be an in-
dexed catalogue for 3-D images - templates - solid blue-
prints, if you like to call them that.'


 'For what purpose?'


 'Well, you know the theory about the biots ... the idea
that they don't exist until they're needed and then
they're created - synthesized - from patterns stored some-
where?'


 'I see,' said Mercer slowly and thoughtfully. 'So when a
Raman needs a left-handed blivet, he punches out the
correct code number, and a copy is manufactured from
the pattern in here.'


 'Something like that. But please don't ask me about the
practical details.'


 The pillars through which they had been moving had
been steadily growing in size, and were now more than
two metres in diameter. The images were correspond-
ingly larger; it was obvious that, for doubtless excellent
reasons, the Ramans believed in sticking to a one-to-one
scale. Norton wondered how they stored anything really
big, if this was the case.


 To increase their rate of coverage, the four explorers
had now spread out through the crystal columns and were
taking photographs as quickly as they could get their
cameras focused on the fleeting images. This was an
astonishing piece of luck, Norton told himself, though he
felt that he had earned it; they could not possibly have
made a better choice than this Illustrated Catalogue of
Raman Artifacts. And yet, in another way; it could
hardly have been more frustrating. There was nothing
actually here, except impalpable patterns of light and
darkness; these apparently solid objects did not really
exist.


 Even knowing this, more than once Norton felt an al-
most irresistible urge to laser his way into one of the pil-
lars, so that he could have something material to take
back to Earth. It was the same impulse, he told himself
wryly, that would prompt a monkey to grab the reflection
of a banana in a mirror.


 He was photographing what seemed to be some kind of
optical device when Calvert's shout started him running
through the pillars.


 'Skipper - Karl - Will - look at this!'


 Joe was prone to sudden enthusiasms, but what he had
found was enough to justify any amount of excitement.


 Inside one of the two-metre columns was an elaborate
harness, or uniform, obviously made for a vertically-
standing creature, much taller than a man. A very nar-
row central metal band apparently surrounded the waist,
thorax or some division unknown to terrestrial zoology.
From this rose three slim columns, tapering outwards and
ending in a perfectly circular belt, an impressive metre in
diameter. Loops equally spaced along it could only be
intended to go round upper limbs or arms. Three of
them...


 There were numerous pouches, buckles, bandoliers
from which tools (or weapons?) protruded, pipes and
electrical conductors, even small black boxes that would
have looked perfectly at home in an electronics lab on
Earth. The whole arrangement was almost as complex as
a spacesuit, though it obviously provided only partial
covering for the creature wearing it.


 And was that creature a Raman? Norton asked him-
self. We'll probably never know; but it must have been
intelligent - no mere animal could cope with all that
sophisticated equipment.


 'About two and a half metres high,' said Mercer
thoughtfully, 'not counting the bead - whatever that was
like.'


 'With three arms - and presumably three legs. The
same plan as the Spiders, on a much more massive scale.
Do you suppose that's a coincidence?'


 'Probably not. We design robots in our own image; we
might expect the Ramans to do the same.'


 Joe Calvert, unusually subdued, was looking at the dis-
play with something like awe.


 'Do you suppose they know we're here?' he half-whisp-
ered.


 'I doubt it,' said Mercer. 'We've not even reached their
threshold of consciousness - though the Hermians cer-
tainly had a good try.'


 They were still standing there, unable to drag them-
selves away, when Pieter called from the Hub, his voice
full of urgent concern.


 'Skipper - you'd better get outside.'


 'What is it - biots heading this way?'


 'No - something much more serious. The lights are go-
ing out.'