CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE - Special Delivery


Commander Norton was sleeping soundly when his per-
sonal communicator dragged him away from happy
dreams. He had been holidaying with his family on Mars,
flying past the awesome, snow-capped peak of Nix Olym-
pica - mightiest volcano in the solar system. Little Billie
had started to say something to him; now he would never
know what it was.


 The dream faded; the reality was his executive officer,
up on the ship.


 'Sorry to wake you, Skipper,' said Lieutenant-Com-
mander Kirchoff. 'Triple A priority from Headquarters.'


 'Let me have it,' Norton answered sleepily.


 'I can't. It's in code - Commander's Eyes Only.'


 Norton was instantly awake. He had received such a
message only three times in his whole career, and on each
occasion it had meant trouble.


 'Damn!' he said. 'What do we do now?'


 His Exec did not bother to answer. Each understood
the problem perfectly; it was one that Ship's Orders had
never anticipated. Normally, a commander was never
more than a few minutes away from his office and the
code book in his personal safe. If he started now, Norton
might get back to the ship - exhausted - in four or five
hours. That was not the way to handle a Class AAA Pri-
ority.


 'Jerry,' he said at length. 'Who's on the switchboard?'


 'No one; I'm making the call myself.'


 'Recorder off?'


 'By an odd breach of regulations, yes.


 Norton smiled. Jerry was the best Exec he had ever
worked with. He thought of everything.


 'OK. You know where my key is. Call me back.'


 He waited as patiently as he could for the next ten
minutes, trying - without much success - to think of
other problems. He hated wasting mental effort; it was
very unlikely that he could out-guess the message that
was coming, and he would know its contents soon
enough. Then he would start worrying effectively.


 When the Exec called back, he was obviously speaking
under considerable strain.


 'It's not really urgent Skipper - an hour won't make
any difference. But I prefer to avoid radio. I'll send it
down by messenger.'


 'But why - oh, very well - I trust your judgement. Who
will carry it through the airlocks?'


 'I'm going myself; I'll call you when I reach the Hub.'


 'Which leaves Laura in charge.'


 'For one hour, at the most. I'll get right back to the
ship.'


 A medical officer did not have the specialized training
to be acting commander, any more than a commander
could be expected to do an operation. In emergencies,
both jobs had sometimes been successfully switched; but
it was not recommended. Well, one order had already
been broken tonight...


 'For the record, you never leave the ship. Have you
woken Laura?'


 'Yes. She's delighted with the opportunity.'


 'Lucky that doctors are used to keeping secrets. Oh -
have you sent the acknowledgement?'


 'Of course, in your name.'


 'Then I'll be waiting.'


 Now it was quite impossible to avoid anxious anticipa-
tions. 'Not really urgent - but I prefer to avoid radio...'


 One thing was certain. The Commander was not going
to get much more sleep this night.