CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT - General Assembly


According to the history books - though no one could
really believe it - there had been a time when the old
United Nations had '72 members. The United planets
had only seven; and that was sometimes bad enough. In
order of distance from the Sun, they were Mercury, Earth,
Luna, Mars, Ganymede, Titan and Triton.


 The list contained numerous omissions and ambigui-
ties which presumably the future would rectify. Critics
never tired of pointing out that most of the United
Planets were not planets at all, but satellites. And how
ridiculous that the four giants, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus
and Neptune were not included ...


 But no one lived on the Gas Giants, and quite possibly
no one ever would. The same might be true of the other
major absentee, Venus. Even the most enthusiastic of
planetary engineers agreed that it would take centuries
to tame Venus; meanwhile the Hermians kept their eyes
on her, and doubtless brooded over long-range plans.


 Separate representation for Earth and Luna had also
been a bone of contention; the other members argued
that it put too much power in one corner of the solar
system. But there were more people on the Moon than
all the other worlds except Earth itself - and it was the
meeting place of the UP. Moreover, Earth and Moon
hardly ever agreed on anything, so they were not likely
to constitute a dangerous bloc.


 Mars held the asteroids in trust - except for the Icarian
group (supervised by Mercury) and a handful with pen-
helions beyond Saturn - and thus claimed by Titan. One
day the larger asteroids, such as Pallas, Vesta, Juno and
Ceres, would be important enough to have their own am-
bassadors, and membership of the UP would then reach
two figures.


 Ganymede represented not only Jupiter - and there-
fore more mass than all the rest of the solar system put
together - but also the remaining fifty or so Jovian satel-
lites, if one included temporary captures from the aster-
oid belt (the lawyers were still arguing over this). In the
same way, Titan took care of Saturn, its rings and the
other thirty-plus satellites.


 The situation for Triton was even more complicated.
The large moon of Neptune was the outermost body in
the solar system under permanent habitation; as a result,
its ambassador wore a considerable number of hats. He
represented Uranus and its eight moons (none yet occu-
pied); Neptune and its other three satellites; Pluto and
its solitary moon; and lonely, moonless Persephone. If
there were planets beyond Persephone, they too would be
Triton's responsibility. And as if that was not enough,
the Ambassador for the Outer Darkness, as he was some-
times called, had been heard to ask plaintively: 'What
about comets?' It was generally felt that this problem
could be left for the future to solve.


 And yet, in a very real sense, that future was already
here. By some definitions, Rama was a comet; they were
the only other visitors from the interstellar deeps, and
many had travelled on hyperbolic orbits even closer to
the Sun than Rama's. Any space-lawyer could make a
very good case out of that - and the Hermian Ambassa-
dor was one of the best.


 'We recognize His Excellency the Ambassador for Mer-
cury.'


 As the delegates were arranged counter-clockwise in
order of distance from the sun, the Hermian was on the
President's extreme right. Up to the very last minute, he
had been interfacing with his computer; now he removed
the synchronizing spectacles which allowed, no one else to
read the message on the display screen. He picked up his
sheaf of notes, and rose briskly to his feet.


  'Mr President, distinguished fellow delegates, I would
like to begin with a brief summary of the situation which
now confronts us.'


 From some delegates, that phrase 'a brief summary'
would have evoked silent groans among all listeners; but
everyone knew that Hermians meant exactly what they
said.


 'The giant spaceship, or artificial asteroid, which has
been christened Rama was detected over a year ago, in
the region beyond Jupiter. At first it was believed to be a
natural body, moving on a hyperbolic orbit which would
take it round the sun and on to the stars.


 'When its true nature was discovered, the Solar Survey
Vessel Endeavour was ordered to rendezvous with it. I am
sure we will all congratulate Commander Norton and his
crew for the efficient way in which they have carried out
their unique assignment.


 'At first, it was believed that Rama was dead - frozen
for so many hundreds of thousands of years that there
was no possibility of revival. This may still be true, in a
strictly biological sense. There seems general agreement,
among those who have studied the matter, that no living
organism of any complexity can survive more than a
very few centuries of suspended animation. Even at ab-
solute zero, residual quantum effects eventually erase too
much cellular information to make revival possible. It
therefore appeared that, although Rama was of enormous
archaeological importance, it did not present any major
astropolitical problems.


  'It is now obvious that this was a very naÔve attitude,
though even from the first there were some who pointed
out that Rama was too precisely aimed at the Sun for
pure chance to be involved.


 'Even so, it might have been argued -. indeed, it was
argued - that here was an experiment that had failed.
Rama had reached the intended target, but the control-
ling intelligence had not survived. This view also seems
very simple-minded; it surely underestimates the entities
we are dealing with.


 'What we failed to take into account was the possibility
of non-biological survival. If we accept Dr Perera's very
plausible theory, which certainly fits all the facts, the crea-
tures who have been observed inside Rama did not exist
until a short time ago. Their patterns, or templates, were
stored in some central information bank, and when the
time was ripe they were manufactured from available
raw materials - presumably the metallo-organic soup of
the Cylindrical Sea. Such a feat is still somewhat beyond
our own ability, but does not present any theoretical
problems. We know that solid state circuits, unlike living
matter, can store information without loss, for indefinite
periods of time.


 'So Rama is now in full operating condition, serving
the purpose of its builders - whoever they may be. From
our point of view, it does not matter if the Ramans them-
selves have all been dead for a million years, or whether
they too will be re-created, to join their servants, at any
moment. With or Without them, their will is being done
and will continue to be done.


  'Rama has now given proof that its propulsion system is
still operating. In a few days, it will be at perihelion,
where it would logically make any major orbit change.
We may therefore soon have a new planet - moving
through the solar space over which my government has
jurisdiction. Or it may. of course, make additional
changes and occupy a final orbit at any distance from the
sun. It could even become a satellite of a major planet -
such as Earth ...


 'We are therefore, fellow delegates, faced with a whole
spectrum of possibilities, some of them very serious in-
deed. It is foolish to pretend that these creatures must be
benevolent and will not interfere with us in any way. If
they come to our solar system, they need something from
it. Even if it is only scientific knowledge - consider how
that knowledge may be used


 'What confronts us now is a technology hundreds -
perhaps thousands - of years in advance of ours, and a
culture which may have no points of contact whatsoever.
We have been studying the behaviour of the biological
robots - the biots - inside Rama, as shown on the films
that Commander Norton has relayed, and we have arrived
at certain conclusions which we wish to pass on to you.


 'On Mercury we are perhaps unlucky in having no in-
digenous life-forms to observe. But, of course, we have a
complete record of terrestrial zoology, and we find in it
one striking parallel with Rama.


 'This is the termite colony. Like Rama, it is an arti-
ficial world with a controlled environment. Like Rama,
its functioning depends upon a whole series of specialized
biological machines - workers, builders, farmers - war-
riors. And although we do not know if Rama has a
queen, I suggest that the island known as New York
serves a similar function.


 'Now, it would obviously be absurd to press this anal-
ogy too far; it breaks down at many points. But I put it to
you for this reason.


 'What degree of cooperation or understanding would
ever be possible between human beings and termites?
When there is no conflict of interest, we tolerate each
other. But when either needs the other's territory or re-
sources, no quarter is given.


 'Thanks to our technology and our intelligence, we can
always win, if we are sufficiently determined. But some-
times it is not easy, and there are those who believe that,
in the long run, final victory may yet go to the ter-
mites...


 'With this in mind, consider now the appalling threat
that Rama may - I do not say must present to human
civilization. What steps have we taken to counter it, if the
worst eventuality should occur? None whatsoever; we
have merely talked and speculated and written learned
papers.


 'Well, my fellow delegates, Mercury has done more
than this. Acting under the provisions of Clause 34 of the
Space Treaty of 2057, which entitled us to take any steps
necessary to protect the integrity of our solar space, we
have dispatched a high-energy nuclear device to Rama.
We will indeed be happy if we never have to utilize it.
But now, at least, we are not helpless - as we were before.


 'It may be argued that we have acted unilaterally,
without prior consultation. We admit that. But does any-
one here imagine - with, all respect, Mister President -
that we could have secured any such agreement in the
time available? We consider that we are acting not only
for ourselves, but for the whole human race. All future
generations may one day thank us for our foresight.


 'We recognized that it would be a tragedy - even a
crime - to destroy an artifact as wonderful as Rama. If
there is any way in which this can be avoided, without
risk to humanity, we will be very happy to hear of it. We
have not found one, and time is running out.


 'Within the next few days, before Rama reaches peri-
helion, the choke will have to be made. We will, of
course, give ample warning to Endeavour - but we would
advise Commander Norton always to be ready to leave
at an hour's notice. It is conceivable that Rama may
undergo further dramatic transformations at any moment.


 'That is all, Mister President, fellow delegates. I thank
you for your attention. I look forward to your coopera-
tion.'