CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR - Dragonfly


Lieutenant James Pak was the most junior officer on
board Endeavour, and this was only his fourth mission
into deep space. He was ambitious, and due for promo-
tion; he had also committed a serious breach of regula-
tions. No wonder, therefore, that he took a long time to
make up his mind.


 It would be a gamble; if he lost, he could be in deep
trouble. He could not only be risking his career; he
might even be risking his neck. But if he succeeded, he
would be a hero. What finally convinced him was
neither of these arguments; it was the certainty that, if
he did nothing at all, he would spend the rest of his life
brooding over his lost opportunity. Nevertheless, he was
still hesitant when he asked the Captain for a private
meeting.


 What is it this time? Norton asked himself, as he analy-
sed the uncertain expression on the young officer's face.
He remembered his delicate interview with Boris Rod-
rigo; no, it wouldn't be anything like that. Jimmy was
certainly not the religious type; the only interests he had
ever shown outside his work were sport and sex, prefer-
ably combined. -


 It could hardly be the former, and Norton hoped it
was not the latter. He had encountered most of the prob-
lems that a commanding officer could encounter in this
department - except the classical one o-f an unscheduled
birth during a mission. Though this situation was the
subject of innumerable jokes, it had never happened yet;
of time.
 
 'Well, Jimmy, what is it?'


 'I have an idea, Commander. I know how to reach the
southern continent - even to the South Pole.'


 'I'm listening. How do you propose to do it?'


 'Er - by flying there.'


 'Jimmy, I've had at least five proposals to do that -
more if you count crazy suggestions from Earth. We've
looked into the possibility of adapting our spacesuit pro-
pulsors, but air drag would make them hopelessly ineffici-
ent. They'd run out of fuel before they could go ten kilo-
metres.'


 'I know that. But I have the answer.'


 Lt Pak's attitude was a curious mixture of complete
confidence and barely suppressed nervousness. Norton
was quite baffled; what was the kid worried about?
Surely he knew his commanding officer well enough to be
certain that no reasonable proposal would be laughed
out of court.


 'Well, go on. If it works, I'll see your promotion is retro-
active.'


 That little half-promise, half-joke didn't go down as
well as he had hoped. Jimmy gave a rather sickly smile,
made several false starts, then decided on an oblique ap-
proach to the subject.


 'You know, Commander, that I was in the Lunar Olym-
pics last year.'  


 'Of course. Sorry you didn't win.'


 'It was bad equipment; I know what went wrong. I
have friends on Mars who've been working on it, in
secret. We want to give everyone a surprise.'


 'Mars? But I didn't know...'


 'Not many people do - the sport's still new there; it's
only been tried in the Xante Sportsdome. But the best
aerodynamicists in the solar system are on Mars; if you
can fly in that atmosphere, you can fly anywhere.


 'Now, my idea was that if the Martians could build a
good machine, with all their know-how, it would really
perform on the Moon - where gravity is only half as
strong.'
 
 'That seems plausible, but how does it help us?'


 Norton was beginning to guess, but he wanted to give
Jimmy plenty of rope.


 'Well, I formed a syndicate with some friends in Lowell
City. They've built a fully aerobatic flyer with some re-
finements that no one has ever seen before. In lunar grav-
ity, under the Olympic dome, it should create a sensa-
tion.'


 'And win you the gold medal.'


 'I hope so.'


 'Let me see if I follow your train of thought correctly.
A sky-bike that could enter the Lunar Olympics, at a
sixth of a gravity, would be even more sensational inside
Rama, with no gravity at all. You could fly it right along
the axis, from the North Pole to the South - and back
again.'


 'Yes - easily. The one-way trip would take three hours,
non-stop. But of course you could rest whenever you
wanted to, as long as you kept near the axis.'
'It's -a brilliant idea, and I congratulate you. What a
pity sky-bikes aren't part of regular Space Survey equip-
ment.'


 Jimmy seemed to have some difficulty in finding words.
He opened his mouth several times, but nothing hap-
pened.
 
 'All right, Jimmy. As a matter of morbid interest, and
purely off the record, how did you smuggle the thing
aboard?'
 
 'Er - "Recreational Stores".'


 'Well, you weren't lying. And what about the weight?'


 'It's only twenty kilograms.'


 'Only! Still, that's not as bad as I thought. In fact, I'm
astonished you can build a bike for that weight.'


  'Some have been only fifteen, but they were too fragile
and usually folded up when they made a turn. There's no
danger of Dragonfly doing that. As I said, she's fully aero-
batic.'


 'Dragonfly - nice name. So tell me just how you plan to
use her; then I can decide whether a promotion or a
court martial is in order. Or both.'