CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - Spring


During the first 'nights' on Rama, it had not been easy to
sleep. The darkness and the mysteries it concealed were
oppressive, but even more unsettling was the silence. Ab-
sence of noise is not a natural condition; all human
senses require some input. If they are deprived of it, the
mind manufactures its own substitutes.


 And so many sleepers had complained of strange noises
- even of voices - which were obviously illusions, because
those awake had heard nothing. Surgeon-Commander
Ernst had prescribed a very simple and effective cure;
during the sleeping period, the camp was now lulled by
gentle, unobtrusive background music.


 This night, Commander Norton found the cure in-
adequate. He kept straining his ears into the darkness,
and he knew what he was listening for. But though a very
faint breeze did caress his face from time to time, there
was no sound that could possibly be taken for that of a
distant, rising wind. Nor did either of the exploring
parties report anything unusual.


 At least, around Ship's midnight, he went to sleep.
There was always a man on watch at the communications
console, in case of any urgent messages. No other precau-
tions seemed necessary.


 Not even a hurricane could have created the sound
that did wake him, and the whole camp, in a single in-
stant. It seemed that the sky was falling, or that Rama
had split open and was tearing itself apart. First there
was a rending crack, then a long-drawn-out series of
crystalline crashes like a million glass-houses being de-
molished. It lasted for minutes, though it seemed like
hours; it was still continuing, apparently moving away
into the distance, when Norton got to the message centre.


 'Hub Control! What's happened?'


 'Just a moment, Skipper. It's over by the Sea. We're
getting the light on it.'


 Eight kilometres overhead, on the axis of Rama, the
searchlight began to swing its beam out across the plain.
It reached the edge of the Sea, then started to track along
it, scanning around the interior of the world. A quarter
of the way round the cylindrical surface, it stopped.


 Up there in the sky - or what the mind still persisted in
calling the sky - something extraordinary was happening.
At first, it seemed to Norton that the Sea was boiling. It
was no longer static and frozen in the grip of an eternal
winter; a huge area, kilometres across, was in turbulent
movement. And it was changing colour; a broad band of
white was marching across the ice.


 Suddenly a slab perhaps a quarter of a kilometre on a
side began to tilt upwards like an opening door. Slowly
and majestically, it reared into the sky, glittering and
sparkling in the beam of the searchlight. Then it slid back
and vanished underneath the surface, while a tidal wave
of foaming water raced outwards in all directions from its
point of submergence.


 Not until then did Commander Norton fully realize
what was happening. The ice was breaking up. All these
days and weeks, the Sea had been thawing, far down in
the depths. It was hard to concentrate because of the
crashing roar that still filled the world and echoed round
the sky, but he tried to think of a reason for so dramatic a
convulsion. When a frozen lake or river thawed on Earth,
it was nothing like this...


 But of course! It was obvious enough, now that it had
happened. The Sea was thawing from beneath as the
solar heat seeped through the hull of Rama. And when
ice turns into water, it occupies less volume ...


 So the Sea had been sinking below the upper layer of
ice, leaving it unsupported. Day by day the strain bad
been building up; now the band of ice that encircled the
equator of Rama was collapsing, like a bridge that had
lost its central pier. It was splintering into hundreds of
floating islands, that would<crash and jostle into each
other until they too melted. Norton's blood ran suddenly
cold, when he remembered the plans that were being
made to reach New York by sledge...


 The tumult was swiftly subsiding; a temporary stale-
mate had been reached in the war between ice and water.
In a few hours, as the temperature continued to rise, the
water would win and the last vestiges of ice would dis-
appear. But in the long run, ice would be the victor, as
Rama rounded the sun and set forth once more into the
interstellar night.


 Norton remembered to start breathing again; then he
called the party nearest the Sea. To his relief, Lieutenant
Rodrigo answered at once. No, the water hadn't reached
them. No tidal wave had come sloshing over the edge of
the cliff. 'So now we know,' he added very calmly, 'why
there is a cliff.' Norton agreed silently; but that hardly
explains, he thought to himself, why the cliff on the
southern shore is ten times higher...


 The Hub searchlight continued to scan round the
world. The awakened Sea was steadily calming, and the
boiling white foam no longer raced outwards from capsiz-
ing ice-floes. In fifteen minutes, the main disturbance was
over.


 But Rama was no longer silent; it had awakened from
its sleep, and ever and again there came the sound of
grinding ice as one berg collided with another.


 Spring had been a little late, Norton told himself, but
winter had ended.


 And there was that breeze again, stronger than ever.
Rama had given him enough warnings; it was time to go.


As he neared the halfway mark, Commander Norton
once again felt gratitude to the darkness that concealed
the view above - and below. Though he knew that more
than ten thousand steps still lay ahead of him, and could
picture the steeply ascending curve in his mind's eye, the
fact that he could see only a small portion of it made the
prospect more bearable.


 This was his second ascent, and he had learned from
his mistakes on the first. The great temptation was to
dumb too quickly in this low gravity; every step was so
easy that it was very hard to adopt a slow, plodding
rhythm. But unless one did this, after the first few thou-
sand steps strange aches developed in the thighs and
calves. Muscles that one never knew existed started to
protest, and it was necessary to take longer and longer
periods of rest. Towards the end he had spent more time
resting than climbing, and even then it was not enough.
He had suffered painful leg-cramps for the next two days,
and would have been almost incapacitated had he not
been back in the zero-gravity environment of the ship.


 So this time he had started with almost painful slow-
ness, moving like an old man. He had been the last to
leave the plain, and the others were strung out along the
half-kilometre of stairway above him; he could see their
lights moving up the invisible slope ahead.


 He felt sick at heart at the failure of his mission, and
even now hoped that this was only a temporary retreat.
When they reached the Hub, they could wait until any
atmospheric disturbances had ceased. Presumably, it
would be a dead calm there, as at the centre of a cyclone,
and they could wait out the expected storm in safety.


 Once again, he was jumping to conclusions, drawing
dangerous analogies from Earth. The meteorology of a
whole world, even under steady-state conditions, was a
matter of enormous complexity. After several centuries of
study, terrestrial weather-forecasting was still not abso-
lutely reliable. And Rama was not merely a completely
novel system; it was also undergoing rapid changes, for
the temperature had risen several degrees in the last few
hours. Yet still there was no sign of the promised hurri-
cane, though there had been a few feeble gusts from ap-
parently random directions.


 They had now climbed five kilometres, which in this
low and steadily diminishing gravity was equivalent to
less than two on Earth. At the third level, three kilo-
metres from the axis, they rested for an hour, taking light
refreshments and massaging leg muscles. This was the last
point at which they could breathe in comfort; like old-
time Himalayan mountaineers, they had left their oxy-
gen supplies here, and now put them on for the final as-
cent.


 An hour later, they had reached the top of the stairway
- and the beginning of the ladder. Ahead lay the last,
vertical kilometre, fortunately in a gravity field only a
few per cent of Earth's. Another thirty-minute rest, a
careful check of oxygen, and they were ready for the final
lap.


 Once again, Norton made sure that all his men were
safely ahead of him, spaced out at twenty-metre intervals
along the ladder. From now on, it would be a slow, steady
haul, extremely boring. The best technique was to empty
the mind of all thoughts and to count the rungs as they
drifted by - one hundred, two hundred, three hundred,
four hundred...


 He had just reached twelve hundred and fifty when he
suddenly realized that something was wrong. The light
shining on the vertical surface immediately in front of
his eyes was the wrong colour - and it was much too
bright.


 Commander Norton did not even have time to check
his ascent, or to call a warning to his men. Everything
happened in less than a second.


 In a soundless concussion of light, dawn burst upon
Rama.