CHAPTER FOURTEEN - Storm Warning


'I've called this meeting of the Committee,' said His Ex-
cellency the Ambassador of Mars to the United Planets,
'because Dr Perera has something important to tell us.
He insists that we get in touch with Commander Norton
right away, using the priority channel we've been able to
establish after, I might say, a good deal of difficulty. Dr
Perera's statement is rather technical, and before we
come to it I think a summary of the present position
might be in order; Dr Price has prepared one. Oh yes -
some apologies for absence. Sir Lewis Sands is unable to
be with us because he's chairing a conference, and Dr
Taylor asks to be excused?


 He was rather pleased about that last abstention. The
anthropologist had rapidly lost interest in Rama, when it
became obvious that it would present little scope for him.
Like many others, he had been bitterly disappointed to
find that the mobile worldlet was dead; now there would
be no opportunity for sensational books and viddies
about Raman rituals and behavioural patterns. Others
might dig up skeletons and classify artifacts; that sort of
thing did not appeal to Conrad Taylor. Perhaps the only
discovery that would bring him back in a hurry would be
some highly explicit works of art, like the notorious fres-
coes of Thera and Pompeii. -


 Thelma Price, the archaeologist, took exactly the oppo-
site point of view. She preferred excavations and ruins
uncluttered by inhabitants who might interfere with dis-
passionate, scientific studies. The bed of the Mediter-
ranean had been ideal - at least until the city planners
and landscape artists had started getting in the way. And
Rama would have been perfect, except for the madden-
ing detail that it was a hundred million kilometres away
and she would never be able to visit it in person.


 'As you all know,' she began, 'Commander Norton has
completed one traverse of almost thirty kilometres, with-
out encountering any problems. He explored the curious
trench shown on your maps as the Straight Valley; its
purpose is still quite unknown, but it's clearly important
as it runs the full length of Rama - except for the break
at the Cylindrical Sea - and there are two other identical
structures 120 degrees apart round the circumference of
-the world.


 'Then the party turned left - or East, if we adopt the
North Pole convention - until they reached Paris. As
you'll see from this photograph, taken by a telescope
camera at the Hub, it's a group of several hundred build-
ings, with wide streets between them.


 'Now these photographs were taken by Commander
Norton's group when they reached the site. If Paris is a
city, it's a very peculiar one. Note that none of the build-
ings have windows, or even doors! They are all plain
rectangular structures, an identical thirty-five metres
high. And they appear to have been extruded out of the
ground - there are no seams or joints - look at this close-
up of the base of a wall - there's a smooth transition into
the ground.


 'My own feeling is that this place is not a residential
area, but a storage or supply depot. In support of that
theory, look at this photo


 'These narrow slots or grooves, about five centimetres
wide, run along all the streets, and there's one leading to
every building - going straight into the wall .There's a
striking resemblance to the street-car tracks of the early
twentieth century; they are obviously part of some trans-
port system.


 'We've never considered it necessary to have public
transport direct to every house. It would be economically
absurd - people can always walk a few hundred metres.
But if these buildings are used for the storage of heavy
materials, it would make sense.


 'May I ask a question?' said the Ambassador for Earth.


 'Of course, Sir Robert.'


 'Commander Norton couldn't get into a single build-
ing?'


 'No; when you listen to his report, you can tell he was
quite frustrated. At one time he decided that the build-
ings could only be entered from underground; then he
discovered the grooves of the transport system, and
changed his mind.'


 'Did he try to break in?'


 'There was no way he could, without explosives or
heavy tools. And he doesn't want to do that until all
other approaches have failed.'


 'I have it!' Dennis Solomons suddenly interjected. 'Co-
cooning!'


 'I beg your pardon?'


 'It's a technique developed a couple of hundred years
ago,' continued the science historian. 'Another name for
it is moth-balling. When you have something you want to
preserve, you seal it inside a plastic envelope, and then
pump in an inert gas. The original use was to protect
military equipment between wars; it was once applied to
whole ships. It's still widely used in museums that are
short of storage space; no one knows what's inside some of
the hundred-year-old cocoons in the Smithsonian base-
ment.'


 Patience was not one of Carlisle Perera's virtues; he was
aching to drop his bombshell, and could restrain himself
no longer.


 'Please, Mr Ambassador! This is all very interesting,
but I feel my information is rather more urgent.'


 'If there are no other points - very well, Dr Perera.'


 The exobiologist, unlike Conrad Taylor, had not
found Rama a disappointment. It was true that he no
longer expected to find life - but sooner or later, he had
been quite sure, some remains would be discovered of the
creatures who had built this fantastic world. The ex-
ploration had barely begun, although the time available
was horribly brief before Endeavour would be forced to
escape from her present sun-grazing orbit.


 But now, if his calculations were correct, Man's contact
with Rama would be even shorter than he had feared.
For one detail had been overlooked - because it was so
large that no one had noticed it before.


 'According to our latest information,' Perera began,
'one party is now on its way to the Cylindrical Sea, while
Commander Norton has another group setting up a sup-
ply base at the foot of Stairway Alpha. When that's estab-
lished, he intends to have at least two exploratory mis-
sions operating at all times. In this way he hopes to use
his limited manpower at maximum efficiency.
ï 'It's a good plan, but there may be no time to carry it
out. In fact, I would advise an immediate alert, and a
preparation for total withdrawal at twelve hours' notice.
Let me explain...


 'It's surprising how few people have commented on a
rather obvious anomaly about Rama. It's now well inside
the orbit of Venus - yet the interior is still frozen. But the
temperature of an object in direct sunlight at this point
is about five hundred degrees!


 'The reason of course, is that Rama hasn't had time to
warm up. It must have cooled down to near absolute zero
- two hundred and seventy below - while it was in inter-
stellar space. Now, as it approaches the sun, the outer
hull is already almost as hot as molten lead. But the
inside will stay cold, until the heat works its way through
that kilometre of rock.


 'There's some kind of fancy dessert with a hot exterior
and ice-cream in the middle - I don't remember what it's
called-'


 'Baked Alaska. It's a favourite at UP banquets, unfor-
tunately.'


 'Thank you, Sir Robert. That's the situation in Rama
at the moment, but it won't last. All these weeks, the
solar heat has been working its way through, and we ex-
pect a sharp temperature rise to begin in a few hours.
That's not the problem; by the time we'll have to leave
anyway, it will be no more than comfortably tropical.'


 'Then what's the difficulty?'


 'I can answer in one word, Mr Ambassador. Hurri-
canes.'