CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR - Space Drive


A hundred kilometres was an adequate safety margin,
Norton had decided. Rama was now a huge black rect-
angle, exactly broadside-on, eclipsing the sun. He had
used this opportunity to fly Endeavour completely into
shadow, so that the load could be taken off the ship's
cooling systems and some overdue maintenance could be
carried out. Rama's protective cone of darkness might
disappear at any moment, and he intended to make as
much use of it as he could.
 
 Rama was still turning; it had now swung through al-
most fifteen degrees, and it was impossible to believe that
some major orbit change was not imminent. On the
United Planets, excitement had now reached a pitch of
hysteria, but only a faint echo of this came to Endeavour.
Physically and emotionally, her crew was exhausted;
apart from a skeleton watch, everyone had slept for
twelve hours after take-off from the North Polar Base. On
doctor's orders, Norton himself had used electro-sedation;
even so, he had dreamed that he was climbing an infinite
stairway.


 The second day back on ship, everything had almost
returned to normal; the exploration of Rama already
seemed part of another life. Norton started to deal with
the accumulated office work and to make plans for the
future; but he refused the requests for interviews that
had somehow managed to insinuate themselves into the
Survey and even SPACEGUARD radio circuits. There were
no messages from Mercury, and the UP General Assembly
had adjourned its session, though it was ready to meet
again at an hour's notice.


 Norton was having his first good night's sleep, thirty
hours after leaving Rama, when he was rudely shaken
back to consciousness. He cursed groggily, opened a
bleary eye at Karl Mercer - and then, like any good com-
mander, was instantly wide awake.


 'It's stopped turning?'


 'Yes. Steady as a rock.'


 'Let's go to the bridge.'


 The whole ship was awake; even the simps knew that
something was afoot, and made anxious, meeping noises
until Sergeant McAndrews reassured them with swift
hand-signals. Yet as Norton slipped into his chair and
fastened the restraints round his waist, he wondered if
this might be yet another false alarm.


 Rama was now foreshortened into a stubby cylinder,
and the searing rim of the sun had peeked over one edge.
Norton jockeyed Endeavour gently back into the umbra
of the artificial eclipse, and saw the pearly splendour of
the corona reappear across a background of the brighter
stars. There was one huge prominence, at least half a mil-
lion kilometres high, that had climbed so far from the
sun that its upper branches looked like a tree of crimson
fire.


 So now we have to wait, Norton told himself. The im-
portant thing is not to get bored, to be ready to react at a
moment's notice, to keep all the instruments aligned and
recording, no matter how long it takes


 That was strange. The star field was shifting, almost as
if he had actuated the Roll thrusters. But he had touched
no controls, and if there had been any real movement, he
would have sensed it at once.


 'Skipper!' said Calvert urgently from the Nay position,
'we're rolling - look at the stars! But I'm getting no in-
strument readings!'
'Rate gyros operating?'


 'Perfectly normal - I can see the zero jitter. But we're
rolling several degrees a second!'


 'That's impossible!'


 'Of course it is - but look for yourself...'


 When all else failed, a man had to rely on eyeball in-
strumentation. Norton could not doubt that the star field
was indeed slowly rotating - there went Sirius, across the
rim of the port. Either the universe, in a reversion of
pre-Copernican cosmology, had suddenly decided to re-
volve around Endeavour; or the stars were standing still,
and the ship was turning.


 The second explanation seemed rather more likely, yet
it involved apparently insoluble paradoxes. If the ship
was really turning at this rate, he would have felt it -
literally by the seat of his pants, as the old saying went.
And the gyros could not all have failed, simultaneously
and independently.


 Only one answer remained. Every atom of Endeavour
must be in the grip of some force - and only a powerful
gravitational field could produce this effect. At least, no
other known field...


 Suddenly, the stars vanished. The blazing disc of the
sun had emerged from behind the shield of Rama, and its
glare had driven them from the sky.


 'Can you get a radar reading? What's the doppler?'


 Norton was fully prepared to find that this too was
inoperative, but he was wrong.


 Rama was under way at last, accelerating at the modest
rate of O.O15 gravities. Dr Perera, Norton told himself,
would be pleased; he had predicted a maximum of 0.02.
And Endeavour was somehow caught in its wake like a
piece of flotsam, whirling round and round behind a
speeding ship...


 Hour after hour, that acceleration held constant;
Rama was falling away from Endeavour at steadily in-
creasing speed. As its distance grew, the anomalous be-
haviour of the ship slowly ceased; the normal laws of in-
ertia started to operate again. They could only guess at
the energies in whose backlash they had been briefly
caught, and Norton was thankful that he had stationed
Endeavour at a safe distance before Rama had switched
on its drive.


 As to the nature of that drive, one thing was now cer-
tain, even though all else was mystery. There were no jets
of gas, no beams of ions or plasma thrusting Rama into
its new orbit. No one put it better than Sergeant-Profes-
sor Myron when he said, in shocked disbelief: 'There
goes Newton's Third Law.'


 It was Newton's Third law, however, upon which En-
deavour had to depend the next day, when she used her
very last reserves of propellent to bend her own orbit out-
wards from the sun. The change was slight, but it would
increase her perihelion distance by ten million kilometres.
That was the difference between running the ship's cool-
ing system at ninety-five per cent capacity - and a certain
fiery death.


 When they had completed their own manoeuvre,
Rama was two hundred thousand kilometres away, and
difficult to see against the glare of the sun. But they could
still obtain accurate radar measurements of its orbit;
and the more they observed, the more puzzled they be-
came.


 They checked the figures over and over again, until
there was no escaping from the unbelievable conclusion.
It looked as if all the fears of the Hermians, the heroics of
Rodrigo, and the rhetoric of the General Assembly, had
been utterly in vain.


 What a cosmic irony, said Norton as he looked at his
final figures, if after a million years of safe guidance
Rama's computers had made one trifling error - per-
haps changing the sign of an equation from plus to
minus.


 Everyone had been so certain that Rama would lose
speed, so that it could be captured by the sun's gravity
and thus become a new planet of the solar system. It was
doing just the opposite.


 It was gaining speed - and in the worst possible direc-
tion.


 Rama was falling ever more swiftly into the sun.