CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE - Terminal Velocity


Commander Norton had never yet lost a man, and he
had no intention of starting now. Even before Jimmy had
set off for the South Pole, he had been considering ways
of rescuing him in the event of accident; the problem,
however, had turned out to be so difficult that he had
found no answer. All that he had managed to do was to
eliminate every obvious solution.


 How does one climb a half-kilometre vertical cliff; even
in reduced gravity? With the right equipment - and
training - it would be easy enough. But there were no
piton-guns aboard Endeavour, and no one could think of
any other practical way of driving the necessary hundreds
of spikes into that hard, mirror surface.


 He had glanced briefly at more exotic solutions, some
frankly crazy. Perhaps a simp, fitted with suction pads,
could make the ascent. But even if this scheme was
practical, how long would it take to manufacture and test
such equipment - and to train a simp to use it? He
doubted if a man would have the necessary strength to
perform the feat.


 Then there was more advanced technology. The EVA
propulsion units were tempting, but their thrust was too
small, since they were designed for zero-gee operation.
They could not possibly lift the weight of a man, even
against Rama's modest gravity.


 Could an EVA thrust be sent up on automatic control,
carrying only a rescue line? He had tried out this idea on
Sergeant Myron, who had promptly shot it down in
flames. There were, the engineer pointed out, severe stab-
ility problems; they might be solved, but it would take a
long time - much longer than they could afford.


 What about balloons? There seemed a faint possibility
here, if they could devise an envelope and a sufficiently
compact source of heat. This was the only approach that
Norton had not dismissed, when the problem suddenly
ceased to be one of theory, and became a matter of life
and death, dominating the news in all the inhabited
worlds.


 While Jimmy was making his trek along the edge of
the Sea, half the crackpots in the solar system were trying
to save him. At Fleet Headquarters, all the suggestions
were considered, and about one in a thousand was for-
warded to Endeavour. Dr Carlisle Perera' arrived twice -
once via the Survey's own network, and once by PLANET-
COM, RAMA PRIORITY. It had taken the scientist approxi-
mately five minutes of thought and one millisecond of
computer time.


 At first, Commander Norton thought it was a joke in
very poor taste. Then he saw the sender's name and the
attached calculations, and did a quick double-take.


 He handed the message to Karl Mercer.


 'What do you think of this?' he asked, in as non-com-
mittal a tone of voice as he could manage.


 Karl read it swiftly, then said, 'Well I'm damned! He's
right, of course.'


 'Are you sure?'


 'He was right about the storm, wasn't he? We should
have thought of this; it makes me feel a fool.'


 'You have company. The next problem is - how do we
break it to Jimmy?'


 'I don't think we should ... until the last possible min-
ute. That's how I'd prefer it, if I was in his place. Just tell
him we're on the way.'
Though he could look across the full width of the Cylin-
drical Sea, and knew the general direction from which
Resolution was coming, Jimmy did not spot the tiny craft
until it had already passed New York. It seemed incred-
ible that it could carry six men - and whatever equip-
ment they had brought to rescue him.


 When it was only a kilometre away, he recognized
Commander Norton, and started waving. A little later
the skipper spotted him, and waved back.


 'Glad to see you're in good shape, Jimmy,' he radioed.
'I promised we wouldn't leave you behind. Now do you
believe me?'


 Not quite, Jimmy thought; until this moment he had
still wondered if this was all a kindly plot to keep up his
morale. But the Commander would not have crossed the
Sea just to say goodbye; he must have worked out some-
thing.
 
 'I'll believe you, Skipper,' he said, 'when I'm down
there on the deck. Now will you tell me how I'm going to
make it?'


 Resolution was now slowing down, a hundred metres
from the base of the cliff; as far as Jimmy could tell, she
carried no unusual equipment - though he was not sure
what he had expected to see.


 'Sorry about that, Jimmy - but we didn't want you to
have too many things to worry about.'


 Now that sounded ominous; what the devil did he
mean?


 Resolution came to a halt, fifty metres out and five
hundred below; Jimmy had almost a bird's-eye view of
the Commander as he spoke into his microphone.


 'This is it, Jimmy. You'll be perfectly safe, but it will
require nerve. We know you've got plenty of that. You're
going to jump.'


 'Five hundred metres!'


 'Yes, but at only half a gee.'


 'So - have you ever fallen two hundred and fifty on
Earth?'


 'Shut up, or I'll cancel your next leave. You should
have worked this out for yourself... it's just a question of
terminal velocity. In this atmosphere, you can't reach
more than ninety kilometres an hour - whether you fall
two hundred or two thousand metres. Ninety's a little
high for comfort, but we can trim it some more. This is
what you'll have to do, so listen carefully...'


 'I will,' said Jimmy. 'It had better be good.'


 He did not interrupt the Commander again, and made
no comment when Norton had finished. Yes, it made
sense, and was so absurdly simple that it would take a
genius to think of it. And, perhaps, someone who did not
expect to do it himself...


 Jimmy had never tried high-diving, or made a delayed
parachute drop, which would have given him some psy-
chological preparation for this feat. One could tell a man
that it was perfectly safe to walk a plank across an abyss -
yet even if the structural calculations were impeccable, he
might still be unable to do it. Now Jimmy understood
why the Commander had been so evasive about the de-
tails of the rescue. He had been given no time to brood,
or to think of objections.


 'I don't want to hurry you,' said Norton's persuasive
voice from half a kilometre below. 'But the sooner the
better.'
 
 Jimmy looked at his precious souvenir, the only flower
in Rama. He wrapped it very carefully in his grimy
handkerchief, knotted the fabric, and tossed it over the
edge of the cliff.


 It fluttered down with reassuring slowness, but it also
took a very long time getting smaller, and smaller, and
smaller, until he could no longer see it. But then Resolu-
tion surged forward, and he knew that it had been spot-
ted.


 'Beautiful!' exclaimed the Commander enthusiastic-
ally. 'I'm sure they'll name it after' you. OK - we're wait-
ing...


 Jimmy stripped off his shirt - the only upper garment
anyone ever wore in this now tropical climate - and
stretched it thoughtfully. Several times on his trek he
life.


 For the last time, he looked back at the hollow world
he alone had explored, and the distant, ominous pin-
nacles of the Big and Little Horns. Then, grasping the
shirt firmly with his right hand, he took a running jump
as far out over the cliff as he could.
 
 Now there was no particular hurry; he had a full
twenty seconds in which to enjoy the experience. But he
did not waste any time, as the wind strengthened around
him and Resolution slowly expanded in his field of view.
Holding his shirt with both hands, he stretched his arms
above his. head, so that the rushing air filled the garment
and blew it into a hollow tube.


 As a parachute, it was hardly a success; the few kilo-
metres an hour it subtracted from his speed was useful,
but not vital. It was doing a much more important job -
keeping his body vertical, so that he would arrow straight
into the sea.


 He still had the impression that he was not moving at
all, but that the water below was rushing up towards
him. Once he had committed himself, he had no sense of
fear; indeed, he felt a certain indignation against the
skipper for keeping him in the dark. Did he really think
that he would be scared to jump, if he had to brood over
it too long?


 At the very last moment, he let go of his shirt, took a
deep breath, and grabbed his mouth and nose with his
hands. As he had been instructed, he stiffened his body
into a rigid bar, and locked his feet together. He would
enter the water as cleanly as a falling spear...


 'It will be just the same,' the Commander had prom-
ised, 'as stepping off a diving board on Earth. Nothing to
it - if you make a good entry.'


 'And if I don't?' he had asked.
 
 'Then you'll have to go back and try again.'
 
 Something slapped him across the feet - hard, but not
viciously. A million slimy hands were tearing at his body;
even though his eyes were tightly closed, he could tell that
darkness was falling as he arrowed down into the depths
of the Cylindrical Sea.


 With all his strength, he started to swim upwards to-
wards the fading light. He could not open his, eyes for
more than a single blink; the poisonous water felt like
acid when he did so. He seemed to have been struggling
for ages, and more than once he had a nightmare fear
that he had lost his orientation and was really swimming
downwards. Then he would risk another quick glimpse,
and every time the light was stronger.


 His eyes were still clenched tightly shut when he broke
water. He gulped a precious mouthful of air, rolled over
on his back, and looked around.


 Resolution was heading towards him at top speed;
within seconds, eager hands had grabbed him and drag-
ged him aboard.


 'Did you swallow any water?' was the Commander's
anxious question.


 'I don't think so.'


 'Rinse out with this, anyway. That's fine. How do you
feel?'


 'I'm not really sure. I'll let you know in a minute. Oh
... thanks, everybody.' The minute was barely up when
Jimmy was only too sure how lie felt.


 'I'm going to be sick,' he confessed miserably. His res-
cuers were incredulous.


 'In a dead calm - on a flat sea?' protested Sergeant
Barnes, who seemed to regard Jimmy's plight as a direct
reflection on her skill.


 'I'd hardly call it flat,' said the Commander, waving his
arm around the band of water that circled the sky. 'But
don't be ashamed - you may have swallowed some of that
stuff. Get rid of it as quickly as you can.


 Jimmy was still straining, unheroically and unsuccess-
fully, when there was a sudden flicker of light in the sky
behind them. All eyes turned towards the South Pole,
and Jimmy instantly forgot his sickness. The Horns had
started their firework display again.


 There were the kilometre-long streamers of fire, danc-
ing from the central spike to its smaller companions.
Once again they began their stately rotation, as if invis-
ible dancers were winding their ribbons around an elec-
tric maypole. But now they began to accelerate, moving
faster and faster until they blurred into a flickering cone
of light.


 It was a spectacle more awe-inspiring than any they
had yet seen here, and it brought with it a distant crack-
ling roar which added to the impression of overwhelm-
ing power. The display lasted for about five minutes;
then it stopped as abruptly as if someone had turned a
switch.


 'I'd like to know what the Rama Committee make of
that,' Norton muttered to no one in particular. 'Has any-
one here got any theories?'


 There was no time for an answer, because at that mo-
ment Hub Control called in great excitement.


 'Resolution! Are you OK? Did you feel that?'


 'Feel what?'


 'We think it was an earthquake - it must have hap-
pened the minute those fireworks stopped.'


 'Any damage?'


 'I don't think so. It wasn't really violent - but it shook
us up a bit.'


 'We felt nothing at all. But we wouldn't, out here in
the Sea.'


 'Of course, silly of me. Anyway, everything seems quiet
now ... until next time.'
 
 'Yes, until the next time,' Norton echoed. The mystery
of Rama was steadily growing; the more they discovered
about it, the less they understood.


 There was a sudden shout from the helm.


 'Skipper - look - up there in the sky!'


 Norton lifted his eyes, swiftly scanning the circuit of
the Sea. He saw nothing, until his gaze had almost
reached the zenith, and he was staring at the other side of
the world. -


 'My God,' he whispered slowly, as he realized that the
'next time' was already almost here.


 A tidal wave was racing towards them, down the eter-
nal curve of the Cylindrical Sea.