CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE - Command Decision


 'Well, Rod, how do the Hermians fit into your theology?'


 'Only too well, Commander,' replied Rodrigo with a
humourless smile. 'It's the age-old conflict between the
forces of good and the forces of evil. And there are times
when men have to take sides in such a conflict.'


 I thought it would be something like that, Norton told
himself. This situation must have been a shock to Boris,
but he would not have resigned himself to passive acqui-
escence. The Cosmo-Christers were very energetic, compe-
tent people. Indeed, in some ways they were remarkably
like the Hermians.


 'I take it you have a plan, Rod.'


 'Yes, Commander. It's really quite simple. We merely
have to disable the bomb.'


 'Oh. And how do you propose to do that?'


 'With a small pair of wire-cutters.'


 If this had been anyone else, Norton would have as-
sumed that they were joking. But not Boris Rodrigo.


 'Now just a minute! It's bristling with cameras. Do
you suppose the Hermians will just sit and watch you?'


 'Of course; that's all they can do. When the signal
reaches them, it will be far too late. I can easily finish the
job in ten minutes.


 'I see. They certainly will be mad. But suppose the
bomb is booby-trapped so that interference sets it off?'


 'That seems very unlikely; what would be the purpose?
This bomb was built for a specific deep-space mission,
and it will be fitted with all sorts of safety devices to
prevent detonation except on a positive command. But
that's a risk I'm prepared to take - and it can be done
without endangering the ship. I've worked everything out.'


 'I'm sure you have,' said Norton. The idea was fascin-
ating - almost seductive in its appeal; he particularly
liked the idea of the frustrated Hermians; and would give
a good deal to see their reactions when they realized - too
late - what was happening to their deadly toy.


 But there were other complications, and they seemed
to multiply as Norton surveyed the problem. He was fac-
ing by far the most difficult, and the most crucial, de-
cision in his entire career.


 And that was a ridiculous understatement. He was
faced with the most difficult decision any commander had
ever had to make; the future of the entire human race
might well depend upon It. For just suppose the Her-
mians were right?
When Rodrigo had left, he switched on the DO NOT
DISTURB sign; he could not remember when he had last
used it, and was mildly surprised that it was working.
Now, in the heart of his crowded, busy ship, he was com-
pletely alone - except for the portrait of Captain James
Cook, gazing at him down the corridors of time.


 It was impossible to consult with Earth; he had already
been warned that any messages might be tapped - per-
haps by relay devices on the bomb itself. That left the
whole responsibility in his hands.


 There was a story he had heard somewhere about a
President of the United States - was it Roosevelt or
Perez? - who had a sign on his desk saying 'The buck
stops here'. Norton was not quite certain what a buck
was, but he knew when one had stopped at his desk.


 He could do nothing, and wait until the Hermians ad-
vised him to leave. How would that look in the histories
of the future? Norton was not greatly concerned with
posthumous fame or infamy, yet he would not care to be
remembered for ever as the accessory to a cosmic crime -
which it had been in his power to prevent.


 And the plan was flawless. As he had expected, Rodrigo
had worked out every detail, anticipated every possibility
even the remote danger that the bomb might be triggered
when tampered with. If that happened, Endeavour could
still be safe, behind the shield of Rama. As for Lieu-
tenant Rodrigo himself, he seemed to regard the possi-
bility of instant apotheosis with complete equanimity.


 Yet, even if the bomb was successfully disabled, that
would be far from the end of the matter. The Hermians
might try again - unless some way could be found of
stopping them. But at least weeks of time would have
been bought; Rama would be far past perihelion before
another missile could possibly reach it. By then, hope-
fully, the worst fears of the alarmists might have been
disproved. Or the reverse...


 To act, or not to act - that was the question. Never
before had Commander Norton felt such a close kinship
with the Prince of Denmark. Whatever he did, the possi-
bilities for good and evil seemed in perfect balance. He
was faced with the most morally difficult of all decisions.
If his choice was wrong, he would know very quickly. But
if he was correct - he might never be able to prove it...


 It was no use relying any further on logical arguments
and the endless mapping of alternative futures. That
way, one could go round and round in circles for ever.
The time had come to listen to his inner voices.


 He returned the calm, steady gaze across the centuries.
'I agree with you, Captain,' he whispered. 'The human
race has to live with its conscience. Whatever the Her-
mians argue, survival is not everything.'


 He pressed the call button for the bridge circuit and
said slowly, 'Lieutenant Rodrigo - I'd like to see you.


 Then he closed his eyes, hooked his thumbs in the re-
straining straps of his chair, and prepared to enjoy a few
moments of total relaxation.


 It might be some time before he would experience it
again.