CHAPTER TEN - Descent into Darkness


Commander Norton was sorely tempted - but, as captain
his first duty was to his ship. If anything went badly
wrong on this initial probe, he might have to run for it.


 So that left his second officer, Lieut-Commander Mer-
cer, as the obvious choice. Norton willingly admitted that
Karl was better suited for the mission.


 The authority on life-support systems, Macer had writ-
ten some of - the standard textbooks on the subject. He
had personally checked out innumerable types of equip-
ment, often under hazardous conditions, and his biofeed-
back control was famous. At a moment's notice he could
cut his pulse-rate by fifty per cent, and reduce respiration
to almost zero for up to ten minutes. These useful little
tricks had saved his life on more than one occasion.


 Yet despite his great ability and intelligence, he was
almost wholly lacking in imagination. To him the most
dangerous experiments or missions were simply jobs that
had to be done. He never took unnecessary risks, and had
no use at all for what was commonly regarded as courage.


 The two mottoes on his desk summed up his philos-
ophy of life. One asked WHAT HAVE YOU FORGOTTEN? The
other said HELP STAMP our BRAVERY. The fact that, he was
widely regarded as the bravest man in the Fleet was the
only thing that ever made him angry.


 Given Mercer, that automatically selected the next
man - his inseparable companion Lt Joe Calvert. It was
hard to see what the two had in common; the lightly-
built, rather highly strung navigating officer was ten years
younger than his stolid and imperturbable friend, who
certainly did not share his passionate interest in the art of
the primitive cinema.


 But no one can predict where lightning will strike, and
years ago Mercer and Calvert had established an appar-
ently stable liaison. That was common enough; much
more unusual was the fact that they also shared a wife
back on Earth, who had borne each of them a child.
Commander Norton hoped that he could meet her one
day; she must be a very remarkable woman. The triangle
had lasted for at least five years, and still seemed to be an
equilateral one.


 Two men were not enough for an exploring team; long
ago it had been found that three was the optimum - for
if one man was lost, two might still escape where a single
survivor would be doomed. After a good deal of thought,
Norton had chosen Technical Sergeant Willard Myron.
A mechanical genius who could make anything work - or
design something better if it wouldn't - Myron was the
ideal man to identify alien pieces of equipment. On a
long sabbatical from his regular job as Associate Pro-
fessor at Astrotech, the Sergeant had refused to accept a
commission on the grounds that he did not wish to block
the promotion of more deserving career officers. No one
took this explanation very seriously and it was generally
agreed that Will rated zero for ambition. He might make
it to Space Sergeant, but would never be a full professor.
Myron, like countless NCOs before him, had discovered
the ideal compromise between power and responsibility.


 As they drifted through the last airlock and floated out
along the weightless axis of Rama, Lt Calvert found him-
self, as he so often did, in the middle of a movie flash-
back. He sometimes wondered if he should attempt to
cure himself of this habit, but he could not see that it had
any disadvantages. It could make even the dullest situa-
tions interesting and - who could tell? - one day it might
save his life. He would remember what Fairbanks or
Connery or Hiroshi had done in similar circumstances...


 This time, he was about to go over the top, in one of
the early-twentieth-century wars; Mercer was the sergeant
leading a three-man patrol on a night raid into no-man's
land. It was not too difficult to imagine that they were at
the bottom of an immense shell-crater, though one that
had somehow become neatly tailored into a series of
ascending terraces. The crater was flooded with light
from three widely-spaced plasma-arcs, which gave an al-
most shadowless illumination over the whole interior.
But beyond that - over the rim of the most distant ter-
race - was darkness and mystery.


 In his mind's eye, Calvert knew perfectly well what lay
there. First there was the flat circular plain over a kilo-
metre across. Trisecting it into three equal parts, and
looking very much like broad railroad tracks, were three
wide ladders, their rungs recessed into the surface so that
they would provide no obstruction to anything sliding
over it. Since the arrangement was completely symmetri-
cal, there was no reason to choose one ladder rather than
another; that nearest to Airlock Alpha had been selected
purely as a matter of convenience.


 Though the rungs of the ladders were uncomfortably
far apart, that presented no problem. Even at the rim of
the Hub, half a kilometre from the axis, gravity was still
barely one thirtieth of Earth's. Although they were carry-
ing almost a hundred kilos of equipment and life-support
gear, they would still be able to move easily hand-over-
hand.


 Commander Norton and the back-up team accompan-
ied them along the guide ropes that had been stretched
from Airlock Alpha to the rim of the crater; then, beyond
the range of the floodlighis, the darkness of Rama lay
before them. All that could be seen in the dancing beams
of the helmet lights was the first few hundred metres of
the ladder, dwindling away across a flat and otherwise
featureless plain.


 And now, Karl Mercer told himself, I have to make my
first decision. Am I going up that ladder, or down it?


 The question was not a trivial one. They were still
essentially in zero gravity, and the brain could select any
reference system it pleased. By a simple effort of will,
Mercer could convince himself that he was looking out
across a horizontal plain, or up the face of a vertical wall,
or over the edge of a sheer cliff. Not a few astronauts had
experienced grave psychological problems by choosing
the wrong coordinates when they started on a compli-
cated job.


 Mercer was determined to go head-first, for any other
mode of locomotion would be awkward; moreover, this
way he could more easily see what was in front of him.
For the first few hundred metres, therefore, he would im-
agine he was climbing upwardsd: only when the increasing
pull of gravity made it impossible to maintain the illu-
sion would he switch his mental directions one hundred
and eighty degrees.


 He grasped the first rung and gently propelled himself
along the ladder. Movement was as effortless as swim-
ming along the seabed - more so, in fact, for there was no
backward drag of water. It was so easy that there was a
temptation to go too fast, but Mercer was much too ex-
perienced to hurry in a situation as novel as this.


 In his earphones, he could hear the regular breathing
of his two companions. He needed no other proof that
they were in good shape, and wasted no time in conver-
sation. Though he was tempted to look back, he decided
not to risk it until they had reached the platform at the
end of the ladder.


 The rungs were spaced a uniform half metre apart, and
for the first portion of the climb Mercer missed the alter-
nate ones. But he counted them carefully, and at around
two hundred noticed the first distinct sensations of
weight. The spin of Rama was starting to make itself felt.


 At rung four hundred, he estimated that his apparent
weight was about five kilos. This was no problem, but it
was now getting hard to pretend that he was climbing,
when he was being firmly dragged upwards.


 The five hundredth rung seemed a good place to
pause. He could feel the muscles in his arms responding
to the unaccustomed exercise, even though Rama was
now doing all the work and he had merely to guide him-
self.


 'Everything OK, Skipper,' he reported. 'We're just pass-
ing the halfway mark. Joe, Will - any problems?'


 'I'm fine - what are you stopping for?' Joe Calvert an-
swered.


 'Same here,' added Sergeant Myron. 'But watch out for
the Coriolis force. It's starting to build up.'


 So Mercer had already noticed. When he let go of the
rungs he had a distinct tendency to drift off to the right.
He knew perfectly well that this was merely the effect of
Rama's spin, but it seemed as if some mysterious force
was gently pushing him away from the ladder.


 Perhaps it was time to start going feet-first, now that
'down' was beginning to have a physical meaning. He
would run the risk of a momentary disorientation.


 'Watch out - I'm going to swing round.'


 Holding firmly on to the rung, he used his arms to
twist himself round a hundred and eighty degrees, and
found himself momentarily blinded by the lights of his
companions. Far above them - and now it really was
above - he could see a fainter glow along the rim of the
sheer cliff. Silhouetted against it were the figures of Com-
mander Norton and the back-up team, watching him in-
tently. They seemed very small and far away, and he gave
them a reassuring wave.


 He released his grip, and let Rama's still feeble pseudo-
gravity take over. The drop from one rung to the next
required more than two seconds; on Earth, in the same
time, a man would have fallen thirty metres.


 The rate of fall was so painfully slow that he hurried
things up a trifle by pushing with his hands, gliding over
spans of a dozen rungs at a time, and checking himself
with his feet whenever he felt he was travelling too fast.


 At rung seven hundred, he came to another halt and
swung the beam of his helmet-lamp downwards; as he
had calculated, the beginning of the stairway was only
fifty metres below.


 A few minutes later, they were on the first step. It was a
strange experience, after months in space, to stand up-
right on a solid surface, and to feel it pressing against
one's feet. Their weight was still less than ten kilogrammes,
but that was enough to give a feeling of stability. When
he closed his eyes, Mercer could believe that he once more
had a real world beneath him.


 The ledge or platform from which the stairway des-
cended was about ten metres wide, and curved upwards
on each side until it disappeared into the darkness. Mer-
cer knew that it formed a complete circle and that if he
walked along it for five kilometres he would come right
back to his starting-point, having circumnavigated Rama.


 At the fractional gravity that existed here, however,
real walking was impossible; one could only bound along
in giant strides. And therein lay danger.


 The stairway that swooped down into the darkness, far
below the range of their lights, would be deceptively easy
to descend. But it would be essential to hold on to the tall
handrail that flanked it on either side; too bold a step
might send an incautious traveller arching far out into
space. He would hit the surface again perhaps a hundred
metres lower down; the impact would be harmless, but its
consequences might not be - for the spin of Rama would
have moved the stairway off to the left. And so a falling
body would hit against the smooth curve that swept in
an unbroken arc to the plain almost seven kilometres
below.


 That, Mercer told himself, would be a hell of a tobog-
gan ride; the terminal speed, even in this gravity, could
be several hundred kilometres an hour. Perhaps it would
be possible to apply-enough friction to check such a head-
long descent; if so, this might even be the most con-
venient way to reach the inner surface of Rama. But
some very cautious experimenting would be necessary
first.


 'Skipper,' reported Mercer, 'there were no problems
getting down the ladder. If you agree, I'd like to continue
towards the next platform. I want to time our rate of
descent on the stairway.'


 Norton replied without hesitation.


 'Go ahead.' He did not need to add, 'Proceed with cau-
tion.'


 It did not take Mercer long to make a fundamental
discovery. It was impossible, at least at this one-twentieth-
of-a-gravity level, to walk down the stairway in the nor-
mal manner. Any attempt to do so resulted in a slow-
motion dream-like movement that was intolerably tedi-
ous; the only practical way was to ignore the steps, and to
use the handrail to pull oneself downwards.


 Calvert had come to the same conclusion.


 'This stairway was built to walk up, not down!' he
exclaimed. 'You can use the steps when you're moving
against gravity, but they're just a nuisance in this direc-
tion. It may not be dignified, but I think the best way
down is to slide along the handrail.'


 'That's ridiculous,' protested Sergeant Myron. 'I can't
believe the Ramans did it this way.' -


 'I doubt if they ever used this stairway - it's obviously
only for emergencies. They must have had some mech-
anical transport system to get up here. A funicular, per-
haps. That would explain those long slots running down
from the Hub.'
 
 'I always assumed they were drains - but I suppose they
could be both. I wonder if it ever rained here?'
'Probably,' said Mercer. 'But I think Joe is right, and to
hell with dignity. Here we go.'
 
 The handrail - presumably it was designed for some-
thing like hands7 was a smooth, flat, metal bar supported
on widely-spaced pillars a metre high. Commander Mer-
cer straddled it, carefully gauged the braking power he
could exert with his hands, and let himself slide.
 
 Very sedately, slowly picking up speed, he descended
into the darkness, moving in the pool of light from his
helmet-lamp. He had gone about fifty metres when he
called the others to join him.
 
 None would admit it, but they all felt like boys again.
sliding down the banisters. In less than two minutes, they
had made a kilometre descent in safety and comfort.
 
 Whenever they felt they were going too fast,. a tightened
grip on the handrail provided all the braking that was
necessary.


 'I hope you enjoyed yourselves,' Commander Norton
called when they stepped off at the second platform.
'Climbing back won't be quite so easy.'


 'That's what I want to check,' replied Mercer, who was
walking experimentally back and forth, getting the feel
of the increased gravity. 'It's already a tenth of a gee here
- you really notice the difference.'


 He walked - or, more accurately, glided - to the edge
of the platform, and shone his helmet-light down the
next section of the stairway. As far as his beam could
reach, it appeared identical with the one above - though
careful examination of photos had shown that the height
of the steps steadily decreased with the rising gravity.
The stair had apparently been designed so that the effort
required to climb it was more or less constant at every
point in its long curving sweep.


 Mercer glanced up towards the Hub of Rama, now al-
most two kilometres above him. The little glow of light,
and the tiny figures silhouetted against it, seemed hor-
ribly far away. For the first time, he was suddenly glad
that he could not see the whole length of this enormous
stairway. Despite his steady nerves and lack of imagina-
tion, he was not sure how he would react if he could see
himself like an insect crawling up the face of a vertical
saucer more than sixteen kilometres high - and with the
upper half overhanging above him. Until this moment,
he had regarded the darkness as a nuisance; now he al-
most welcomed it.


 'There's no change of temperature,' he reported to
Commander Norton. 'Still just below freezing. But the
air-pressure is up, as we expected - around three hundred
millibars. Even with this low oxygen content, it's almost
breathable; further down there will be no problems at
all. That will simplify exploration enormously. 'What a
find - the first world on which we can walk without
breathing gear! In fact, I'm going to take a sniff.'


 Up on the Hub, Commander Norton stirred a little
uneasily. But Mercer, of all men, knew exactly what he
was doing. He would already have made enough tests to
satisfy himself.


 Mercer equalized pressure, unlatched the securing clip
of his helmet, and opened it a crack. He took a cautious
breath; then a deeper one.


 The air of Rama was dead and musty, as if from a
tomb so ancient that the last trace of physical corruption
had disappeared ages ago. Even Mercer's ultra-sensitive
nose, trained through years of testing life-support systems
to and beyond the point of disaster, could detect no re-
cognizable odours. There was a faint metallic tang, and
he suddenly recalled that the first men on the Moon had
reported a hint of burnt gunpowder when they repres-
surized the lunar module. Mercer imagined that the
moon-dust-contaminated cabin on Eagle must have
smelled rather like Rama.


 He sealed the helmet again, and emptied his lungs of
the alien air. He had extracted no sustenance from it;
even a mountaineer acclimatized to the summit of Ever-
est would die quickly here. But a few kilometres further
down, it would be a different matter.


 'What else was -there to do here? He could think of
nothing, except the enjoyment of the gentle, unaccust-
omed gravity. But there was no point in growing used to
that, since they would be returning immediately to the
weightlessness of the Hub.


 'We're coming back, Skipper,' he reported. 'There's no
reason to go further - until we're ready to go all the way.'


 'I agree. We'll be timing you, but take it easy.'


 As he bounded up the steps, three or four at a stride,
Mercer agreed that Calvert had been perfectly correct;
these stairs were built to be walked up, not down. As long
as one did not look back, and ignored the - vertiginous
steepness of the ascending curve, the climb was a delight-
ful experience. After about two hundred steps, however,
he began to feel some twinges in his calf muscles, and
decided to slow down. The others had done the same;
when he ventured a quick glance over his shoulder, they
were considerably further down the slope.


 The climb was wholly uneventful - merely an- appar-
ently endless succession of steps. When they stood once
more on the highest platform, immediately beneath the
ladder, they were barely winded, and it had taken them
only ten minutes. They paused for another ten, then
started on the last vertical kilometre.


 Jump - catch hold of a rung - jump - catch - jump -
catch... it was easy, but so boringly repetitious that there
was danger of becoming careless. Halfway up the ladder
they rested for five minutes: by this time their arms as
well as their legs had begun to ache. Once again, Mercer
was glad that they could see so little of the vertical face to
which they were clinging; it was not too difficult to pre-
tend that the ladder only extended just a few metres be-
yond their circle of light, and would soon come to an -
end.


 Jump - catch a rung - jump - then, quite suddenly,
the ladder really ended. They were back at the weightless
world of the axis, among their anxious friends. The
whole trip had taken under an hour, and they felt a sense
of modest achievement.


 But it was much too soon to feel pleased with them-
selves. For all their efforts, they had traversed less than an
eighth of that cyclopean stairway.