CHAPTER T W E N T Y - O N E


"I don't think you realize, do you, the danger you are in here on Soror?"




"I've already had some experience of it; but I feel that if I showed myself in
my true colors—and I can do so now by providing proof—the apes ought to
admit me as their spiritual brother."






"That's where you're wrong. Now listen . . ."
  We were strolling through the park. The paths were almost deserted and we
had passed no more than one or two courting couples who were roused to a
momentary curiosity by my presence. I, on the other hand, stared at them
shamelessly, being firmly resolved not to miss a single opportunity to learn about
simian customs.


  They walked along together holding each other around the waist, the length
of their arms making this embrace a tight and complex encirclement. They
would often stop at a corner of a path to exchange a kiss or two. From time
to time also, after darting a furtive glance all around, they would take hold of
the low branches of a tree and swing themselves off the ground. This they
accomplished without separating, each of them using one hand and one foot
with an ease that I envied, and they would then disappear into the foliage.


  "Now listen," said Zira. "Your launch"—I had told her in detail how we had
arrived on the planet—"your launch has been discovered; at least what's left of
it after being pillaged. It has aroused the curiosity of' our researchers.


 They realize it was not manufactured here."




"Do you build similar machines?"






  "Yes, but not so perfected. From what you've told me, we're a long way behind
you. We have, however, already launched artificial satellites around our planet,
the last one even being occupied by a living being: a man. We had to destroy it
in flight because we were unable to recover it."






"I see," I said, lost in thought. "So men also serve you for this sort of
experiment."
"It can't be helped. . . . Anyway, your rocket has been discovered."


 "What about our spaceship, which has been in orbit around Soror for the last
 few months?"




  "I haven't heard anything about it. It must have escaped the notice of our
astronomers . . . but do stop interrupting me. Some of our scientists have
put forward the theory that the machine comes from another planet and that
it was inhabited. They are unable to go a step further and imagine intelligent
beings in human form."






 "But you must tell them, Zira!" I cried. "I've had enough of living like a
prisoner, even in the most comfortable of cages, even looked after by you.
Why are you hiding me away? Why not reveal the truth to everyone?"




Zira stopped short, glanced all about her, and put her hand on my arm.






"Why? It's purely in your own interests that I'm doing this. You know
Zaius?"






"Of course. I wanted to talk to you about him. Well?"






 "Did you notice the effect your first attempts at rationality produced on
him? Do you know I've tried a hundred times to tell him about you and to
suggest—ever so carefully!—that perhaps you were not a beast in spite of
appearances?"
"I've seen you having long conversations together and noticed you didn't
agree."




   "He's as stubborn as a mule and as stupid as a man!" Zira burst out. "Alas!
it's the same with almost all the orangutans. He has decreed once and for all
that your talents are due to a highly developed animal instinct, and nothing
will make him change his opinion. The unfortunate thing is, he has already
prepared a long theses on you in which he asserts that you are a tame man,
in other words, a man who has been trained to perform certain tricks
without understanding them, probably during a former period of captivity."






"The stupid beast!"






  "Certainly. The only snag is, he represents official science and he's
powerful. He is one of the highest authorities in the institute, and all my
reports have to go through him. I'm almost certain he would accuse me of
scientific heresy if I tried to reveal the truth in your case, as you suggest. I
should be dismissed. That's unimportant, but do you realize what might then
happen to you?"




 "What fate could be worse than living in a cage?"






  "Be thankful for small mercies! Do you know how I've had to scheme and
plot to prevent him from having you transferred to the encephalic section?
Nothing could restrain him if you insisted on claiming to be a rational
creature."
 "What's the encephalic section?" I asked in alarm.
"That's where we perform certain extremely tricky operations on the brain:
grafting; observation and alteration of the nervous centers; partial and even
total ablation."






"And you carry out these experiments on men!"






  "Of course. Man's brain, like the rest of his anatomy, is the one that bears
the closest resemblance to ours. It's a lucky chance that nature has put at
our disposal an animal on whom we can study our own bodies. Man serves
us in many other fields of research, as you'll come to realize. . . . At this
very moment we are undertaking an extremely important series of
experiments."


 "For which you need a considerable amount of human material."


  "A very considerable amount—which explains those drives we carry out in
the jungle to renew our supplies. Unfortunately, it's the gorillas who
organize them, and we can't stop them indulging in their favorite pastime,
which is shooting. A large number of subjects have thus been lost to
science."




"What a terrible shame," I muttered, biting my lip. "But to get back to me . .
."






"Do you know why I've insisted on keeping our secret?"






 "Am I then condemned to spend the rest of my life in a cage?"
  "Not if the plan I have in mind succeeds. But you must not drop your
mask until the time is ripe and you hold all the cards. This is what I suggest:
in a month from now we're holding our annual biological conference. It's an
important event. A large public is admitted to it and the representatives of
all the leading papers attend. Now, for us public opinion is a more powerful
element than Zaius, more powerful than all the orangutans combined, more
powerful even than the gorillas. This will be your chance. It's when this
congress is in full session that you must lift the veil; for you're going to be
introduced by Zaius, who, as I've told you, is preparing a long report on you
and your famous instinct. The best thing then would be for you to speak up
yourself to explain your case. This would cause such a sensation that Zaius
wouldn't be able to stop you. It will be up to you to explain yourself clearly
to the assembly and convince the crowd and the journalists, as you have
already convinced me."






 "And if Zaius and the orangutans put their foot down?"






 "Once the gorillas are forced to bow before public opinion,
they'll soon make those idiot orangutans see reason. Many of them, after all,
are not so stupid as Zaius; and there are also, among the scientists, a few
chimpanzees whom the Academy has been obliged to admit because of
their sensational discoveries. One of these is Cornelius, my fiance. He's the
only one to whom I have spoken about you. He has promised to do all he
can for you. Naturally, he wants to see you beforehand so as to check the
incredible account I have given him. That's partly why I've brought you
here today. I've arranged to meet him and he shouldn't be long."






  Cornelius was waiting for us near a bank of giant ferns. He was a fine-
looking chimpanzee, older than Zira certainly, but extremely young for a
learned academician. As soon as I saw him I was struck by his
exceptionally keen and intense expression.






"What do you think of him?" Zira whispered to me hi French.






  I realized from her question that I had definitely won the confidence of
this she-ape. I muttered some complimentary remark and we went up to him.


  The engaged couple embraced in the manner of the lovers in the park. He
had opened his arms wide without glancing hi my direction. In spite of
what she had told him about me, it was clear that my presence counted no
more for him than that of a pet animal. Zira herself forgot me for a moment
and they exchanged long kisses on the muzzle. Then she stiffened, broke
free from him, and bashfully lowered her eyes.




 "Darling, we are not alone."
    "Yes, I am here," I said with dignity in my best simian language.


    "What's that?" Cornelius exclaimed with a start.


 "I said, I am here. I am sorry to have to remind you of the fact. Your
demonstrations do not embarrass me in the least, but you might hold it
against me later."


  "Well, I never!" exclaimed the learned chimpanzee. Zira burst out
laughing and introduced us.


  "Dr. Cornelius of the Academy," she said. "Ulysse Merou, an inhabitant of
the solar system or, to be more precise, the Earth."




"I am delighted to make your acquaintance," I said. "Zira has told me about
you. I congratulate you on having such a charming fiancee.


"


  And I held out my hand. He shied away as though a snake had just raised
its head in front of him.






    "So it's true?" he muttered, looking at Zira in utter bewilderment.




    "Darling, am I in the habit of telling you lies?"






 He pulled himself together. He was a man of science. After a moment's
hesitation he shook my hand.
"How do you do?"






  "How do you do?" I replied. "Once more I must apologize for appearing hi
this state of undress."


 "That's all he can think of," said Zira with a laugh. "It's a complex with
him. He does not realize the effect he would have if he were dressed."




"And you really come from . . . from?"






"From Earth, a planet of the Sun."






  He had evidently given little credit till now to Zira's confidences,
preferring to believe in some hoax. He started firing questions at me. We
were strolling along, the two of them a few paces ahead and arm in arm, I
following on the end of my chain so as not to attract the attention of the
passers-by we chanced to meet. But my replies roused his scientific
curiosity to such a pitch that he would often stop short, let go of his fiancee,
and we would embark on a discussion face to face with sweeping gestures,
tracing diagrams in the sand on the path. Zira did not mind. She appeared,
on the contrary, delighted with the impression I had made.






 Cornelius was particularly interested, of course, in the emergence of
Homo sapiens on Earth and made me tell him again and again everything I
knew about this subject. Then he pondered over it for some time. He told
me that my revelations undoubtedly constituted a document of capital
importance to science and particularly to him, as he was then engaged on
some extremely arduous research into the simian phenomenon. From what I
understood, this was still an unsolved problem to him and he did not agree
with the generally, accepted theories. But he became reticent on this subject
and did not let me know his views completely during this first encounter.




 However it might be, I was an object of great interest to him and he would
have given a fortune to have me in his laboratory. We then spoke about my
present situation and about Zaius, whose stupidity and blindness he fully
appreciated. He approved of Zira's plan. He would himself prepare the
ground by alluding to the mystery of my case in die presence of some of his
colleagues.






When he left us he held out his hand without a moment's hesitation, after
first making sure the path was deserted.






Then he kissed his fiance'e and went off, not without turning. around several
times to convince himself that I was not an hallucination.


 "A charming young ape," I said as we made our way back to the car.




"And a very great scientist. With his support I'm sure you will persuade the
congress."






 "Zira," I murmured in her ear when I was in the back seat, "I shall owe you
my liberty and my life."


  I was thinking of all she had done for me since my capture. Without her I
should never have been able to come into contact with the simian world.
Zaius would have been quite capable of having my brain removed to
demonstrate that I was not a rational being. Thanks to her, I now had some
allies and could face the future with a little more optimism.
"I did it out of love for science," she said, blushing. "You are a unique case
that must be preserved at all costs."






My heart overflowed with gratitude. I yielded to the soulfulness of her
expression, managing to overlook her physical appearance. I put my hand on
her long hairy paw. A shiver went down her spine and I discerned in her
eyes a gleam of affection. We were both deeply moved and remained silent
all the way back. When she returned me to my cage, I roughly rebuffed
Nova, who was indulging in some sort of childish demonstration to welcome
me back.