CHAPTER FIVE
"It's a woman's foot," Arthur Levain declared.
  This peremptory remark, made in a strangled voice, did not surprise me at
all. It confirmed my own opinion. The slimness, the elegance, the singular
beauty of the footprint had disturbed me profoundly. There could be no doubt
as to the humanness of the foot. Perhaps it belonged to an adolescent or to a
small man, but with much more likelihood—and this I hoped with all my heart
—to a woman.


  "So Soror is inhabited by humans," Professor Antelle murmured.




  There was a hint of disappointment in his voice, which made me at that
moment less well disposed toward him. He shrugged his shoulders with a
gesture that was habitual with him and joined us in inspecting the sand
around the lake. We discovered other footprints, obviously left by the same
creature. Levain, who had moved away from the water's edge, drew our
attention to one on the dry sand. The print itself was still damp.






"She was here less than five minutes ago," the young man exclaimed. 4,
"She was swimming, heard us coming, and fled."
  It had become an implicit fact for us that the subject under discussion was
a woman. We fell silent, scanning the forest, but without hearing so much
as the noise of a branch breaking.






"We've got all the time in the world," said the professor, shrugging his
shoulders again. "But if a human being swam here, we could no doubt do the
same without any danger."






  Without further ado the learned scientist shed his clothes and plunged his
skinny body into the pool. After our long voyage the pleasure of this swim
in cool, delicious water made us almost forget our recent discovery. Levain
alone seemed harassed and lost in thought. I was about to make a taunting
remark about his melancholy expression when I saw the woman just above
us, perched on the rocky ledge from which the cascade fell.






  I shall never forget the impression her appearance made on me. I held my
breath at the marvelous beauty of this creature from Soror, who revealed
herself to us dripping with spray, illuminated by the blood-red beams of
Betelgeuse. It was a woman—a young girl, rather, unless it was a goddess.
She boldly asserted her femininity in the light of this monstrous sun,
completely naked and without any ornament other than her hair, which
hung down to her shoulders. True, we had been deprived of any point of
comparison for over two years, but none of us was inclined to fall a victim
to mirages. It was plain to see that the woman, who stood motionless on the
ledge like a statue on a pedestal, possessed the most perfect body that could
be conceived on Earth. Levain and I were breathless, lost hi admiration, and
I think even Professor Antelle was moved.
  Standing upright, leaning forward, her breasts thrust out toward us, her
arms raised slightly backward in the attitude of a diver taking off, she was
watching us, and her surprise clearly equaled our own. After gazing at her
for a long time, I was so dazzled that I could not discern any particular
feature: her body as a whole hypnotized me. It was only after several
minutes that I saw she belonged to the white race, that her skin was golden
rather than bronzed, that she was tall, but not excessively so, and slender.
Then I noticed, as though in a dream, a face of singular purity. Finally I
looked at her eyes.






Then I became more alert, my attention sharpened, and I stiffened, for in
her expression there was an element that was new to me. In it I discerned
the outlandish, mysterious quality all of us had been expecting in a world so
distant from our own. But I was unable to analyze or even define the nature
of this oddity. I only sensed an essential difference from individuals of our
own species. It did not come from the color of her eyes: these were of a
grayish hue not often found among us, but nevertheless not unknown. The
anomaly lay hi their emanation, a sort of void, an absence of expression,
reminding me of a wretched mad girl I had once known. But no! it was not
that, it could not be madness.






When she saw that she herself was an object of curiosity— or, to be more
accurate, when my eyes met hers—she seemed to receive a shock and
abruptly looked away with an automatic gesture as swift as that of -a
frightened animal. It was not out of shame at being this scrutinized. I had a
feeling that it would have been an exaggeration to suppose her capable of
such an emotion. It was simply that her gaze would not, or could not,
withstand mine. With her head turned to one side, she now watched us
stealthily, out of the corner of her eye.






"As I told you, it's a woman," young Levain muttered.
He had spoken in a voice stifled with emotion, almost a whisper: but the
young girl heard him and the sound of his voice produced a strange effect
on her. She recoiled, but so swiftly that once again I compared her
movement to the reflex of a frightened animal pausing before taking flight.
She stopped, however, after taking two steps backward, the rocks then
concealing most of her body. I could discern no more than the top of her
head and an eye that was still trained on us.


  We dared not move a muscle, tortured by the fear of seeing her rush away.
Our attitude reassured her. After a moment she stepped out again onto the
ledge. But young Levain was decidedly too excited to! be able to hold his
tongue.




"Never in my life . . ." he began.






He stopped, realizing his imprudence. She had recoiled in the same manner
as before, as though the human voice terrified her.






  Professor Antelle motioned us to keep quiet and started splashing about in
the water without appearing to pay the slightest attention to her. We adopted
the same tactics, which met with complete success. Not only did she step
forward once more, but she soon showed a visible interest in our
movements, an interest that was manifested in a rather unusual manner,
rousing our curiosity even more. Have you ever watched a timid puppy on
the beach while his master is swimming? He longs to join him in the water,
but dares not. He takes three steps in one direction, three in another, draws
away, scampers back, shakes his head, paws the ground. Such, exactly, was
the behavior of this girl.
  And all of a sudden we heard her: but the sounds she uttered only added
to the impression of animality created by her attitude. She was then
standing on the very edge of her perch, as though about to fling herself into
the lake. She had broken off her sort of dance for a moment. She opened
her mouth. I was standing a little to one side and was able to study her
without being noticed. I thought she was going to speak, to give a shout. I
was expecting a cry. I was prepared for the most barbarous language, but
not for the strange sounds that came out of her throat; specifically out of
her throat, for neither mouth nor tongue played any part in this sort of shrill
mewing or whining, which seemed yet again to express the joyful frenzy of
an animal. In our zoos, sometimes, young chimpanzees play and wrestle
together giving just such little cries.




Since, despite our astonishment, we forced ourselves to go on swimming
without paying attention to her, she appeared to come to a decision. She
lowered herself onto the rock, took a grip on it with her hands, and started
climbing down toward us. Her agility was extraordinary. Her golden body,
appearing to us through a cloud of spray and light, like a fairy-tale vision,
moved quickly down the rock face along the thin transparent blade of the
waterfall. In a few moments, clinging to some imperceptible projections, she
was down at the level of the lake, kneeling on a flat stone. She watched us a
few seconds longer, then took to the water and swam toward us.






  We realized she wanted to play and therefore continued with our frolics,
which had given her such confidence, modifying our movements whenever
she looked startled. Soon we were all involved in a game in which she had
unconsciously laid down the rules: a strange game indeed, with a certain
resemblance to the movements of seals in a pool, which consisted of
alternately fleeing from us and approaching us, suddenly veering away
when we were almost within reach, then drawing so close as to graze us but
without ever actually coming into contact. It was childish; but what would
we not have done in order to tame the beautiful stranger! I noticed that
Professor Antelle took part in this play with unconcealed pleasure.
  This had been going on for some time, and we were getting out of breath,
when I was struck by the paradoxical nature of the girl's expression: her
solemnity. There she was, taking evident pleasure in the games she was
inspiring, yet not a smile had appeared on her face. For some time this had
given me a vague feeling of uneasiness, without my knowing exactly why.
I was now relieved to discover the reason: she neither laughed nor smiled;
from time to time she only uttered one of those little throaty cries that
evidently expressed her satisfaction.






I decided to make an experiment. As she approached me, cleaving the water
with a peculiar swimming action resembling a dog's and with her hair
streaming out behind her like the tail of a comet, I looked her straight in the
eye and, before she could turn her head aside, gave her a smile filled with all
the friendliness and affection I could muster.






The result was surprising. She stopped swimming, stood up in the water,
which reached to her waist, and raised her hands in front of her in a gesture
of defense. Then she quickly turned her back on me and raced for the shore.
Out of the water, she paused and half turned around, looking at me askance,
as she had on the ledge, with the startled air of an animal that has just seen
something alarming. Perhaps she might have regained her confidence, for
the smile had frozen on my lips and I had started swimming again in an
innocent manner, but a fresh incident renewed her emotion. We heard a
noise hi the forest and, tumbling from branch to branch, our friend Hector
came into view, landed on his feet, and scampered over toward us,
overjoyed at finding us again. I was amazed to see the bestial expression,
compounded of fright and menace that came over the young girl's face
when she caught sight of the monkey. She drew back, hugging the rocks so
closely as to melt into them, every muscle tensed, her back arched, her
hands contracted like claws. All this because of a nice little chimpanzee who
was about to greet us!
  As he passed close by, without noticing her, she sprang out. Her body
twanged like a bow. She seized him by the throat and closed her hands
around his neck, holding the poor creature firmly between her thighs. Her
attack was so swift that we did not even have time to intervene. The
monkey hardly struggled. He stiffened after a few seconds and fell dead
when she let go of him. This gorgeous creature in a romantic flight of fancy
I had christened her "Nova," able to compare her appearance only to that of
a' brilliant star—Nova had strangled a harmless pet animal with her own
hands.






  When, having recovered from our shock, we rushed toward her, it was far
too late to save Hector. She turned to face us as though to defend herself,
her arms again raised in front of her, her lips curled back, in a menacing
attitude that brought us to a standstill. Then she uttered a last shrill cry,
which could be interpreted as a shout of triumph or a bellow of rage, and
fled into the forest. In a few seconds she had disappeared into the
undergrowth that closed back around her golden body, leaving us standing
aghast in the middle of the jungle, now completely silent once again.