CHAPTER FOUR
We were silent and motionless for quite a time after making contact with
the ground. Perhaps this behavior will seem surprising, but we felt the need
to recover our wits and concentrate our energy. We were launched on an
adventure a thousand times more extraordinary than that of the first
terrestrial navigators and were preparing ourselves to confront the wonders
of interstellar travel that have fired the imaginations of several generations of
poets.
  For the moment, talking of wonders, we had landed without a hitch on the
grass of a planet that contained, as ours did, oceans, mountains, forests,
cultivated fields, towns, and certainly inhabitants. Yet we must have been
fairly far from the civilized regions, considering the stretch of jungle over
which we had flown before touching down.




  We eventually came out of our daydream. Having donned our diving suits,
we carefully opened one porthole of the launch. There was no hiss of ^air.
The pressures inside and outside were the same. The forest surrounded the
clearing like the walls of a fortress. Not a sound, not a movement disturbed
it. The temperature was high but bearable: about seventy-seven degrees
Fahrenheit.






We climbed out of the launch, accompanied by Hector. Professor Antelle
insisted first of all on analyzing the atmosphere by a more precise method.
The result was encouraging: the air had the same composition as the Earth's,
in spite of some differences in the proportion of the rare gases. It was
undoubtedly breathable. Yet, to make doubly sure, we tried it out first on
our chimpanzee. Rid of his suit, the monkey appeared perfectly happy and
in no way inconvenienced. He seemed overjoyed to find himself free and on
land. After a few skips and jumps, he scampered off to the forest, sprang
into a tree, and continued his capering in the branches. He drew farther away
and finally disappeared, ignoring our gestures and shouts.






  Then, shedding our own space suits, we were able to talk easily. We were
startled by the sound of our voices, and ventured only timidly to take a step
or two without moving too far from our launch.




There was no doubt that we were on a twin planet of our Earth. Life existed.
The vegetable realm was, in fact, particularly lush: some of these trees must
have been over a hundred and fifty feet tall. The animal kingdom soon
appeared in the form of some big black birds, hovering in the sky like
vultures, and other smaller ones, rather like parakeets, that chased one
another chirping shrilly. From what we had seen before landing, we knew
that a civilization existed, too. Rational beings—we dared not call them
men yet—had molded the face of the planet. Yet the forest all around us
appeared to be uninhabited. This was scarcely surprising; landing at random
in some corner of the Asiatic jungle, we should have had the same impression
of solitude.
Before taking a further step, we felt it was urgent to give the planet a
name. We christened it Soror, because of its resemblance to our Earth.




  Deciding to make an initial reconnaissance without delay, we entered the
forest, following a sort of natural path. Arthur Levain and I were armed
with carbines. As for the professor, he scorned material weapons. We felt
light-footed and walked briskly: not that our weight was less than on Earth
—there again the similarity was complete—but the contrast with the ship's
force of gravity prompted us to scamper along like young goats.






We were marching hi single file, calling out every now and then to Hector,
but with no success, when young Levain, who was leading, stopped and
motioned us to listen. A murmur, like running water, could be heard in the
distance. We made our way in that direction and the sound became clearer.






  It was a waterfall. On coming to it, all three of us were moved by the
beauty of the site. A stream of water, clear as our mountain torrents, twisted
above our heads, spread out into a sheet on a ledge of level ground, and feE
at our feet from a height of several yards into a sort of lake, a natural
swimming pool fringed with rocks mingled with sand, the surface of which
reflected the light of Betelguese, which was then at its zenith.






The sight of this water was so tempting that the same urge seized both
Levain and me. The heat was now intense. We took off our clothes and got
ready to dive into the lake. But Professor Antelle cautioned us to behave with
a little more prudence when coming up against the system of Betelguese for
the first time. Perhaps this liquid was not water at all and might be extremely
dangerous. He went up to the edge of it, bent down, examined it, then
cautiously touched it with his finger. Finally he scooped a little up in the
palm of his hand, smelled it, and wetted the end of his tongue with it.
"It can't be anything but water," he muttered.






 He bent down again to plunge his hand into the lake, when we saw him
suddenly stiffen. He gave an exclamation of surprise and pointed toward
something he had just discerned in the sand. I experienced, I believe, the
most violent emotion of my life. There, beneath the scorching rays of
Betelgeuse that filled the sky above our heads like an enormous red balloon,
visible to all of us and admirably outlined on a little patch of damp sand,
was the print of a human foot.