CHAPTER THIRTY




Suppose, I argue, that men once reigned as masters on this planet. Suppose that a human civilization similar to ours flourished on Soror
more than ten thousand years ago.




  This is no longer a senseless hypothesis—quite the contrary. No sooner do I formulate it than I feel the excitement produced by
picking up the right scent among so many false ones. It is on this track, I know, that the solution to the irritating simian mystery is
to be found, I realize my subconscious has always been dreaming of some explanation of this sort.




   I am in the aircraft taking me back to the capital, accompanied by Cornelius' secretary, a rather talkative chimpanzee. I don't
feel like chatting with him. I always tend to meditate when I'm hi an airplane. I shall find no better opportunity than this voyage to
put my thoughts in order.








  Suppose, then, the existence in the distant past of a civilization on the
planet Soror similar to our own. Is it possible that creatures devoid of
intelligence could have perpetuated it by a simple process of imitation? The
answer to this question seems risky, but after thinking it over, a host of
arguments occur to me that gradually lessen its aspect of unreasonableness.
That perfected machines may one day succeed us is, I remember, an
extremely commonplace notion on Earth. It prevails not only among poets
and romantics but in all classes of society. Perhaps it is because it is so
widespread, born spontaneously in popular imagination, that it irritates
scientific minds. Perhaps it is also for this very reason that it contains a
germ of truth. Only a germ: Machines will always be machines; the most
perfected robot, always a robot. But what of living creatures possessing a
certain degree of intelligence, like apes? And apes, precisely, are endowed
with a keen sense of imitation. . . .






  I close my eyes. I let myself be lulled by the drone of the engines. I feel
the need to commune with myself in order to justify my position.






What is it that characterizes a civilization? Is it the exceptional genius? No,
it is everyday life. . . . Hmm! Let us give intelligence its due. Let us
concede that it is principally the arts, and first and foremost, literature. Is the
latter really beyond the reach of our higher apes, if it is admitted-that they
are capable of stringing words together? Of what is our literature made?
Masterpieces? Again, no. But once an original book has been written—and
no more than one or two appear in a century—men of letters imitate it, in
other words, they copy it so that hundreds of thousands of books are
published on exactly the same theme, with slightly different titles and
modified phraseology. This should be able to be achieved by apes, who are
essentially imitators, provided, of course, that they are able to make use of
language.






In fact, language represents the only valid objection. But wait a moment! It is
not essential that apes should understand what they are copying hi order to
produce a hundred thousand volumes from a single original. It is clearly no
more necessary for them than it is for us. Like us, they merely need to be
able to repeat sentences after having heard them. All the rest of the literary
process is purely mechanical. It is at this point that the opinion of certain
learned biologists assumes its full value: There is nothing in the anatomy of
the ape, they maintain, that precludes the use of speech—nothing, that is,
except the necessary urge. It is not difficult to conceive that this urge
came to him one day as a result of some sudden mutation.






  The perpetuation of a literature like ours by talking apes does not,
therefore, conflict with common sense in any way. Subsequently, perhaps,
some apes of letters raised themselves a step or two higher on the
intellectual ladder. As my learned friend Cornelius said, mind embodies
itself in gesture—in this case, in the mechanism of speech—and a few
original ideas were able to appear in the new simian world at the rate of one
every century—as in our own case.


Cheerfully pursuing this train of thought, I soon succeeded in convincing
myself that well-trained animals might well have been able to produce the
paintings and sculptures I had admired in the museums of the capital and, in
general, become expert in all the human arts, including the art of
cinematography.




  Having first considered the highest manifestations of intelligence, it was
only too easy to extend my thesis to other areas. That of industry quickly
succumbed to my analysis. It seemed absolutely clear that industry did not
require the presence of a rational being to maintain itself. Basically,
industry consisted of manual laborers, always performing the selfsame
tasks, who could easily be replaced by apes; and, at a higher level, of
executives whose function was to draft certain reports and pronounce
certain words under given circumstances. All this was a question of
conditioned reflexes. At the still higher level of administration, it seemed
even easier to concede the quality of aping. To continue our system, the
gorillas would merely have to imitate certain attitudes and deliver a few
harangues, all based on the same model.


 I thus came to view the most diverse activities of our Earth with a new
eye and to imagine them performed by apes. I indulged with a certain
satisfaction in this game, which demanded no intellectual effort. I called to
mind a number of political meetings I had attended as a journalist. I
remembered the stock remarks made by the personalities I had had to
interview. I recalled with particular intensity a celebrated trial I had followed
several years before.




 The defense counsel was one of the masters of his profession. Why did he
appear to me now in the guise of a proud gorilla, as did also the advocate
general, another celebrity? Why did I compare then- gestures and actions to
conditioned reflexes resulting from intensive training? Why did the president
of the tribunal remind me of a solemn orangutan reciting sentences learned
by heart, the utterance of which was automatic and likewise inspired by
some statement from a witness or some murmur in the crowd?






  I thus spent the last part of the journey obsessed by comparisons that
seemed to me significant. When I came to the world of finance and
business, my final mental picture was a thoroughly simian vision, a recent
recollection of the planet Soror. It was during a visit to the stock exchange,
where my friend Cornelius had insisted on bringing me, for it was one of
the curiosities of the capital. This is what I saw—a picture I recalled with
extraordinary vividness during the last minutes of my flight.






The stock exchange was a large building, outwardly imbued with a strange
atmosphere created by a vague buzz of voices that grew progressively
louder as one approached, until it was a deafening roar. We went inside and
were forthwith caught up in the turmoil. I wedged myself against a pillar. I
was accustomed to individual apes but was always somewhat stupefied
when surrounded by a compact mob, as now. I found the sight even more
incongruous than that of the learned assembly during the famous congress.
Imagine a hall of vast proportions crammed full of apes, screaming,
gesticulating, and running hither and thither in a completely disorganized
manner, apes in hysteria, apes who not only rushed about and bumped into
one another on the floor but who formed a swarming mass right up to the
ceiling, which was at a giddy height from the ground. The place was
equipped with ladders, trapezes, and ropes that they used constantly hi order
to move from one spot to another. They thus filled the entire volume of the
building, which assumed the aspect of a cage specially designed for a
grotesque exhibition of four-handed creatures.






The apes literally flew to and fro across this space, always catching hold of
some piece of equipment just when I thought they were about to fall; all this
in a hubbub of infernal exclamations, shouts, cries, and even sounds that
recalled no civilized language. There were monkeys there who were
barking—yes, barking for no apparent reason— swinging themselves from
one end of the room to the other on long ropes.






"Have you ever seen anything like it?" my friend Cornelius asked me
proudly.






  I readily admitted I had not. It needed all my previous acquaintance with
the apes to convince me that these were rational creatures. No one in his
right mind who watched this circus could escape the conclusion that he was
witnessing the frolics of madmen or animals gone wild. Not a glimmer of
intelligence could be seen in their eyes, and they ali looked alike. I could
not tell one from another. All of them were dressed in the same way and
wore the same mask, which was the mask of madness.




  The most disturbing part of my present image was that contrary to the
phenomenon that shortly before had made me assign the form of gorillas or
orangutans to the figure? in the earthly scene, I now saw the members of this
insane-crowd in the guise of human beings. It was men I thus saw shrieking,
barking, and swinging about on ropes to reach their destination as fast as
possible. In excitement I recalled other aspects of this scene. I remembered
tha* after looking on for some time, I had begun to notice certain details
suggesting vaguely that this hubbub did nevertheless form part of a civilized
system. An articulate word could occasionally be heard above the bestial
shrieks. Perched on a scaffolding at a giddy height above us, a gorilla,
without interrupting the hysterical gestures of his hands, would pick up a
piece of chalk in his foot and write some probably significant figure on a
blackboard. To this gorilla, too, I assigned human features.






I managed to rid myself of this hallucination only by coming back to my
rough outline of a theory on the origins of the simian civilization, and in this
remembrance of the world of finance I found fresh arguments to support it.






The aircraft touched down. I was back in the capital. Zira had come to meet
me at the airport. From far off I saw her scarf pulled down over her ears,
and the sight of it filled me with joy. When I eventually joined her after the
customs formalities I had to restrain myself from flinging my arms around her.






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - O N E


I spent the month following my return in bed, suffering from an infection I
had probably picked up on the site and which assumed the form of violent
bouts of fever similar to malaria. I was not in pain, but my brain was on fire
and I could not stop mulling over the elements of the fearful truth I had
glimpsed. There was no longer any doubt in my mind that a human era had
preceded the simian age on the planet Soror, and this conviction gave me a
sort of intoxication.




On second thought, however, I am not sure if I ought to feel proud of this
discovery or profoundly humiliated by it. My self-respect notes with
satisfaction that apes have invented nothing, that they are mere imitators.
My humiliation derives from the fact that a human civilization could have
been so easily assimilated by apes.
How could this have happened? In my delirium I could not keep my mind
off the problem. True, we have long known that our civilizations are mortal,
but such a complete disappearance makes the senses reel. A sudden
disaster? A cataclysm? Or else the slow decline of the one and the
progressive ascent of the other? I am inclined to the latter hypothesis, and I
find extremely significant indications of this evolution in the apes' present-
day condition and preoccupations.




  The importance they attach to biological research, for instance—well, I
am fully aware of its origin. In the old days many apes must have served as
experimental subjects for men, as is the case in our own laboratories. These
were the ones who first hoisted the flag, who were the pioneers of the
revolution. They would naturally have begun by imitating the gestures and
attitudes observed in their masters, and these masters were researchers,
learned biologists, doctors, nurses, and warders. Hence this unusual imprint
on most of their enterprises, which still persists today.


  And what about the men all this time? Enough speculation about apes!


  It is now two months since I visited my former companions in captivity,
my fellow humans. Today I feel better. I have no more fever. Yesterday I
told Zira--»-Zira has looked after me like a sister during my illness—I told
her that I was planning to resume my work in her department. She did not
seem very pleased but she raised no objection. It is time for me to pay my
visit.


  Here I am again in the room with the cages. A strange emotion makes me
pause on the threshold. I now see these creatures in a new fight. It is with
anguish that I wonder, before making up my mind to enter, if they will
recognize me after my long absence. Well, they do recognize me. All their
eyes are fixed on me, as they always used to be, and even with a sort of
deference. Am I dreaming or do I really discern a new look in them, a look
reserved for me and different from the glances they bestow on their ape
warders? A gleam impossible to describe, but in which I fancy I see an
awakened curiosity, an unusual emotion, shades of ancestral memories
trying to emerge from bestiality, and perhaps . . . an uncertain glimmer of
hope.


  This hope, I believe, I have myself unconsciously nourished for some
time. Is it not the reason why I am overwhelmed by this feverish
excitement? Is it not I, I, Ulysse Merou, the man whom destiny has brought
to this planet to be the instrument of human regeneration?


  Here, distinctly stated at last, is the hazy notion that has been haunting me
for a month. The good Lord does not shoot dice, as a certain physicist once
said. Nothing happens by mere chance in the cosmos. My voyage to the
world of Betelgeuse was decreed by a superior consciousness. It is up to me
to show myself worthy of the choice and to be the new savior of this human
race in decline.


 As before, I go slowly around the cages. I force myself not to rush over to
Nova's cage at once. Is the envoy of destiny entitled to favorites? I speak to
each of my subjects. The moment has not yet come for them to talk. I do
not mind. I have my entire lifetime in which to accomplish my mission.


  I now approach my former cage with studied negligence. I look out of the
corner of my eye, but I do not see Nova's arms stretched through the bars, I
do not hear the cries of joy with which she always used to greet me. A
strange misgiving assails me. I cannot restrain myself. I dash forward. The
cage is empty.




I summon one of the warders in an authoritative voice that makes the
captives shiver. Zanam is the one who appears. He does not like receiving
orders from me, but Zira has instructed him to put himself at my disposal.






"Where is Nova?"
  He replies in a surly manner that he does not know. She was taken away
one day without any reason being given. I repeat my question but in vain.
At this moment, luckily, Zira turns up to carry out her tour of inspection.
She sees me in front of the empty cage and realizes why I am so upset. She
looks flustered and at once starts talking about something else.


  "Cornelius has just come back. He wants to see you."


  At the moment I don't give a damn about Cornelius or the chimpanzees or
the gorillas or any other creature hi heaven or in hell. I point at the cell with
my ringer.




  "Where's Nova?"






  "She's ill," says'Zira. "She's been transferred to a special wing."


  She beckons to me and leads me aside, out of earshot of the warder.






"The administrator made me promise to keep it secret. But I feel you ought to
know."






"She's ill?" ,






"Nothing serious; but it's important enough to put the authorities on their toes.
Nova is expecting."






"She's ..."
"I mean she's pregnant," the she-ape announces, observing me with a curious
expression.






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - T W O


I am stupefied without yet fully realizing what this news implies. At first I
am assailed by a mass of trivial details and above all tormented by the
disquieting question: why was I not notified of this? Zira does not give me
time to protest.


  "I noticed two months ago, on my return from the trip. The gorillas had
not seen a thing. I phoned Cornelius, who had a long conversation with the
administrator. They agreed that it would be better to keep it secret. No one
knows about it except them and me. She's in an isolated cage and I'm looking
after her personally."




I regard this concealment as an act of treachery on Cornelius' part and I can
see that Zira is embarrassed. It looks to me as though some plot is being
hatched in the background.


, "Don't worry. She is being well treated and there's nothing she needs. I'm
doing everything I can for her. No pregnancy of a female human has ever been
so carefully watched over."




  Under her mocking gaze I lower my eyes like a schoolboy guilty of some
misdemeanor. She makes an effort to assume an ironical tone, but I can see
she is perturbed. True, I realize my physical intimacy with Nova has vexed
her ever since she recognized my true nature, but there is more than
vexation in her expression. It is her affection for me that makes her anxious.
These mysteries concerning Nova presage nothing good. I imagine she has
not told me the whole truth: that the Grand Council is well aware of the
situation and there have been discussions at a very high level. –
"When is her confinement due?"






  "In three or four months."






  The tragi-comic side of the situation overwhelms me suddenly. I am about
to become a father in the system of Betelgeuse. I am going to have a child on
the planet Soror by a woman for whom I feel a great physical attraction and
sometimes even compassion but who has the mind of an animal. No other
being in the cosmos has found himself involved in such an adventure. I feel
like weeping and laughing at the same time.




 "Zira, I want to see her!"






 She gives a little pout of annoyance.






 "I knew you would ask me that. I've already discussed it with Cornelius
and I think he will agree to it. He's waiting for you in his office."






 "Cornelius is a traitor!"






 "You've no right to say that. He is divided between his passion for science
and his duty as an ape. It is only natural that he should feel extremely
apprehensive at this impending birth."
My anguish increases as I follow her down the corridors of the institute. I
can imagine the attitude of the learned apes and their fear of seeing a new
race arise that— Good heavens! I now see exactly how the mission with
which I have been entrusted can be accomplished.






 Cornelius greets me in a friendly manner, but a permanent awkwardness
has been created between us. At times he looks at me as though in terror. I
make an effort not to broach the subject on my mind at once. I ask him
about the voyage and the end of his stay among the ruins.




"Fascinating. I have a mass of irrefutable proof."






  His clever little eyes are sparkling. He cannot prevent himself from
exulting over his success. Zira is right; he is torn between his love of
science and his duty as an ape. At the moment it is the scientist speaking,
the enthusiastic scientist for whom only the triumph of his theories counts.


 "Skeletons," he says. "Not one, but a whole collection, discovered in such
order and circumstances as to make it incontestably clear that we had come
upon a graveyard. Enough evidence to convince the most obtuse mind. Our
orangutans, of course, insist on regarding it as a mere coincidence."


 "What about these skeletons?"




"They are not simian."






 "I see."
We look each other straight in the eye. With his enthusiasm somewhat
diminished, he slowly continues, "I can't hide it from you; you've already
guessed. They are the skeletons of men."


 Zira is certainly in the know, for she shows no surprise. Both of them
again observe me closely. Cornelius finally makes up his mind to discuss the
matter frankly.


   "I am now certain," he admits, "that there once existed on our planet a
 race of human beings endowed with a mind comparable to yours and to
 that of the men who populate your Earth, a race that has degenerated and
 reverted to an animal state. . . . Furthermore, since my return here I have
 been given additional evidence to support this hypothesis."




  "Additional evidence?"






  "Yes. It was discovered by the director of the encephalic section, a young
chimpanzee with a great future. He may even be a genius. . . . You would
be wrong to think," he continued with heavy sarcasm, "that apes have
always been imitators. We have made some remarkable innovations in
certain branches of science, especially hi connection with these
experiments on the brain. I'll show you the results some day, if I can. I'm
sure you'll be amazed by them."


  He seems anxious to convince himself and expresses himself with
unusual aggressiveness. I have never attacked him on this point. He was
the one who first mentioned the lack of creative faculty in apes, two
months ago. In a boastful tone he continues:


  "Believe me, the day will come when we shall surpass men in every
field. It is not just by accident, as you might imagine, that we have
managed to succeed them. This result was foreordained in the normal
course of evolution. Rational man having had his day, a superior being was
bound to succeed him, preserve the essential results of his conquests, and
assimilate them during a period of apparent stagnation before soaring up to
even greater heights."


  This is a new way of visualizing the outcome. I might well retort that
many men on Earth have had the presentiment of a superior being who
may one day succeed them but that no scientist, philosopher, or poet has
ever imagined this superhuman in the guise of an ape. But I do not feel
inclined to pursue the point. The essential, after all, is that the mind should
embody itself in some organism. The form of the latter is of little
importance. I have many other more pressing subjects. I bring the
conversation around to Nova and her condition. He makes no comment
and tries to console me.


"Don't worry. It will be all right, I hope. It will probably be a child like any
other human child on Soror." "I certainly hope not. I'm convinced it will
talk!" I cannot help protesting indignantly. Zira gives a frown to make me
keep quiet






"Don't be too hopeful," Cornelius solemnly says, "for her sake and for your
own."






  He adds in a friendlier tone, "If he talked, I don't know if I should be able
to go on protecting you as I do. Don't you realize that the Grand Council is
on tenterhooks and that I've been given the strictest orders to keep this birth
a secret? If the authorities discovered you knew all about it, I should be
dismissed, so would Zira, and you'd find yourself alone among . . ."






"Among enemies?"
  He turns his head away. That is exactly what I thought: I am regarded as a
danger to the simian race. Nevertheless, I am happy to feel I have an ally in
Cornelius, if not a friend. Zira must have pleaded my cause more fervently
than she gave me to understand, and he will do nothing that might
displease her. He gives me permission to go and see Nova—in secret, of
course.




Zira leads me to an isolated little building to which she alone holds the key.
The room into which she shows me is not very big. It "contains only three
cages, two of which are empty. Nova occupies the third. She has heard us
coming and her instinct has warned her of my presence, for she has risen to
her feet and stretched out her arms even before seeing me. I clasp her hands
and rub my face against hers. Zira gives a contemptuous shrug, but she hands
me the key of the cage and goes to keep watch outside in the corridor. What
a good soul this she-ape is! What woman would have been capable of such
tact? She knows we must have a lot of things to say to each other and
therefore leaves us to ourselves.






A lot of things to say? Alas! I have again forgotten Nova's miserable
condition. I rush into the cage and fling my arms around her. I speak to her
as though she is able to understand—as I might speak to Zira, for instance.


Does she not understand? Does she not have at least a vague intuition of the
mission for which both of us are responsible from now on, she as well as I?






  I lie down on the straw by her side. I stroke the incipient fruit of our
outlandish passion. It seems to me nonetheless that her present condition
has given her a personality and dignity she did not have before. She
trembles as I pass my fingers over her stomach. Her eyes have certainly
acquired a new intensity. Suddenly, with a great effort, she stammers out
the syllables of my name, which I have taught her to articulate. She has-not
forgotten her lessons. I am overwhelmed with joy. But her eye dulls again
and she turns aside to devour the fruit I have brought her.
  Zira comes back; it is time to say good-by. I leave with her. Sensing my
feeling of loss, she accompanies me back to my apartment where I burst into
tears like a child.






"Oh Zira, Zira!"






 While she cradles me in her arms like a mother, I begin to speak to her, to
speak to her with affection, without stopping, relieving myself at last of the
surfeit of emotions and thoughts that Nova is unable to appreciate.




C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - T H R E E


Admirable she-ape! Thanks to her, I was able to see Nova fairly often during
this period, without the authorities knowing. I spent hours on the lookout for
the intermittent gleam in her eye, and the weeks went by in impatient
expectancy of the birth.


  One day Cornelius decided to take me to the encephalic section, the
wonders of which he had described to me. He introduced me to the head of
the department, the young chimpanzee called Helius, whose genius he had
praised to the skies, and apologized for not being able to show me around
himself because of some urgent work.


 "I'll come back in an hour's time to show you the pearl of these experiments
myself," he said, "the one that affords the evidence I told you about.
Meanwhile I'm sure you'll be interested in the classic cases."




Helius showed me into a room similar to those in the institute, equipped
with two rows of cages. On entering, I was struck by a pharmaceutical smell
reminiscent of chloroform. It was indeed an anesthetic. All the surgical
operations, my guide informed me, were now performed on subjects who
had been put to sleep. He stressed this point, as though to show the high
degree attained by simian civilization, which was at pains to suppress all useless
suffering, even in men. I could thus be reassured.






  I was only half reassured. I was still less so when he ended by mentioning
an exception to this rule: the very experiments, in fact, whose aim is to
make a study of pain and localize the nerve centers from which it derives. But
I was not to see any of these today.




  This was not calculated to appease my human sensibility. I remembered that
Zira had tried to dissuade me from visiting this section, where she herself
came only when she had to. I felt like turning around and retracing my steps;
but Helius did not give me time to do so.






"If you would like to attend an operation, you will see for yourself -that the
patient suffers no pain at all. No? Well, let's go and see the results then.


  Passing by the closed cell from which the smell emanated, he led me
toward the cages. In the first I saw a young man of fairly handsome
appearance but extreme emaciation. He was propped up on a litter. In front
of him, almost under his nose, stood a bowl containing a mash of sweetened
cereals to which all the men were partial. He was gazing at it in
bewilderment without making the slightest gesture
  "You see," said the director. "This boy is famished, he has not eaten for
twenty-four hours. Yet he does not react when confronted with his favorite
food. This is the result of partial ablation of the frontal brain, which was
performed on him some months ago. Since then he has been continuously in
this state and has to be fed by force. You can see how thin he is.


 He signaled to a nurse, who went into the cage and plunged the young
man's face into the basin. The latter then began lapping up the mash.
"A fairly commonplace case. Here are some more interesting ones. On each
of these subjects we've performed an operation affecting various areas of the
cerebral tissue."


 We walked past a series of cages occupied by men and women of all ages.
At the door of each of these was a panel specifying the operation
performed, with a wealth of technical details.


 "Some of these areas are related to the natural reflexes; others to the
acquired reflexes. This one, for instance—"


  This one, according to the case history, had had a whole zone of the
occipital area removed. He could no longer distinguish the distance or
shape of objects, a disability he manifested by a series of disorganized
gestures whenever a nurse approached him. He was incapable of avoiding a
stick placed in his path. On the other hand, a piece of fruit held out to him
inspired him with alarm and he tried to draw away from it in terror. He
could not grasp the bars of his cage and made grotesque attempts to do so,
closing his fingers on empty air.




  "This other one here," said the director with a wink, "was once a
remarkable subject. We had succeeded in training him to an astonishing
degree. He answered to his name and, to a certain extent, obeyed simple
orders. He had solved fairly complicated problems and learned how to use
rudimentary tools. Today he has forgotten all his education. He does not
know his name. He cannot perform the slightest trick. He has become the
stupidest of all our men—as a result of a particularly difficult operation:
extraction of the temporal lobules."






 With my stomach heaving at this succession of horrors accompanied by
comments from a grinning chimpanzee, I saw men partially or totally
paralyzed, others artificially deprived of sight. I saw a young mother whose
maternal instinct—once highly developed, so Helius assured me—had
completely disappeared after interference with the cervical cortex. She kept
pushing away her young child whenever it attempted to approach her. This
was too much for me. I thought of Nova, of her impending motherhood,
and clenched my fists with rage. Luckily Helius showed me into another
room, which gave me time to recover my composure.






  "Here," he said with a mysterious ah", "we indulge in more. delicate
research. It's no longer the scalpel that is brought to bear, it's a far more
subtle medium—electrical stimulation of certain spots of the brain. We
have brought off some remarkable experiments. Do you practice this sort of
thing on Earth?"




"Yes, on apes!" I retorted in fury.






  The chimpanzee kept his temper and smiled.






  "Of course. However, I don't think you could ever have obtained such
perfect results as ours, comparable to those that Dr. Cornelius wishes to
show you himself. Meanwhile let's continue with our rounds of the
commonplace cases."




He again led me up to some cages where nurses were in the process of
operating. The subjects here were stretched out on a sort of table. An
incision in the skull laid bare a certain area of the brain. One ape was
applying the electrodes wfiile another was attending to the anesthetic.






 "You will note that here, too, we put the subjects to sleep: a mild
anesthetic, otherwise the results would be falsified, but the patient feels no
pain."
Depending on the point at which the electrodes were applied, the subject
made various movements, usually affecting only one side of his body. One
man jerked his leg up at each electric shock, then stretched it out again as
soon as the current was switched off. Another performed the same
movement with one arm. In the next case it was the whole shoulder that
began twitching spasmodically under the effect of the current. Farther on,
with a very young patient, it was the area commanding the jaw muscles that
was brought into play. The poor wretch started champing, endlessly
champing, with a ghastly grin on his face, while the rest of his adolescent
body remained motionless.






  "Now look what happens when the duration of the contact is increased,"
said Helius. "Here is an experiment carried to its utmost limit."






The creature on which this treatment was imposed was a lovely young girl
who in certain respects reminded me of Nova. Several nurses, male and
female apes in white smocks, were buzzing about her naked body. The
electrodes were fixed by a she-ape to the young girl's face. The girl at once
started moving the fingers of her left hand. The she-ape kept the current on
instead of switching it off after a few seconds, as in the other cases. Then
the movements of the fingers became frenzied and gradually the wrist started
twitching. A moment later and it was the forearm, then the upper arm and
shoulder. The twitching presently spread, on the one hand to the hip, the
thigh, and the leg all the way down to the toes, on the other to the muscles
of the face. After ten minutes the whole of the wretched girl's left side was
shaken by convulsive spasms, a dreadful sight, growing more and more
rapid and more and more violent.






"That's the phenomenon of extension," Helius calmly observed. "It's well
known and culminates in a state of convulsions presenting all the symptoms
of epilepsy—an extremely strange epilepsy, moreover, affecting only one
side of the body."






 "Stop it!"






  I had not been able to stifle the cry that rose to my lips. All the apes gave
a start and turned toward me with reproving glances. Cornelius, who had
just come in, gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder.


  "I admit these experiments are rather bloodcurdling when you're not used
to them. But you must bear in mind that thanks to them our medicine and
surgery have made enormous progress in the last quarter of a century."


  This argument did not convince me, any more than the memory I had of
the same treatment applied to chimpanzees in a laboratory on Earth.
Cornelius shrugged his shoulders and dragged me off toward a narrow
passage leading to a smaller room.




  "Here," he told me in a solemn tone, "you're going to see a marvelous
achievement, which is absolutely new. Only three of us ever go into this
room—Helius, who is personally in charge of this research and who has
made such a success of it; myself; and a carefully selected assistant.






He's a gorilla. He's dumb. He's devoted to me body and soul and, what is
more, he's an utter brute. So you see the importance I attach to this work.
I'm willing to show it to you because I know you'll be discreet. It's hi your
own interests."




C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - F O U R
I entered the room and at first could see nothing to justify this air of
mystery. The equipment was the same as in the previous room: generators,
transformers, electrodes. There were only two subjects, a man and a woman,
lying strapped down on two parallel divans. As soon as we arrived they started
observing us with a strange intensity.
  The gorilla assistant welcomed us with an inarticulate grunt. Helius and
he exchanged a few words in deaf-mute language. It was a far from
commonplace experience to see a gorilla and a chimpanzee moving then"
fingers like this. I do not know why, but it seemed to me the height of
absurdity and I almost burst out laughing.


  "All is well. They are quite calm. We can begin a test right away."




"What sort of test?" I implored.






  "I'd rather keep it as a surprise for you," Cornelius grinned.


  The gorilla anesthetized the two patients, who presently fell asleep, and
started up various machines. Helius went up to the man, carefully unrolled
the bandage that covered his skull, and, aiming at a certain spot, applied the
electrodes. The man remained absolutely still. I was questioning Cornelius
with my eyes when the miracle happened.


  The man began to talk. His voice echoed around the room with an
abruptness that made me start, rising above the buzz of the generator. It
was not an hallucination on my part. He was expressing himself in simian
language, with the voice of a man from Earth or that of an ape on this
planet.


 The faces of the two scientists were a study in triumph. They looked at me
with a mischievous glint in their eyes and reveled in my stupefaction. I was
about to utter an exclamation, but they motioned me to keep quiet and listen.
The man's words were incoherent and devoid of originality. He must have
been captive in the institute for a long time and kept repeating snatches of
sentences he had heard spoken by the nurses or the scientists. Cornelius
presently put a stop to the experiment.


 "We'll get nothing more out of this chap. But the main point is, he talks."




 "It's amazing," I stammered.






 "You haven't seen anything yet," said Helius. "He talks like a parrot or a
gramophone. But I've done much better with her."






He indicated the woman, who was sleeping peacefully.






 "Much better?"






  "A thousand times better," said Cornelius, who showed the same
excitement as his colleague. "Just listen. This woman also talks, as you'll
soon hear. But she doesn't merely repeat the words she has heard hi
captivity. Her talk has an exceptional significance. By a combination of
physico-chemical processes, of which I shall spare you the details, this
genius Helius has succeeded hi awakening hi her not only her own
individual memory but the memory of the species. Under electrical impulse
her recollections go back to an extremely distant line of ancestors: atavistic
memories reviving a past several thousands of years old. Do you realize
what that means, Ulysse?"


  I was so amazed by this extravagant claim that for a moment I really
believed the learned Cornelius had gone mad; for madness exists among
the apes, particularly among the intellectuals. But the other chimpanzee
was already handling his electrodes and applying them to the woman's
brain. The latter remained inert for some time, just like the man, then she
heaved a deep sigh and started talking. She likewise expressed herself in
simian language in a rather low but extremely distinct voice that changed
from time to time, as though it belonged to a number of different persons.
Every sentence she uttered has remained engraved on my memory.




  "For some time," said the voice in a slightly anxious tone, "these apes, all
these apes, have been ceaselessly multiplying, although it looked as though
then" species was bound to die out at a certain period. If this goes on, they
will almost outnumber us . . : and that's not all. They are becoming
arrogant. They look us straight in the eye. We have been wrong to tame
them and to grant those whom we use as servants a certain amount of
liberty. They are the most insolent of all. One day I was jostled hi the street
by a chimpanzee. As I raised my hand, he looked at me hi such a menacing
manner that I did not dare strike him.






 "Anna, who works at the laboratory, tells me there have been a great
many changes there as well. She dares not enter the cages alone any more.
She says that at night a sort of whispering and chuckling can be heard. One
of the gorillas makes fun of the boss behind his back and imitates his
nervous tics."






The woman paused, heaved several anguished sighs, then went on:




 "It's happened! One of them has succeeded in talking. It's certain; I read
about it in Woman's Journal. There's a photograph of him, too. He's a
chimpanzee."


  "A chimpanzee, the first! Just as I thought," Cornelius exclaimed.


 "There are several others. The papers report fresh cases every day.
Certain biologists regard this as a great scientific success. Don't they
realize where it may lead? It appears that one of these chimpanzees has
uttered some ugly threats. The first use they make of speech is to protest
when they are given an order."


 The woman fell silent again and resumed in a different voice, a somewhat
pedantic man's voice:


  "What is happening could have been foreseen. A cerebral laziness has
taken hold of us. No more books; even detective novels have now become
too great an intellectual effort. No more games; at the most a hand or two
of cards. Even the childish motion picture does not tempt us any more.
Meanwhile the apes are meditating in silence. Their brain is developing in
solitary reflection . . . and they are talking. Oh! not very much, and to us
hardly at all, apart from a few words of scornful refusal to the more
intrepid men who still dare to give them orders. But at night, when we are
not there, they exchange impressions and mutually instruct one another."


 After a long silence a woman's voice continued, in anguish:


 "I was too frightened. I could not go on living like this. I preferred to
hand the place over to my gorilla. I left my own house.




  "He1 had been with me for years and was a loyal servant. He started
going out in the evening to attend meetings. He learned to talk. He refused
to do any work. A month ago he ordered me to do the cooking and washing
up. He began to use my plates and knives and forks. Last week he chased
me out of my bedroom. I had to sleep in an armchair in the sitting room.
Not daring to scold him or punish him, I tried to win him over by kindness.
He laughed in my face and his demands increased. I was too miserable. I
abdicated.






"I have taken refuge in a camp with other women where they are in the
same plight. There are some men here as well; most of them have no more
courage than we have. It's a wretched life we lead outside the town. We feel
ashamed and scarcely speak to one another. During the first few days I
played a few games of patience. I haven't the energy any more."






The woman broke off again and a male voice took over:


"I had found, I believe, a cure for cancer. I wanted to put it to the test, like
all my previous discoveries. I was careful, but not careful enough. For some
time the apes have been reluctant to lend themselves to these experiments.
Before going into Georges', the chimpanzee's, cage I had him held down by
my two assistants. I got ready to give him the injection—the cancer-
producing one. I had to give it to him in order to be able to cure him.
Georges' eyes looked resigned. He did not move, but I saw his crafty eyes
glance over my shoulder. I realized too late. The gorillas, the six gorillas I
was holding in reserve for the infection, had escaped. A plot. They seized
us. Georges directed the operation. He copied my movements exactly. He
ordered us to be tied down on the table, and the gorillas promptly obeyed
him. Then he picked up the hypodermic and injected all three of us with the
deadly liquid. So now I have cancer. It's certain, for though there may be
doubt as to the efficacy of the cure, the fatal serum has long since been
tested and proved effective.






  "After emptying the hypodermic, Georges gave me a friendly pat on the
cheek, as I often did to my apes. I had always treated them well. From me
they received more caresses man blows. A few days later, in the cage in
which they had locked me up, I recognized the first symptoms of the
disease. So had Georges, and I heard him tell the others that he was going
to begin the cure. This gave me a new fright. What if it killed me off more
quickly! I know I am condemned, but now I lack confidence in this new
cure. During the night I succeeded hi forcing the bars of my cage and
escaping. I have taken refuge in the camp outside the town. I have two
months to live. I am spending them playing patience and dozing."
Another feminine voice succeeded his:






 "I was a lady animal tamer. I used to do an act with a dozen orangutans,
magnificent beasts. Today I'm inside the cage instead of them, together
with some other circus performers.




  'To give them their due, the apes treat us well and give us plenty to eat.
  They change the straw of our bedding when it becomes too dirty. They are
  not unkind; they punish only those of us who show reluctance and refuse
  to perform the tricks they have taken it into their heads to teach us. These
  are extremely advanced! I walk on all fours; I turn somersaults. So they are
  very good to me. I'm not unhappy. I have no more worries or
  responsibilities. Most of us are adapting ourselves to this regime."






  This time the woman fell silent for a long time, during which Cornelius
gazed at me with embarrassing insistence. I could read his thoughts only too
well. Had it not been high time for such a feeble race of men, who gave in
so easily, to make way for a nobler breed? I grew flushed and looked away.
The woman continued in a more and more anguished tone:






  "They now hold the whole town. There are only a few hundred of us left in
this redoubt and our situation is precarious. We form the last human nucleus in
the vicinity of the city, but the apes will not tolerate us at liberty so close to
them. In the other camps some of the men have fled far off, into the jungle;
the others have surrendered in order to get something to relieve their
hunger. Here we have stayed put, mainly from laziness. We sleep; we are
incapable of organizing ourselves for resistance. . . .
  "This is what I feared. I can hear a barbaric din, something like a parody of a
military band. . . . Help! It's them, it's the apes! They are surrounding us.
They are led by enormous gorillas. They have taken our bugles, our drums
and uniforms, our weapons, too, of course. . . . No, they haven't any weapons.
Oh, what bitter humiliation, the final insult! Their army is upon us and all they
are carrying are whips!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - F I V E


Some of the results obtained by Helius have leaked out to the public.
Probably it was the chimpanzee himself who could not keep his mouth shut in
the enthusiasm of success. In the town they are saying that a scientist has
succeeded in making men talk. Furthermore, the discoveries of the buried
city are being discussed in the press, and although their significance is usually
distorted, one or two journalists are close to suspecting the truth. As a result
there is an uneasy atmosphere abroad, which is manifested by the increased
wariness of the authorities about me, an attitude that is increasingly more
disturbing.






Cornelius has many enemies. He dares not proclaim his discovery frankly.
Even if he thought of doing so, his superiors would no doubt be against it.
The orangutan clan led by Zaius is in league against him. They talk about a
conspiracy against the simian race and point me out more or less openly as
one of the factioniste. The gorillas have not yet adopted an official stand,
but they are always against anything that tends to disturb law and order.


  Today I experienced a deep emotion. The long-awaited event has taken
place. First I was overwhelmed with joy but, on second thoughts, trembled
at the new danger it represents. Nova has given birth to a boy.


I have a child, I have a son on the planet Soror. I have seen him, but only
with the greatest difficulty. The security measures have become
increasingly strict and I was unable to visit Nova until the week after the
birth. It was Zira who brought me the news. She at least will remain a true
friend, whatever else may happen. She found me so perturbed that she took
the responsibility of arranging a meeting for me with my new family. It was
a few days after the event that she took me to see them, late at night, for the
newborn child is under close observation during the day.


I have seen him. He's a splendid baby. He was lying on the straw like a new
Christ, mizzling against his mother's breast. He looks like me, but he also
has Nova's beauty. The latter gave a menacing growl when I pushed open
the door. She, too, feels uneasy. She rose up, her nails extended like claws,
but calmed down when she recognized me. I am sure this birth has raised
her a few degrees higher on the human scale. The fleeting gleam in her eye
is now a permanent glow. I kiss my son with passion, without allowing
myself to think of the clouds gathering over our heads.






  He will be a man, a proper man, I'm sure. Intelligence sparkles in his
features and in his eyes. I have. revived the sacred flame. Thanks to me, a
new human race is rising and will bloom on this planet. When he grows up
he will be the first of the branch and then….




  When he grows up! I shudder at the thought of the conditions of his
childhood and of all the obstacles that will stand in his path. No matter!
Between the three of us, we shall triumph, of that I am sure. I say the three
of us, for Nova is now one of us. One need only see the way in which she
looks at her child. Though she still licks him, in the manner of the mothers
of this strange planet, her eyes radiate love.






 I put him. down again on the straw. I am reassured as to his nature. He
does not talk yet, but—I am out of my mind, he is only three days old!—he
will one day. Now he has started crying, crying like a human child and not
whining. Nova hears the difference and observes him with awe and ecstasy.
  It does not escape Zira's attention, either. She draws closer, her furry ears
prick up, and she watches the baby for a long time, in silence, with a
solemn expression. Then she signals me that it is time to go. It would be
dangerous for all of us if I were to be found here. She promises to look after
my son and I know she will keep her word. But I am also aware that she is
suspected of being attached to me, and the possibility of her dismissal
makes me tremble. I must not allow her to run this risk.


  I embrace my family warmly and leave. Looking around, I see the she-ape
likewise bend over this human body and gently put her muzzle to his brow
before closing the cage. And Nova does not protest! She permits this caress,
which must have become a daily occurrence. Remembering the antipathy
she used to show toward Zira, I cannot help regarding this as a miracle.




We go out. I am trembling from head to foot and I see that Zira is as deeply
moved as I am.


"Ulysse," she exclaims, wiping away a tear, "I sometimes feel this child is
also mine!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - S I X


The periodic visits that I force myself to pay Professor Antelle are a more and
more painful duty. He is still in the institute, but he has had to be moved from
the fairly comfortable cell where I had arranged for him to be kept. He was
pining away there and from time to time gave vent to outbursts of temper
that made him dangerous. He attempted to bite his warders. So Cornelius
then tried out another system. He had him put in an ordinary straw-lined cage
and gave him a mate: the girl with whom he used to sleep in the zoo. The
professor welcomed her noisily with an animal demonstration of joy, and
immediately his manner changed. He has now taken a new lease on life.
It is in her company that I now find him. He appears to be quite happy. He
has put on weight and looks younger. I have done all I can to enter into
communication with him. I try again today, but without success. He is
interested only in the cakes I offer him. When the bag is empty he goes back
and lies down beside his mate, who starts licking his face..






 "Now you can see how intelligence can melt away just as it can be
acquired," someone behind me mutters.


 It is Cornelius. He is looking for me, but not to talk about the professor.
There is something serious he wants to discuss. I follow him into his office,
where Zira is waiting. Her eyes are red, as though she has been weeping.
They seem to have bad news for me, but neither of them dares to speak.






"My son?"


 "He's very well," Zira says abruptly.


 "Too well," Cornelius mutters with a frown.






  I know he is a splendid baby, but it is a month since I have seen him. The
security measures have been tightened still more. Zira, who is suspect by
the authorities, is under close surveillance.




"Much too well," Cornelius repeats. "He smiles. He cries like a baby ape . . .
and he has begun to talk."






 "At three months of age!"
  "Baby words, but there's everything to indicate that he will talk properly
later. In fact, he is miraculously precocious."


 I am delighted. Zira is annoyed by my doting-father manner.


  "But don't you realize this is a disaster? The others will never leave him in
liberty."


  "I know from a reliable source that some extremely important decisions
are going to be taken about him by the Grand Council, which is to meet in
two weeks' time," Cornelius remarks quietly.




 "Important decisions?"






  "Very important. There's no question of doing away with him . . . not for
the moment, at least; but he'll be taken away from his mother."




"And I, wouldn't I be allowed to see him?"






  "You least of all . . . no, don't interrupt me," the chimpanzee continues
emphatically. "We didn't come here to feel sorry for ourselves but to work
out a plan of action. Well, now I have some definite information. Your son is
going to be placed in a sort of fortress under the surveillance of the
orangutans. Yes, Zaius has been plotting for some time and he is going to get
the better of us."






At this point Cornelius clenches his fists in rage and mutters some ugly
oaths. Then he continues:
  "Needless to say, the Council knows perfectly well how little that old fool's
scientific views can be trusted, but they are pretending to believe he is more
qualified than I am to study this exceptional subject, because the latter is
regarded as a danger to our race. They are counting on Zaius to make it
impossible for him to do any harm."






 I am dumbfounded. It is not possible to leave my son in the hands of that
dangerous imbecile. But Cornelius has not yet finished.




 "It's not only the child that is menaced."






 I remain speechless and look at Zira, who hangs her head.




  "The orangutans hate you because you are the living proof of their
scientific aberrations, and the gorillas consider you too dangerous to be
allowed at liberty much longer. They are frightened you might found a new
race on this planet. But apart from this eventuality, they are frightened that
your mere example might sow unrest among the men. Unusual nervousness
has been reported among the ones with whom you are dealing."






  This is true. In the course of my last visit to the room with the cages, I
noticed a marked change among the men. It was as though some mysterious
instinct had notified them of the miraculous birth. They had greeted my
appearance with a concert of howls.






   "To tell the truth," Cornelius abruptly concludes, "I'm very much afraid
that within the next two weeks the Council might decide to eliminate you
. . . or at least remove part of your brain on the pretext of some experiment.
As for Nova, I believe it will be decided to put her out of the way as well,
because she has been in such close contact with you."






It's not possible! I who believed' myself entrusted with a semi-divine
mission! I feel I am once again the most wretched creature living and give
way to the most dreadful despair. Zira puts her hand on my shoulder.






  "Cornelius is quite right not to have concealed anything from you. But
what he has not told you is that we will not abandon you. We have decided
to save all three of you, and we'll be helped by a small group of brave
chimpanzees."




 "What can I do, the only member of my species?"






  "You must get away. You must leave this planet, to which you should
never have come. You must go back where you belong, to Earth. Your son's
safety and your own demand it."






Her voice breaks as though she is on the verge of tears. She is even more
attached to me than I thought. I am also deeply upset, no less at her sorrow
than at the prospect of leaving her forever. But how to escape from this
planet? Cornelius has a plan.






   "It's true," he says. "I've promised Zira to help you escape, and so I shall,
 even if it means losing my job. I shall thus feel I have not evaded my duty
 as an ape. For if a danger threatens us, it will be averted by your return to
 Earth. . . . You once said, I believe, that your spacecraft was still intact and
 could take you home?"
"Without the slightest doubt. It contains enough fuel, oxygen, and supplies
to take us to the edge of the universe. But how am I to reach it?"






  "It's still orbiting around our planet. An astronomer friend of mine has
tracked it down and knows every detail of its trajectory. As to the means of
reaching it? Now listen. In exactly ten days' time we are going to launch an
artificial satellite, manned by humans, of course, on whom we want to test
the effect of certain rays. . . . No, don't interrupt! The number of passengers
will be limited to three: one man, one woman, and one child."






I grasp his scheme in a flash and appreciate his ingenuity —but what
obstacles!






"Some of the scientists responsible for this launching are friends of mine, and
I have won them over to your cause. The satellite will be placed on the
trajectory of your craft and will be navigable within certain limits. The
human couple have been trained to carry out certain motions through
conditioned reflexes. I think you'll be even more skillful than they are. . . .
For this is our plan: you three will take the place of the passengers. That
shouldn't be too difficult. As I said, I've already got the necessary
accomplices: chimpanzees regard assassination with repugnance. The others
won't even notice the trick that's played on them."






   This indeed is more than likely. To most of the apes, a man is a man and
 nothing more. The differences between one individual and another do not
 strike them.
  "I'll put you through an intensive course of training during these ten
 days. Do you think you'll be able to board your craft?"






   It ought to be possible. But it's not the difficulties and dangers I am
 thinking about at the moment. I cannot shake off the melancholy that
 assailed me just now at the thought of leaving the planet Soror, Zira, and
 my fellows, yes, my fellow humans. Toward them I feel I am something !
 of a deserter. Yet above all I must save my son and Nova. i But I shall
 come back. Yes, later, I swear it on the heads ' of the captives in the cages,
 I shall come back with trump cards in my hand.






I am so bewildered that I voice my thoughts out loud.






 Cornelius smiles.






  "In four or five years of your time, your traveling time, but in more
than a thousand years as far as we stay-at-homes are concerned. Don't
forget that we, too, have discovered relativity. In the meantime I've
discussed the risk with my chimpanzee friends and we have decided to take
it."


  We leave one another after making arrangements to meet on the
following day. Zira goes out first. Remaining behind with Cornelius for a
moment, I take the opportunity of thanking him with all my heart.
Inwardly I'm wondering why he is doing all this for me. He reads my
thoughts.


 "Zira's the one you ought to thank," he says. "It's to her you will owe
your life. On my own, I don't know if I should have gone to so much
trouble or taken so many risks. But she would never forgive me for being
a party to murder . . . and anyway . . ."


  He pauses. Zira is waiting for me in the corridor outside. He makes sure
she cannot hear and quickly whispers:
  "Anyway, for her as well as me, it is better that you should vanish from
this planet."


 He closes the door after me as I leave the room. I am alone with Zira
and we take a few steps along the corridor.


 "Zira!"






  I stop and take her in my arms. She is as upset as I am. I see a tear
coursing down her muzzle while we stand locked in a tight embrace. Ah,
what matter this horrid material exterior! It is her soul that communes
with mine. I shut my eyes so as not to see her grotesque face, made
uglier still by emotion. I feel her shapeless body tremble against mine. I
force myself to rub my cheek against hers. We are about to kiss like
lovers when she gives an instinctive start and thrusts me away violently.


  While I stand there speechless, not knowing what attitude to adopt, she
hides her head in her long hairy paws and this hideous she-ape bursts
into tears and announces in despair:


  "Oh, darling,, it's impossible. It's a shame, but I can't, I can't. You are
really too unattractive!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - S E V E N
We have brought it off. I am once again traveling through space aboard the
cosmic craft, rushing like a comet in the direction of the solar system at an ever-
increasing speed.
  I am not alone. With me are Nova and SMus, the fruit of our interplanetary
passion, who can say "papa," "mama" and many other words. Also on board
are a couple of chickens and rabbits, and various seeds that the scientists put
in the satellite to study the effects of radiation on organisms of very diverse
kinds. All this will not be wasted.






  Cornelius' plan was carried out to the letter. Our substitution for the selected trio
was made without difficulty. The woman took Nova's place in the institute;
the child will be handed over to Zaius. The latter will demonstrate that he
cannot talk and is nothing but an animal. Then perhaps I will no longer be
considered dangerous, and the man who has taken my place, who will also
not talk, will be spared his life. It is unlikely that they will ever suspect the
substitution. The orangutans, as I've said before, make no distinction between
one man and another. Zaius will triumph. Cornelius will have a few worries
perhaps, but all this will soon be forgotten. . . . What do I mean! It is
forgotten already, for aeons have elapsed out there during the few months I
have been shooting through space. As for me, my memories are rapidly receding,
like the material body of the super-giant Betelgeuse, as the space-time increases
between us: the monster has changed in size to a small balloon, then an
orange. It is now no more than a minute bright spot in the galaxy. So is it with
my Sororian thoughts.






  It would be unreasonable of me to fret. I have succeeded in saving the
beings who are dear to me. Whom do I miss over there? Zira? Yes, Zira.
But the emotions that came to life between us had no name on Earth or in
any other region of the cosmos. The separation was essential. She must have
recovered her peace of mind, bringing up her baby chimpanzees after
marrying Cornelius. Professor Antelle? To hell with the professor! I could no
longer do anything for him, and he has apparently found a satisfactory solution
to the problem of existence. Only I shudder occasionally when I think that had I
been placed in the same environment as he was, and without Zira's presence, I,
too, might have fallen equally low.
  The boarding of our craft took place without a hitch. I was able to draw
closer and closer to it by guiding the satellite, and to enter the compartment, which had been left wide
open for the eventual return of our launch. Then the robots went into action and closed all the exits. We were on board. The
equipment was intact and the electronic brain started carrying out all the operations for our departure. On the planet Soror our
accomplices pretended that the satellite had been destroyed in flight after failing to be placed in orbit.








  We have been traveling for more than a year and a half of our own time. We have reached almost the speed of light, crossed an
immense space in a very short time, and have already embarked on the deceleration period that is to last another year. In our little
universe I never get tired of admiring my new family.








Nova is bearing the voyage extremely well. She is becoming more and more rational. Her motherhood has transformed her. She
spends hours doting on her son, who is proving to be a better teacher for her than I was. She articulates almost correctly the words
he utters. She does not yet talk to me, but we have drawn up a code of gestures enabling us to understand each other. I feel as
though I had lived with her always. As for Sirius, he is truly the pearl of the cosmos. He is a year and a half old. He walks, despite
the heavy gravity, and babbles without stopping. I cannot wait to show him to the men on Earth.




   What intense emotion I felt this morning when I noticed the sun beginning to assume perceptible dimension! It appears to us
now like a billiard ball and is tinged with yellow. I point it out to Nova and Sirius. I explain the nature of this heavenly body,
which is new to them, and they understand. Today Sirius talks fluently and Nova almost as well. She has been learning at the same
time as he. Miracle of motherhood, miracle that I Ovulated! I was unable to raise all the men on Soror from their animal state, but
my success in Nova's case is complete.








   The sun is growing bigger every moment. I try to distinguish the planets through the telescope. I can find my bearings easily. I
can see Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and . . . the Earth, yes, here is the Earth!








   Tears come into my eyes. Only someone who has lived more than a year on the planet of the apes could appreciate my emotion.
. . . I know that after seven hundred years I shall find neither parents nor friends, but I can hardly wait to see proper men again.








   Glued to the portholes, we watch Earth approaching.
I no longer need the telescope to distinguish the continents. We are in orbit. We are revolving around my old planet. I can see
Australia, America, and then . . . yes, here is France. We all three embrace, sobbing.








   We embark in the vessel's second launch. All the calculations have been made with a view to landing in my native country: not far from
Paris, I hope.








We have entered the atmosphere. The retrorockets come into action. Nova looks at me and smiles. She has learned how to smile
and also how to weep. My son stretches his arms out and opens his eyes in wonder. Below us is Paris. The Eiffel Tower is still there.








   I have taken over the controls and am navigating very accurately. A miracle of technique! After seven hundred years' absence I
manage to land at Orly—it has not changed very much—at the end of the airfield fairly far from the airport buildings. They must have
noticed me, so all I need do is wait There seems to be no air traffic; could the airport be out of use? No, there goes a machine. It
resembles in every respect the aircraft of my day and age!








A vehicle moves off from the buildings, heading in our direction. I switch off my rockets, a prey to an increasingly feverish
excitement What a story I shall have to tell my fellow humans! Perhaps they won't believe me at first, but I have proof. I have Nova, I have my
son.








The vehicle approaches. It is a truck and a fairly old-fashioned model: four wheels and a combustion engine. I automatically register
these details. I should have thought such vehicles had been relegated to museums long ago.








I also expected a somewhat more official reception. There are very few people here to greet me. Only two men, as far as I can see.
But how stupid I am—of course they cannot know. But when they do know . . .!








   Yes, there are two of them. I cannot see them distinctly because of the setting sun reflected on the windshield, an extremely dirty
windshield. Just the driver and one passenger. The latter wears a uniform. He is an officer; I can see the glitter of his badges of rank.
The commander of the airport, probably. The others will follow.








The truck stops fifty yards from us. I pick my son up in my arms and leave the launch. Nova follows us after a moment's hesitation.
She looks frightened but she will soon get over it.








   The driver gets out of the vehicle. He has his back turned to me. He is half concealed by the long grass growing in the space
between us. He opens the door for the passenger
to alight I was not mistaken, he is an officer; a senior officer, as I now see from his badges of rank. He jumps down. He takes a few steps to
emerges from the grass, and at last appears in full view. Nova utters a scream, snatches my son from me, and rushes back with him to the launch
remain rooted to the spot, unable to move a muscle or utter a sound. He is a gorilla.