CHAPTER THREE


The feeling of awe produced by such a sight cannot be described: a star,
which only yesterday was a brilliant speck among the multitude of
anonymous specks in the firmament, showed up more and more clearly
against the black background, assumed a dimension in space, appearing first
of all as a sparkling nut, then swelled in size, at the same time becoming
more definite in color, so that it resembled an orange, and finally fell into
place in the cosmos with the same apparent diameter as our own familiar
daytime star. A new sun was born for us, a reddish sun, like ours when it
sets, the attraction and warmth of which we could already feel.


Our speed was then very much reduced. We drew still closer to Betelguese,
until its apparent diameter far exceeded that of all the heavenly bodies
hitherto seen, which made a tremendous impression on us. Antelle gave some
instructions to the robots and we started gravitating around the super gjant.
Then the scientist took out his astronomical instruments and began his
observations.






  It was not long before he discovered the existence of four planets whose
dimensions he rapidly determined, together with their distances from the
central star. One of these, two away from Betelguese, was moving on a
trajectory parallel to ours. It was about the same size as Earth; it possessed
an atmosphere containing oxygen and nitrogen; it revolved around
Betelguese at a distance equivalent to thirty times the space between the
Sun and Earth, receiving a radiation comparable to that received by our
planet, thanks to the size of the super gjant combined with its relatively low
temperature.




We decided to make it our first objective. After fresh instructions were
given to the robots, our craft was quickly put into orbit around it. Then,
with engines switched off, we observed this new world at our leisure. The
telescope revealed its oceans and continents.






 The craft was not equipped for a landing, but this eventuality had been
provided for. We had at our disposal three much smaller rocket machines,
which we called launches. It was in one of these that we embarked, taking
with us some measuring instruments and Hector, the chimpanzee, who was
equipped as we were with a diving suit and had been trained in its use. As
for our ship, we simply let it revolve around the planet. It was safer there
than a liner lying at anchor in a harbor, and we knew it would not drift an
inch from its orbit.




Landing on a planet of this kind was an easy operation with our launch. As
soon as we had penetrated the thick layers of the atmosphere, Professor
Antelle took some samples of the outside air and analyzed them. He found
they had the same composition as the air on Earth at a similar altitude. I
hardly had time to ponder on this miraculous coincidence, for the ground
was approaching rapidly; we were no more than fifty miles or so above it.
Since the robots carried out every maneuver, I had nothing to do but press
my face to the porthole and watch this unknown world rising toward me,
my brain reeling with the excitement of discovery.






  The planet bore a strange resemblance to Earth. This impression became
clearer every second. I could now discern the outline of the continents with
my naked eye. The atmosphere was bright, slightly tinged with a pale green
color verging from time to time on yellow, rather like our sky in Provence
at sunset. The ocean was light blue, also with green tinges. The form of the
coastline was very different from anything I had seen at home, though my
feverish eye, conditioned by so many analogies, insisted wildly on
discerning similarities even there. But there the resemblance ended.
Nothing in the planet's topography recalled either our Old or New Worlds.






  Nothing? Come now! On the contrary, the essential factor! The planet was
inhabited. We flew over a town: a fairly big town, from which roads
radiated, bordered with trees and with vehicles moving along them. I had
time to make out the general architecture: broad streets and white houses
with long straight lines.
  But we were to land a long way farther off. Our flight swept us first over
cultivated fields, then over a thick russet-colored forest that called to mind
our equatorial jungle. We were now at a very low altitude. We caught sight
of a fairly large clearing occupying the top of a plateau, the ground all
around it being rather broken. Our leader decided to attempt a landing there
and gave his last orders to the robots. A system of retrorockets came into
action. We hovered motionless for a moment or two above the clearing, like
a gull spotting a fish.






Then, two years after leaving our Earth, we came down gently and landed
without a jolt in the middle of the plateau, on green grass reminiscent of our
meadows in Normandy.