CHAPTER                  TWENTY-SIX




It was some time before I recovered consciousness, so intense had been the strain of this session. I found myself lying on a bed in a room.
Zira and Cornelius were attending me, while some gorillas in uniform held back a crowd of journalists and curious onlookers who were
trying to approach me.








"Magnificent!" Zira whispered in my ear. "You've won."








"Ulysse," said Cornelius, "together we're going to do great things."








   He told me that the Grand Council of Soror had just held a special meeting and had decided on my immediate release.




   "There were some who opposed it," he added, "but public opinion demanded it and they had to yield."




   Having himself requested and obtained permission to take me on as his collaborator, he was rubbing bis hands at the thought of the
assistance I would provide in his research.




    "This is where you'll be living. I hope this apartment will suit you. It is quite close to mine, in a wing of the institute reserved for
the senior personnel."




   I looked around in bewilderment, thinking I was dreaming. The room was provided with every comfort; it was the beginning of a new
epoch. After hoping so long for this moment, I was suddenly overwhelmed by an odd feeling of nostalgia. My eyes met Zira's and I
saw that the clever she-ape had read my thoughts. A rather ambiguous smile came over her face.




    "Here, of course," she said, "you won't have Nova with you."
   I blushed, shrugged my shoulders, and sat up. I had recovered my strength and was eager to embark on my new life.








"Do you feel well enough to attend a little party?" Zira asked. "We've invited a few friends, all of them chimpanzees, to celebrate this
great day."








   I replied that nothing would give me greater pleasure, but I was no longer willing to appear stark naked. I then noticed I was
wearing some pajamas, Cornelius having lent me his. But though I was able, hi a pinch, to wear a chimpanzee's pajamas, I should
have looked grotesque in one of his suits




   .




    "We'll fit you out completely tomorrow and you'll have a decent suit for this evening. Here's the tailor."








A little chimpanzee came in and greeted me with great courtesy. I discovered that while I was still lying unconscious, the best tailors
had competed for the honor of dressing me. This one, the most famous of all, had the most noted • gorillas in the capital as clients.








       I admired his speed and dexterity. In less than two hours he had succeeded hi making me an acceptable suit. It felt quite strange
 to be wearing clothes again, and Zira looked at me as though she had never seen me before. While the artist was making the final
 adjustments Cornelius admitted the journalists who were hammering at the door. I was put through a catechism for over an hour,
 riddled with questions, under fire from the photographers, and required to furnish the most intriguing details about the Earth and
 the life men led on that planet. I lent myself willingly to this ceremony. A journalist myself, I realized the scoop I represented to
 these colleagues and knew what a powerful support the press could be.




    It was late by the tune they left. We were just on our way to join Cornelius' friends when we were detained by the arrival of
 Zanam. He was obviously acquainted with the latest developments, for he gave me an obsequious bow. He had come to tell Zira that
 things were not going too well in her department. Furious at my long absence, Nova was making a great racket. Her mood had
 infected all the other captives, and no amount of pike blows would calm them down.








       "I'll go and see," said Zira. "Wait for me here."
  I looked at her with a pleading expression. She hesitated, then shrugged her shoulders.




  "Come along if you like," she said. "After all, you're free and perhaps you'll be able to calm them down better than I can."








  Together we entered the room with the cages. The captives calmed down as soon as they saw me, and the uproar was followed by a
strange silence. They recognized me in spite of my clothes and seemed to understand that they were in the presence of something
miraculous.








  Trembling with emotion, I walked over to Nova's cage, my own cage. I went right up to her, I smiled at her, I spoke to her. For
a moment I had the impression that she was following my train of thought and was about to answer me. This was impossible, but
my mere presence had calmed her down like the others. She accepted a lump of sugar that I handed to her and ate it while I made
my
way out of the room with a heavy heart.






 Of that party, which took place in a smart night club— Cornelius had
decided to launch me forthwith into simian society, since in any case I was
now destined to live in it—I have only a confused and rather disturbing
memory.






The confusion was caused by the alcohol that I started swilling as soon as I
arrived, and to which my system was no longer accustomed. The disturbing
effect was an odd sensation that was to come over me later on many other
occasions. I can only describe it by saying that the nature of the figures
around me became progressively less simian, whereas then- function or the
position they held in society became dominant. The head waiter, for
instance, who came up obsequiously to show us our table, I saw only as the
head waiter, and the fact that he was a gorilla tended to be obscured. The
figure of an elderly she-ape with an outrageously painted face was replaced
by that of an old coquette, and when I danced with Zira I forgot her
condition completely, and my arm merely encircled the waist of a dancer.
The chimpanzee orchestra was nothing more than an orchestra, and the
elegant apes exchanging witticisms all around me were simply men about
town.






I shall not dwell on the sensation caused by my presence among them. I was
the focus of all eyes. I had to give my autograph to a number of fans, and
the two gorillas whom Cornelius had had the prudence to bring along were
hard-pressed to protect me from the swarm of she-apes of every age who
competed for the honor of having a drink or dancing with me.
It was getting late and I was already fairly tipsy when the thought of
Professor Antelle crossed my mind. I felt steeped in black remorse. I was
not far from shedding a tear or two over my own infamy as I reflected that
here I was making merry and drinking with a lot of apes while my
companion was shivering on some straw in a cage.






  Zira asked me why I was looking so sad. I told her. Cornelius then
informed me that he had made inquiries about the professor and that he was
hi good health. There would be no opposition now to his being released. I
insisted that I could not wait a minute longer before bringing him this good
news.




"After all," Cornelius agreed, after thinking it over, "one can't refuse you
anything on a day like this. Let's go. I know the director of the zoo."




 The three of us left the nightclub and drove to the garden. On being
 waked up, the director bestirred himself. He knew all about me. Cornelius
 told him the true identity of one of the men he held locked up in a cage.
 He could hardly believe his ears, but he, too, was eager to do all he could
 for me. We should have to wait, of course, until the next day and go
 through various formalities before he could release the professor, but
 meanwhile there was nothing against our having a talk with him at once.
 He offered to accompany us.




Day was breaking when we reached the cage In which the luckless scientist
lived like an animal in the midst of fifty men and women. These were still
asleep, huddled together in couples or in groups of four or five. They
opened their eyes as soon as the director switched on the lights.
It did not take me long to find my companion. He was stretched out on the
ground like the others, huddled against the" body of a girl who looked quite
young. I shuddered to see him like this, and at the same time was moved by
the debasement to which I, too, had been reduced for four months.






 I was so upset that I could not speak. The men, who were now awake,
showed no sign of surprise. They were tame and well trained; they began
performing their usual tricks in the hope of some reward. The director
threw them some pieces of cake. Immediately scuffles and disputes broke
out, as they did during the day, while the quietest of them assumed their
favorite position, squatting by the bars and stretching out an imploring hand.




Professor Antelle followed their example. He came up as close as possible
to the director and begged for a titbit. This humiliating behavior gave me a
sickening feeling that soon became an unbearable anguish. He was three
paces away; he was looking at me and appeared not to recognize me. In
fact, his eyes, which had once been so keen, had lost all their gleam and
suggested the same spiritual void as those of the other captives. I was
horrified to see in them no more emotion than that aroused among the other
captives by the presence of a man in clothes.






  I made a great effort and managed at last to speak in order to put an end to
this nightmare.




"Professor," I said, "Master, it is I, Ulysse Merou. We are saved. I came
here to tell you . . ."






I stopped hi sheer amazement. At the sound of my voice he had reacted in
the same way as the men of the planet Soror. He had suddenly lowered his
head and shrunk away.
"Professor, Professor Antelle," I beseeched him, "it's I, Ulysse Merou, your
traveling companion. I am free, and in a few hours you will be too. These apes you see here are our friends. They know who we are
and welcome us like brothers."








   There was no response. He showed not the slightest sign of comprehension but, with another frightened gesture like that of a startled
beast, recoiled still further.








I was in despair, and the apes seemed extremely puzzled. Cornelius wrinkled his brow, as he did when he was trying to find the
solution to a problem. It crossed my mind that the professor, frightened by their presence, might well be pretending to be witless. I
asked them to move away and leave me alone with him, to which they readily agreed. When they had disappeared, I walked around
the cage to reach the corner in which the scientist had taken refuge and again I spoke to him:








   "Master," I implored him, "I understand your caution. I know the danger to which men from Earth are exposed on this planet.
But we are alone, I give you my word of honor, and our ordeals are over. You must believe me, your companion, your disciple, your
friend, Ulysse Merou."








    He shrank back still further, darting furtive glances in my direction. Then, while I stood there trembling, not knowing what else to
say, he half opened his mouth.








   Had I succeeded at last in convincing him? I watched him, hoping against hope. But I remained speechless with horror at the
manner in which he expressed his emotion. I said that he had half opened his mouth, but this was not the spontaneous gesture of a
creature preparing to speak. He emitted from it a gurgling sound similar to those uttered by the strange men on this planet to express
satisfaction or fear. There in front of me, without moving his lips, while my heart went numb with horror, Professor Antelle gave
vent to a long-drawn-out howl.








part three