A Distant Noon










                                         – 1 –


                        The flyer dropped, and then shifted back to level flight.


                        The sky ahead was purple. Across the purple heavens, the headlight beams shone golden, glittering, lighting up the countless raindrops like a mirage as the flyer pierced through the lavender darkness.


                        Mmm, it’s started again.


                        Oki PPK Naska stared passively into the front glass for a while.


                        It’s beautiful. So beautiful.


                        Why couldn’t he always be like this, leaving his cares to the wind, relaxed? Before another minute passed, his field of vision became more colorful, changed faces to become a paradise of brilliant hues. Then, in an instant, it all concentrated to brilliant white, turned to flaming high noon. Why couldn’t he immerse himself in that world, greedily devouring his dreams? That one last hope still surviving in his heart: wasn’t that the only path back to peace, the peace he had only felt in childhood – or at least, that he thought he had felt?


                        Still.


                        Oki knew that the “mirage” was a psychological phenomenon caused in human beings by the repetition of twilight and night on this world, Nenegin. He also knew well that if the color-sense compensation effect was left untreated, it became much harder to restore normal vision. Once you entered the false noon of this world, you couldn’t return to the real noon. Just like the colonists who had come here... No, the word “colonist” had a nice ring to it, but the fact was, they were social failures. They had become prisoners of this world, unable to escape it.


                        Oki forced out the pain and the almost-homesickness he felt in his heart, and, taking out the vision-restoring spray from his inner pocket, pressed it to his arm.


                        After a while, the drug took effect, and his color sense returned to normal. That normalcy, though, was of course only the usual blackness and silver spray of raindrops. Normalcy held no joy, no spaciousness: merely boredom.


                        Anyway... The color-sense compensation effect shouldn’t occur again for another three or four hours. Considering his present condition, it should last that long. It was also a fact that the drug’s effect grew weaker with each dose.


                        Mmm...


                        As long as you stayed here on this almost colorless Nenegin, the frequency of color-sense attacks grew higher and higher. If you wanted to avoid it, there were only two methods. One was to decorate your home in total color. The other was to stay awake as little as possible, increasing sleep time to the maximum. People who used the former method, though, became subject to extremely intense color-sense attacks later on, because their nervous systems, hungry for color, began to demand it aggressively after receiving it in small doses. Oki had discarded that method some time ago, as it was like giving a drink of seawater to a thirsty man, or a drug to an addict in withdrawal. From the latter approach, the only effect was that you didn’t suffer attacks during sleep. And, in the waking that always followed sleep, there was always a washed-out feeling. The blank-mindedness of not knowing where you were, stopping the pendulum of your time sense, gradually led to a return to reality. And “reality” was the realization that you were adrift in a soggy hell.


                        There was no solution. As long as you were here on Nenegin, there was no help for it. There was no remedy other than to flee it. He, though, was in a position where that wasn’t possible, wasn’t permitted.


                        Of course, as far as appearances went, Oki couldn’t hold that attitude. An Administrator should feel a sense of love for, a sense of difficulty in parting from, the world assigned to his care. And, because he was the Administrator, he mustn’t feel hatred towards this world – or, more accurately, he was an Administrator, with the experience and training needed to become one with whatever world he might be entrusted with.


                        But he did hate this Nenegin. He hated everything on the surface of this world: the eternal rain... The succession of almost identical, lusterless days and nights under the thick clouds... The miserable, curious native inhabitants... And the humans who had come here to live, with their twisted society.


                        This place was different.


                        This world was fundamentally different from the other worlds he had served on, Yascalin and Todonin. At the start, they too had been strange places to him, but hadn’t he managed to discharge the functions of an Administrator on those different worlds? Perhaps it was different from what he had considered ideal, but he had managed to comprehend it all in his own way. Here, though, he couldn’t find such an opening, no matter how much time he spent. He himself couldn’t yet figure out the reason why... He just didn’t fit.


                        In spite of it (he thought to himself wryly) here he was on Nenegin. As the Administrator of Nenegin, as the hand of the Terran Federation, he had been fighting for over forty days to fulfill his orders. He was struggling under the load of this world’s classification: Class III, Type C – the development of civilization. He was trying to answer the almost hopeless demand that the Federation thought was possible. No, not only that. Even if he did manage to fulfill this, somehow, there would be another demand afterwards – the demand to change to Type D: to help with the creation of a suitable environment for those who already had to live here, win their public support, and ensure their harmonious intercourse with the native inhabitants. Was that really possible? Was there really anybody who could do that?


                        The Federation had judged it to be possible, and for exactly that reason had dispatched the man who could do it. That man was the Administrator –Oki PPK Naska.


                        He questioned himself again.


                        Could he do it?


                        Did he really, honestly, intend to do it?


                        Answer... It didn’t come. Or rather, from the start, there was only one answer. As long as he stayed within the Administrator system, the answer was settled. It was not acceptable to dodge things. Whether he succeeded or failed, the Federation would be the judge, and he had no choice but to continue until they made their decision. He could not judge things himself. Even if he were judged as having failed, and was transferred to a lower post with less difficulty, he would still be one of the elite. It was completely different from throwing away his duties, and falling into that “other” group.


                        Was that all?


                        Was that the only reason he was doing this?


                        Maybe.


                        At any rate, he couldn’t say it wasn’t with any certainty.


                        Oki, of course, never revealed the scorn he directed at himself. Administrators, who received such intensive training, never did. They were trained to control not only their expressions, but also what was in their hearts. Especially someone like him: a veteran of two other worlds. Those thoughts that came bubbling up from inside him were quickly compressed and locked up in a corner of his heart.










                                         – 2 –


                        “In another twenty kilometers we will arrive at Pijajasta,” reported SQ2A.


                        Oki strained his eyes, but he could see nothing more than before. Only blackness and rain.


                        “I will report the situation in Pijajasta as investigated in advance by LQQ72. Of the data now held, I will include only what is judged to be critical. Will you read the report? Or listen to it?”


                        “I’ll listen.”


                        “Understood... The community called Pijajasta consists of approximately seven thousand native inhabitants. As determined by the preliminary investigation, it is the largest community known to the Administrator’s Office. On the Yorkland measurement scale, the natives’ average intelligence level is 3.41; the upper one percent is 4.40. However, their performance as a group is nine percent compared to the theoretical maximum, which places them very high for their relative living standard, although they are still at the pre-organized society level.”


                        “...”


                        Oki listened silently. It wasn’t a good idea to ask questions when a high-level robot was talking. They were talking based on their own logic systems, and to interject a question often derailed their train of thought. After pursuing the tangent suggested by the question to the bitter end, and explaining every detail, they would then return to the main topic. They tied everything together, never missing a point. In order to return to the main topic, it might take hours of explanation. Of course, an order to stop could be given, but you had to be prepared to listen to it later, because the robot would explain it. Although it could be thought of as a fault, the current Administrator system was based on robots, and this situation had been born of necessity. Without their functions, the Administrator’s job would be extremely difficult. Since all the Administrators knew the characteristics of the robots thoroughly, there was no need to change. As long as the robots fulfilled their assigned functions, no one cared to do anything else. In general, bureaucracy was like an involuntary muscle, and rather than using it badly, it was safer to maintain control by stimulating it, damping it, stopping it. You could say that handling the robots followed along the same lines.


                        “LQQ72 has announced our visit to the political body of Pijajasta,” continued SQ2A. “It reports that the native inhabitants are making preparations to greet us.”


                        “...”


                        “The report is concluded. Do you have any instructions or directives?”


                        At that point, Oki spoke.


                        “I want to verify something... Has it been made clear that we have come in response to their request?”


                        “Yes, as per your directive received before we left.”


                        “Satisfactory.” Of course the robots weren’t likely to forget to do something. Rather, he had asked the question to firmly pound it into his own head.


                        “We will land in a few minutes. I will inform you when we land,” reported SQ2A, and then fell silent.


                        Oki felt the light humor of the situation.


                        In a few minutes...


                        Really, robots that learned to use that kind of imprecise, everyday speech – especially high-level robots – seemed to want to use it at every opportunity.


                        That was not his deep feeling, but rather a passing fancy. To the Administrator, robots were just perfectly constructed tools.


                        On the other hand, he also knew well that they were tools of unmistakable authority, and possessed the highest capabilities for the oppression of lower levels. Any Administrator, looking back on himself and his own authority, would soften his position, because any criticism would pass over the robots, exactly because they were not human, and concentrate on him. Of course, he would only soften a little, a slight mental relaxation. That, though, would never become an excuse for him. He always said to himself that, even from the political viewpoint, they had no effect on the Administrator, and it was meaningless to debate the point.


                        Oki cut off his thoughts there. He realized that he had become too tense as the craft descended.


                        They landed at Pijajasta.


                        When he took one step outside in his protective clothing, the world was nothing but mud and rain. The green-brown mud vomited bubbles of gas incessantly, and the rain continued to pour down from above. Without testing each place, it was impossible to guess the depth of the mud. If it went as far as ten centimeters, there were places where it went as deep as several meters. That was what it was like on the surface of Nenegin. There were active volcanoes across the planet, and, as one could imagine, it was hot, and the mud itself swarmed with life of all kinds.


                        Oki, together with SQ2A, advanced across the mud wearing float shoes. To use float shoes required a great deal of training and concentration. It was much easier to use a boat... But after considering the damage to his authority as an Administrator that would follow if his boat should overturn, he decided it was better to use the float shoes, however cumbersome they were.


                        Encircling him and SQ2A were the protective LQ-class robots, each a cubic meter or so in size. Each one was like a fully automatic heavy tank, but with decision-making capability and fighting power not found in tanks. Administrator Oki could place all his confidence in their capabilities. Just as the old monstrous surface ships that crossed the Pacific scared away the sea life with their shapes and engine noise, making it impossible to come truly close to the sea, so did these robots make it difficult for the Administrator to approach the native inhabitants and hold true communication. In time – or rather, as soon as possible – he wanted to be able to meet with the native inhabitants without robot protection, but at the moment he lacked the confidence. He just had to be patient until it became possible. Until then, he had to stay inside their protective shelter. His protection, he thought, included a heavy minus as well. Well, maybe that was good. But in his heart, Oki wondered if the day would ever come when he could walk freely without protection.


                        With the long-frequency visor added to his protective clothing, his field of vision became bright. It raised the infrared wavelengths to where they became visible. To meet the native inhabitants he had to use it, no matter how much he disliked it. It wasn’t night now, which helped quite a bit, and he could make out shapes even with the naked eye. Naturally, a normal light was out of the question. To these dwellers-in-the-darkness, a normal light caused sunburn, headaches, and in extreme cases even blindness – a harmful, too-bright-to-be-visible brilliance. If the visor were only more complete, as Oki desired, he would use it constantly. In other words, if the colors and everything else returned to normal along with the frequency shift... Even though his vision became brighter, it was still a picture drawn only in rust, red, deep crimson, cinnabar, and black. He just couldn’t come to like the strange, illusory feeling caused when all colors were compressed into the red and orange shades.


                        Around the party, dozens of native inhabitants thrust their heads up out of the mud, and swam around. Occasionally, a raft made of branches with two or three crew on board would drift near, but upon seeing Oki and his robots, they hurriedly changed course.


                        Native inhabitants.


                        To be precise, the “Nenegia” – the dominant species on this world, Nenegin.


                        Every time Oki saw one of them, he felt a sense of disbelief. There was no mistake that they were at the top of the ladder on Nenegin. Although it was pretty crude, they had their own distinct civilization... But he still couldn’t believe it. The reason, more than likely, was because of their appearance.


                        Their average height was about one hundred fifty centimeters, and all of it looked funny. Protruding pig eyes, a mouth stretched sideways... Their ears, breathing holes, and gills were lined up on the sides of their heads, leaving a blank space in their faces where humans had a nose. The vestige of a vertebral fin rose on the back of their heads. All together, the head and face were huge compared to the body, plus which they had egg-shaped protruding bellies and water-flippers for feet. Their legs were strong enough not only to propel them through the mud, but also to kick enemies to death if need be. Their legs had evolved to the point where they could stand erect, and as a result their upper limbs had changed to supple arms, with four nimble digits.


                        Now that he thought of it, they looked like puffed-up frogs or swimming pigs. It was only reasonable that he should have trouble believing that things with their appearance could be intelligent. He had studied about them and their manner of living before coming here, and he learned more from the robots, and from direct communication, but he still had the same strange feeling as before. To the colonists who had come here and built their own little closed world, the Nenegia were merely objects of scorn. The Terran Federation forbid the colonists to take that attitude, but the Federation was very far away and the edict was not very strong, so it was generally not expected to be obeyed. With an Administrator present, they at least shouldn’t try to enslave or kill the native inhabitants. He had the authority to order them to stop, and to send robot watchers into the colonists’ living areas. If they resisted that action, it was not hard to imagine what his political reaction would be. Oki knew how they felt about the Nenegia – the pig-frogs. And the fact was, he had to admit deep in his heart that the name was perfect, absolutely perfect.


                        The party was already approaching the gate, which was flanked on either side by watchtowers. They were not just heaped-up mud, of course, but cleverly assembled piles of branches and roots, with openings where the gatekeepers would watch the traffic. It afforded protection not only above the surface of the mud, but also in the mud itself: there was usually a strong movable wall under the surface. It was to guard against entry by the giant, multi-fanged predatory fish, and the fierce soft-bodied creatures, but at the same time it was also used for defense against other Nenegia, when there was a war for some fishing ground or feeding matter. This gate and its equipment were superb, in keeping with this largest known settlement, Pijajasta.


                        At the moment, it was completely open. There was nothing at all in the waterway to impede the progress of this special guest.


                        After they passed through the main gate, they entered the central waterway, and proceeded straight down it.


                        On both sides of the main waterway were further fences. On the far sides of those fences was more mud, then more fences, and so on and so on. From what they currently knew about the Nenegia, this was a collection of homes, ranging in size from four or five square meters for a small dwelling up to two or three thousand square meters for a mansion. Each was surrounded by a fence, which prevented entry either over the mud or through it, except through a gate. Each cluster of Nenegia homes had a fort that reflected its power, which was occupied by the leader of the group. As an independent communal group expanded through reproduction and adoption, it also produced buffer groups to help protect it from threats from the outside, leading to the development of towns. After the size of the community passed a certain point, food supplies came to be held in common, and the communal group began managing resources for the community, requiring a central government. In general, this took the form of the member second to the leader attending to the functions of government in the leader’s name, and for the leader’s benefit, but there were many different styles and levels of use for governments depending on the area. However, the bigger the community was, the more complicated and multi-functional became its government. As management became more difficult, more and more individual groups lost their defining characteristics. In that kind of society, where ability counted for more than lineage, and where there was a class of government officials without ties to a particular home, power had the tendency to shift from the separate homes to the central authority.


                        Oki didn’t study all of this as recorded history. The Nenegia didn’t really have anything yet that could be called “history”, except for some oral traditions. All across Nenegin, the Nenegia were at about the same level of development, which one could easily understand with reference to the laws of history by which humanity had advanced. They were just now moving from towns to primitive city-states... No, it would be better to say from a feudal society to a stage preparatory to an industrial revolution. Oki had reason to think that. Here, among themselves, in this community, they had currency. They had been seen using the eyeballs of their most prized fish as exchange tokens.


                        All of the things he had seen so far had led him to believe they were at that level. Of course, he and the robots had no idea how things would change from here, or whether or not they would ever develop a true community consciousness. It looked as though they would not fall into a cycle of continuous stealing from each other, of conquering and being conquered. It was the duty of the Administrator to predict the future of the Nenegia, and both he and the previous Administrator had struggled with no avail to understand it.


                        To find out the answers, the only shortcut was to find the most advanced, or the largest-scale, community. The previous Administrators had all tried to investigate this largest community, Pijajasta, but with no success. The reason was that, for their own defense, the Nenegia had a custom of never revealing the interior features of their communities to any outsider. Oki, too, had tried to investigate the town, but had met the same barrier – and, until today, he had not been able to enter Pijajasta.


                        True, the robots had investigated under his instructions. They had managed to learn many things, such as the name – “Pijajasta”. According to the native inhabitants, that was not really correct, but humans couldn’t duplicate their pronunciation. Still, it was a proper noun, and it couldn’t be helped. The robots cleaned up the pronunciation for humans, and that’s how the name had been used ever since.


                        That level of investigation by itself, though, was not enough. However much data there was, the Federation wanted the judgment of the Administrator himself on the most critical things, which meant that he and his party had to go themselves.


                        They had sought the opinions of the colonists who had come to live on Nenegia. The previous Administrator had done that... Since Oki had had a bad experience when he first came here, he had lost trust in the colonists, and the more he found out about them, the less he liked them. Now he only maintained the minimum level of contact with them. In any case, they were not true colonists, and weren’t recognized or protected by the Federation. The Administrator would face no difficulty in simply ignoring them, and he certainly didn’t feel like asking anything of them.


                        Besides, he had managed to enter Pijajasta without their help. He could investigate, see this Pijajasta with his own eyes, without using the capabilities of the robots from the side or from the air. Of course, that wasn’t to say he or other Administrators had never entered a community. They had entered a small one near the Administration Complex often, and good-sized communities several times... But this was a giant community, quite possibly at a different level of development.


                        The fact that he had been so lucky was actually almost a mere coincidence. LQQ72, who patrolled this community regularly, had received a petition to meet the Administrator. Not only that, but it asked for the Administrator to meet them here, in Pijajasta. It was a longed-for, almost impossible-to-believe invitation that they had never made before.


                        The rain was falling, everything was red, and the float shoes were heavy.


                        Ahead of them was a hill-like structure. As they approached it, surrounded by the mud, it looked more and more forbidding.


                        The central fort.


                        Just as each member group had a fort to show its own strength, so did Pijajasta itself have a fort, and it was natural for it to be the seat of government... He had never seen such a large central fort.


                        It wasn’t the standard uniform shape, but rose in a complex terraced formation, with fields on the terraces.


                        On the lower part, thirty or forty Nenegia were lined up, looking like a reception committee.


                        LQQ72 rose up out of the group of Nenegia, and came flying towards him through his red field of vision.


                        Oki couldn’t detect it, but in that instant, advance scout LQQ72, SQ2A in charge of his protection detail, and the head SQ1, back at the main complex, were exchanging information, calculating and deciding. The fact that they made no effort to stop him meant that they felt there was no danger at the moment.


                        As LQQ72 joined them, the reception party began to move also, and a raft with four or five Nenegia on it came from the main fort. As they came, they croaked a subdued “Ueyy, Ueyy.”


                        “Welcome. We have been waiting. Please step up onto the raft,” spoke the translator built into SQ2A’s body.


                        Oki stepped onto the raft, still wearing his float shoes. SQ2A immediately took up a position at his side, and the other robots surrounded the raft.


                        The raft was big enough that there was still ample space even after Oki’s party got on.


                        After he got on, the Nenegia said nothing, merely standing rigidly in respect. They seemed to be only underlings assigned to come meet him. To indicate their status, the Nenegia sewed a piece of rope or wood, called a peda (sometimes peta), on to the top of their heads, which bobbed incessantly. The material used to make them changed constantly from place to place, but the thinner it was – and the more there were – indicated higher status. The peda of Pijajasta were extremely thin, and wrapped in something soft, showing that a great deal of labor had been invested in making them, but the Nenegia here only had one or two peda apiece.


                        Oki turned to look at the stern of the raft, surprised. Generally Nenegian rafts, especially big ones like this, were propelled by a number of paddlers from the lower classes, kicking with their feet. This one, however, had some peda-less Nenegia turning a circular contraption, which transmitted its power to the mud and propelled the craft – a mud-wheel.


                        Oki was given no time to look at it, though. The raft arrived at the main fort, and all of the waiting Nenegia fell to all fours and croaked “Guwa, Guwaa” at him.


                        “Welcome to Pijajasta!” honked the translator. “Please step up onto the fort.”


                        Oki began to climb the reddish-black rain-sprayed central fort. He noticed for the first time that it had real stairs built in.


                        And more... Oki felt his curiosity bubbling up even more. What had looked like terraced fields were divided into various levels, each with a number of Nenegia working on something or having some kind of discussion. As he climbed up the fort, he noticed that there were only one- and two-peda Nenegia visible. Generally, the standard group wore five or six, and the highest decision-maker a dozen or more.


                        He finally reached the top of the rain-drenched fort.


                        A single Nenegia popped out of the fort from one of the countless openings, padded around to the front of Oki, and signaled the others to fall back. Prostrating himself in front of Oki, he began to speak.


                        The translator spoke in turn:


                        “We have been waiting for you. I am... [the translator paused, and converted it into human pronunciation] Gugenge. I am the first decision-maker of Pijajasta.”


                        “...”Oki had been expecting a long, drawn-out affair of ceremonious phrases when meeting the highest Nenegia, and was taken by surprise.


                        Was this really the first decision-maker?


                        His brick-red shiny skin and bulging eyes were certainly standard for Nenegia, maybe too standard, and the upper classes were usually a little fat. Also, this Nenegia had only a three-rod peda attached to his head.


                        Was this really the first decision-maker? Or merely a stand-in?


                        In any case, since the other had spoken, he had no choice but to return the greeting.


                        “I am honored by your invitation,” he said, giving a small bow. “We were told you wished to meet with us. What is your desire? We would like to help you as much as we may.”


                        “When you speak that way, it is so much easier to discuss things,” said the Nenegia named Gugenge, standing up slowly. “We have something we would like to ask of you as Administrator.”


                        “...”


                        “It is truly a selfish request, though...”


                        “... I wonder what it might be?”


                        “Would you be willing to lend us one of your machines?”


                        “Machines?” Oki furrowed his brow. “We have many machines. What type of machine are you interested in?”


                        “Your laser.”


                        “Laser?”


                        “Yes. The thing that produces invisible energy that destroys what it contacts.”


                        “I would like to inquire,” said Oki, on the alert, “Exactly how did you learn the word laser?”


                        “We heard it from humans.”


                        “Humans?”


                        “Yes. Humans who live apart from you and your robots. We sometimes go there and trade our products for what they have. I saw it once, and was taught the word.”


                        “I see,” nodded Oki. He was talking about the colonists. Oki knew that there was barter between them and the Nenegia.


                        “But in that case, why don’t you borrow it from them?”


                        “Because they won’t loan us one,” answered Gugenge. “They said, though, that you do not attempt to live with them... And, they complain that you are too friendly with us. So, I thought if I asked you, you might assist us in the matter.”


                        “Depending on the use, that is a very dangerous device. How do you plan to use it? Not for war, surely...”


                        “War?”


                        “Don’t you often fight among yourselves, your communities?”


                        When he heard that, Gugenge gave what looked like a strange smile.


                        “If we used the laser in fighting, we would destroy our prize. War is to capture talented Nenegia, and take the best fish. Is there any use for dead Nenegia? Can our warriors alone carry the captured fish? Pijajasta is the largest community. Not only the largest, but also possessed of a large force of talented members, and we are raising more. Our fish are more abundant that anywhere else. Why should we have to fight?”


                        “Don’t they ever come attacking you?”


                        “We have managed to protect Pijajasta until now. Even if we don’t have your laser, we can continue to protect it, I’m sure. If we have the laser, then they certainly won’t come invading. All in all, there is no possibility of the laser being used in combat.”


                        “...” Oki stared silently at the other. This Nenegia was different from the others. He thinks a lot better than any other I’ve met, he said to himself.


                        “We wish to use the laser for development,” continued Gugenge. “We are undertaking many projects to make Pijajasta a better place for us to live in. For that purpose, though, we must cut and work not soft materials, but hard materials. What now takes many members a long time to perform could be done quickly with your laser. That is why we have asked you...”


                        “I see.” Oki gave no answer.


                        Maybe it was a lie. Maybe they planned to use it in war. Still, if that became a problem, then he could simply take it back. That, along with punishing the government of Pijajasta, would settle the problem. If he simply warned them in advance, there should be no problem.


                        And if the laser could be genuinely useful to the Nenegia... They could begin to develop a proper civilization...


                        That was it.


                        He had been changed by the Federation with this world as Class III, Type C – the development of civilization.


                        For that reason, wouldn’t it be better to respond positively to their request? He should, even if there were problems, go along with what the government of Pijajasta was attempting to do, cooperating with and guarding them.


                        “If you loan us a laser, then we will be able to believe in your kind.” Maybe Gugenge thought Oki’s silence was hesitation, and cast out more bait. “In that case, although it’s an exception to our rule, we would be willing to guide you through Pijajasta.”


                        “What!?” At those words, Oki lost the train of thought he had already decided on.


                        The chance!


                        No human had ever seen the interior of Pijajasta closely. Not only would the Federation gain precious data, but there was no mistake that Oki’s credit would rise, too. Plus which, it was close to what the Federation had ordered him to do here.


                        “If that is insufficient, then we are willing to pay compensation,” continued Gugenge.


                        “Compensation?” asked Oki, his curiosity aroused in spite of his decision. “In what, your local currency?”


                        “No,” contradicted Gugenge. “We could not pay you enough in our fish-eyeball currency. We would have to give you our high-denomination currency.”


                        “High-denomination? You have such a thing?”


                        “Yes. Shall I show it to you?”


                        Gugenge bellowed something, and a single Nenegia dove into an opening for an instant, and brought out something in its hand, which it gave to Gugenge. He held it out in the palm of his moist hand.


                        “This single piece has the value of three thousand of our usual currency. Would it be acceptable to you if we paid one of these every day?”


                        “...”


                        Oki silently looked at the “high-value” currency in the other’s hand.


                        What the...?


                        It was an ultra-durable, plastic – clothes button!


                        He couldn’t imagine what road it had traveled over to reach Pijajasta, but it was clear where it had come from.


                        The colonists’ area.


                        For Nenegian goods, the colonists handed these over in return. The Nenegia only saw humans dressed in protective clothing, which had no buttons. And so the colonists had given them buttons, which could be produced in any quantity by an automatic machine. The colonists here were doing exactly what other colonists had once done to Native Americans, with glass beads and knives.


                        Swindling them.


                        Of course, Oki didn’t say that to the other.


                        He would have to settle things with the colonists later, he thought, as he replied to Gugenge.


                        “There is no need to spend these. You have said you will not use the laser for warfare. In the event you should violate that promise, not only will we take direct action to end its use by Pijajasta, but we will also judge each individual decision-maker here. Those are the conditions for loaning the laser.”


                        Those words were immediately translated into Nenegian. The words themselves should have already been translated by SQ2A to SQ1 in the Administration Complex, and recorded there. He couldn’t say what opinions or judgments SQ1 might have, but it certainly couldn’t argue with a decision made based on his authority as Administrator.


                        “Thank you for your precious gift,” responded Gugenge. “And thank you for allowing us to keep our high-denomination currency. Though Pijajasta is richer than all other communities, and has many more of them, they are still valuable...”


                        Gugenge prostrated himself again, then stood and signaled something to the waiting Nenegia, and approached.


                        “Since you have decided, I would like to guide you through Pijajasta.”


                        In the red twilight, the ever-present rain was still falling, making everything appear black. That liquid blackness sprayed from his feet, spread out to pools of blackness, ran away, down, down. Gugenge and the other Nenegia were all red. Even SQ2A was just another member of the reddish-orange world.


                        This was a nightmare... Not reality, but an illusory vision that might possess him at any time... Oppressed yet again by that feeling, he tried to dispel it as he walked with the others down the central fort.


                        Midway down, Gugenge stopped and turned, indicating a single opening.


                        “We Nenegia live in the interior. Will you see it?”


                        “Yes, I’d like to,” answered Oki immediately, climbing down a ladder after Gugenge.


                        It was dark, and it got darker as he went down.


                        Even with the vision aids, he couldn’t make it out clearly. Still, through his squinted eyes he could make out a number of tunnels fanning out and down from his position, with some sort of bags hanging from the ceiling, and a number of Nenegia working here and there.


                        Below that was mud. A mud surface where a number of Nenegia were rising and submerging.


                        “What is under the mud?” asked Oki, feeling the overpoweringly heavy reverberations of his own voice.


                        “It’s the same in the mud,” replied Gugenge. “When we Nenegia emerge from the mud, we can use our vision, but we use our hearing in the mud. Not only that, but we can use our skin also to a certain extent... And we know what is happening, who is there. Of course, we have to make out detailed work with our fingers.”


                        Oki didn’t ask any more questions. The fact that these advanced, differentiated amphibians led such lives had already been hypothesized and verified. Still, when it was explained to him so simply, it all seemed to be blatantly obvious.


                        He decided to examine SQ2A’s recorded memories later, and climbed back up. Emerging, he went down the fort again.


                        A raft similar to the previous one was waiting on the mud surface. Two Nenegia were seated to the sides of that wheel-like arrangement, as before. Oki couldn’t determine if it was the same one as before or not.


                        The raft started when Oki, Gugenge, SQ2A, and three or four other Nenegia got on.


                        The LQ-class robots surrounded the raft at a distance, and moved forward with it.


                        “We invented this propulsion device ourselves. It is vastly more efficient than the previous methods,” said Gugenge.


                        “You did?”


                        “Yes. Not only this, we have designed and built many tools ourselves.”


                        “...” Oki looked at the other in surprise.


                        “We have ten [the translator stopped for a minute, then found a translation] researchers here,” he continued. “Two of my brothers work as researchers, and there are some who used to be in the lowest class. Class distinctions are not important. We will give special treatment to any member with ability... Each of these researchers has a number of assistants, and works on developing new tools. This system works very well, and we are thinking of developing it into something bigger.”


                        “...”


                        “Our inventions will gradually gain acceptance in other communities and be used there. And Pijajasta will become even more prosperous.”


                        “... I see,” murmured Oki.


                        “I have thought about why other communities do not feel as we do. The answer is clear. The other communities are too finely segregated. The first-level decision makers, the high-, medium- and low-level decision makers, major group heads, medium group heads: they are divided without end; and, what’s more, the occupation of each is defined by his social position. This makes it impossible to bring out the capabilities of the lowest classes and the slaves, even if they have true ability. Isn’t that correct?”


                        “Just as you say.” Oki began to feel queerly overpowered. “The social distinctions are not that strong in Pijajasta?”


                        “We want it that way, but it just isn’t feasible. We have eliminated slavery. It’s not efficient... The ones moving the raft now are free Nenegia. They get paid a reward, to the extent that there are too many applicants for the positions. I feel this is a good thing, but how do you feel?”


                        “What you say about slaves is correct... But if you only give special treatment to those employed by the government, when you finally exceed the limits of your managerial ability...” Oki remembered that the other was a Nenegia, and stopped. He had been feeling as if he were talking to an Administrator trainee. “Ah... Isn’t it perfectly reasonable for the present?”


                        “Oh. We will think it over again carefully,” answered Gugenge, and put his hand to his head. “Honestly, I would like to dispense with these.”


                        “What? Oh, the peda?”


                        “Yes. Without them, the various members of Pijajasta could talk together much more easily. Our peda, though, are top quality, and sell for a high price, and we must display them to the other communities to sell them. That’s why we wear them. Plus which, there are only a few people, even here in Pijajasta, who agree with me. Most of them still want the peda... To reduce their number, I explained that one of our peda has the value of three of any other make; I had to convince them of that. I think it would be better to stop pushing there, don’t you?”


                        “Without investing a great deal of time, you will never succeed in that kind of change.”


                        As he answered, Oki suddenly realized that Gugenge was – a reformer! He was advancing reforms actively, with his better-than-average clear thinking and sensitivity. The fact that this decision-maker had asked to meet with Oki had two important goals. True, he wanted to borrow the laser, but not that alone. Gugenge knew that the Administrator was a professional decision-maker, a specialist in government, and was aiming to utilize that specialized knowledge. He, who had only the talents he was born with as a reformer, realized his own weaknesses, and was trying to cover them with more advanced techniques learned from the Administrator. Why else would he guide him so politely, explaining everything, except to try to gain the friendship of the Administrator?


                        Oki had to admit that Gugenge was a rare genius among the Nenegia.


                        The raft turned right at a major intersection of waterways, skirted a patch of fecund vegetation that had risen up above the surface, and continued. That growth was shining, and would shine in one area while dulling in another, exactly as if it were breathing. That was a common feature of vegetation on Nenegin, where infrared rays were changed into short-wave radiation by a type of fluorescent effect.


                        But Oki hadn’t known it could rise up like this, mounded.


                        “Our food areas are surrounded by that type of forest,” said Gugenge. “You can’t see it, but when you protect your food with a poisonous barrier like that, no one approaches. If the guards close the gate, that’s enough.”


                        In front of them, a wide water gate appeared...










                                         – 3 –


                        The room seemed a little warm, so Oki turned down the heat and continued working. “Fifteen minutes until departure,” came SQ2B’s voice through the contact. After that announcement, though, SQ2B said nothing.


                        If it was only fifteen minutes until departure, SQ2B should have been urging him much more strongly by now.


                        Departure.


                        He had to put in an appearance at the meeting the colonists called a party. Oki would have preferred to avoid going if possible. But with their incessant invitations – and the indication from the robots that it had become a custom for the current Administrator to show up at their once-a-year parties – he had decided to go.


                        Once a year.


                        Of course, that followed the custom of once every three hundred sixty-five days. On this world, a day was twenty-six Terran hours long, but the Nenegia divided it into eight shaga (depending on the region, sometimes shuuga), and divided each shaga into sixty-four chuga. In addition, a year here was actually a little less than four hundred fifty days... The colonists had adopted the twenty-six hour day, but stubbornly refused to accept any of the others, holding to their Terran counterparts.


                        Oki had never been to a colonial party before. After he had considered the ridiculous event that had happened when he was first installed here, he thought he could imagine it pretty well.


                        The day he had taken office, the colonists had greeted him with wild cheering. Lighting for normal humans was too bright for them, as they had adapted to this world’s strange visual effects, so they were all wearing dark glasses. Those men and women, wearing dark sunglasses and exotic clothing, shouted, pulled him into their midst singing, forced an alcoholic drink into his hand, and tried to crown him king. They said it was a crown symbolizing the ruler of the Nenegia. Oki had grown angry, and had driven them out of the Administration Complex. That unpleasant memory still clung to the inside of his brain, even now.


                        After he had lived there for a while, the robots told him that even though the previous Administrators hadn’t liked it either, they sometimes met with the colonists, and allowed themselves to be crowned in some sort of ritual. SQ1, the chief of all the robots on this world, had suggested to him that it might be best to do the same, but Oki had never agreed. Those who were called “colonists” here were merely travelers from another world, or those who had stopped off here for a time, and they were not officially recognized by the Federation. It was sufficient for the Administrator to do only the bare minimum for them – or so he believed. If they had time enough for this kind of thing, then they should be mingling with the native inhabitants, lending their hands to help them raise their civilization. If they who called themselves colonists cooperated with his orders it would be different, but they wanted to make trouble instead. They could go do whatever they wanted to. They should thank him for not simply driving them off the surface of the planet.


                        That there was a difference between his thinking and the thinking of the previous Administrators, all of whom had received proper training, showed that there were personality differences between Administrators. And age differences. Over thirty years had passed since the Administrator system had started. Over that period, the outside power blocs had changed, and as a result the Administrators and their training had changed as well. Of course, the fact that the older Administrators should change their thinking as a result of experience was only natural, too. All of the previous Administrators here on Nenegia had been older people. Compared to them, Oki was a younger Administrator than most, but also one who had scored an impressive list of achievements.


                        Well, it didn’t really matter. Oki had said he would attend their party, and an Administrator wasn’t allowed to break his promise.


                        He had been right in the middle of things, but he had to break it off.


                        He thought he would continue again after he returned.


                        Recently, Oki was burning with energy for his work. He had received work he could get lost in again, and his despondency was buried.


                        He was preparing to submit his investigation of Pijajasta, with an analysis, to the Federation. Since his first visit, he had returned to Pijajasta three times, and his interest mounted each time.


                        Of course, Gugenge and his fellow officials guided him. Gugenge explained the situation and his future plans eagerly, and sought Oki’s opinion constantly. Oki became convinced that Gugenge was hoping to use knowledge and techniques gained from him in these conversations – conversations with the Administrator, from another world.


                        He had been shown the interior of Pijajasta many times, and had investigated the translator’s (SQ2A’s) observation records afterwards, learning countless previously unclear facts about the living conditions of the Nenegia.


                        It was already known that the Nenegia lived in the mud, but it had not been known before that the fort was made up of numerous rooms and storehouses. Furthermore, none of it was privately owned, but rather belonged to the “house” – managed by the group leader – or, in this case, the decision-makers. Their tactile sense was developed as much as their vision or hearing, so that even in the mud they could distinguish each other and communicate merely with their fingers and skin... And many other facts became clear, too...


                        And also...


                        When he heard what these Nenegia were trying to add to the traditional life of Pijajasta, Oki felt the first continuing excitement since he had come to this world.


                        The reformers of Pijajasta had already begun to use letters. Previously, the Nenegia had used carved objects for signals, and huge bas-relief carvings in mass rallies, but Gugenge and his group were trying to advance that to the point of a symbolic writing. Because it had to be legible even in the mud, it consisted of a set of coded holes in a board. According to Gugenge, the one that had invented and perfected it was Gugenge’s father, who had been a group leader of a large family group, and who had tried to spread it throughout Pijajasta with the help of his wife, who had come from the family of the first decision-maker. Gugenge also planned to carry it to the point where it was fully usable.


                        His group had also expanded the manufacturing groups, making factories on a huge scale. These factories consisted of dozens of Nenegia on the levels inside or outside the main fort, nimbly finishing off one piece at a time. Gugenge revealed that he had finally managed to make a production line process.


                        They were trying to accomplish so many things, too numerous to mention. Starting with loosening the caste system, they were also pushing hard at breaking down the strict linear ownership of goods within a single group, accelerating the invention of new tools and goods, and improving management techniques for their farms.


                        As promised, Oki lent them a laser device, which they soon mastered and began to use on new tools, as Gugenge had said they would.


                        The more he learned of the Nenegian way of life, the more Oki was impressed by the abilities of Gugenge and his group. There was no mistaking that they were a new generation of reformers, following in the footsteps of Gugenge’s father, but they were pursuing their vision much more powerfully and with a higher consciousness than the previous generation.


                        Of late, Oki had come to think that maybe Gugenge’s group and the previous group, too, were both spontaneous mutations. Spontaneous mutations usually appeared in groups after a while, and perhaps that accounted for Gugenge and his followers. And their group was fulfilling a role in thrusting their society ahead, raising the standard of living by leaps and bounds. Oki felt that he was lucky just to be on the spot when it happened.


                        Still, after a number of visits to Pijajasta, he noticed that what Gugenge was doing did not receive the total support of all the inhabitants. There were still many who held to the traditional beliefs, especially the group leaders, who should have been included in the ruling class. Although the amalgamation of the various houses was well advanced, there were still a number of large, powerful houses that remained independent. Their leaders criticized the sudden reformations, continuously opposed them, and took advantage of every opportunity to try to return Pijajasta to its traditional form. The fact that everything was working now was because Gugenge’s policies had made Pijajasta prosperous, and brought in profit for the inhabitants – only that.


                        Oki gradually advised Gugenge about various facts that were self-evident truths to a political specialist. One of the bits of advice that attracted Gugenge the most was the construction of a fleet of merchant rafts. His heart was taken by the idea of quitting the current policy of sending one or two rafts to adjacent communities on an adventure, and instead sending a fleet of maybe ten rafts, with protective troops on board, on a long-term tour. It would increase the safety and the profit both, and Gugenge began to research it at once.


                        Still.


                        Oki couldn’t use his robots very much in this contact with Pijajasta. In addition to the robots’ regular duties in the investigation and exploration of Nenegin, they had regular patrols, they recorded the activities of the Nenegia, looked after the Administrator, and maintained protection – in other words, they had their hands full already. In fact, they had a little too much work for their numbers. After the world had progressed a little as a colony, the Federation would supply newer robots, but at the moment they were mostly repaired, readjusted, and sometimes even jury-built. The fact that the robots were intensely loyal to their work – or to their implanted destiny, if one cared to express it that way – also meant that it was extremely difficult to get them to change their work assignments. If Oki merely issued an order to SQ1, it would only give rise to a fault, a weak point in the rigid command structure it topped. Even an expert in robot control like Oki would have to spend a great deal of time adjusting them for the change.


                        It was the same for this work. Oki could only freely use the relatively high-level robots, and couldn’t change the basic priorities of the robot control system.


                        Sometimes he wondered if it wasn’t a little suspicious that things had gone that far. Of course, it was impossible, but he did feel that the robots were not cooperating wholeheartedly with the advance of the Nenegian civilization. One example was the data about Pijajasta. When he had first visited there, SQ1 had reported their average intelligence at 3.41, with the upper one percent at 4.50, and their group effectiveness at nine percent compared to the maximum possible. However, when Oki, amazed at Gugenge’s efforts, requested detailed figures, he found that while the upper one percent was 4.50, the upper half percent was 5.25, and the highest tenth of a percent was 5.99. Since the standard report was only for the upper one percent, it had probably been an error on his part not to have asked the robots for more detail. Not only that, but he also knew that the data were about ten years old, and much lower than current values. This problem was one they would address, if he only asked them to. Still, despite knowing the robots’ limitations, he remained unhappy about the gaps in their reports.


                        There were other examples, too.


                        The robots had known about the buttons being used as high-denomination currency. According to the robots’ memory banks, it was standard for items from an advanced culture, even common items, to be highly valued in less-advanced cultures – certainly not surprising. Therefore they had judged it not necessary to tell the Administrator, and had buried it in the data banks. It was just an example of the robots maintaining their devotion to duty by not showering the Administrator with trivial information. At any rate, the previous Administrator had requested this behavior, and Oki hadn’t changed the rules.


                        When he thought about it, he realized that the Administrators were rulers, but only during their term of office. On the other hand, robots were built for one planet, and stayed there until the end. It was only natural that the robots should feel they knew this planet better than the Administrator.


                        Oki stood up.


                        He was thinking too much.


                        Robots didn’t have emotions like humans.


                        “Only five minutes remaining until departure. Please begin your preparations. Only five minutes...” droned SQ2B’s voice.


                        “Welcome! Welcome, and enter! We have been awaiting you!”


                        After he entered the largest of the several domes the colonists used, and doffed his protective clothing in a brightly-lit room, a couple appeared and greeted him joyously. They were wearing gaudy clothing that made Oki’s eyes hurt. The man was wearing a gold breastplate over a richly patterned shirt, and tight pants. On top of that, he had a short-sword on his hip, and a short cape around his shoulders. The woman, had her hair piled up on her head in a feminine style, and was wearing a long-sleeved cream-colored dress, with a thick black cummerbund.


                        Both of them were wearing dark glasses.


                        “We are so very pleased you could attend the festivities,” said the man again, then turned and called into the next room, “The King has come!”


                        SQ2A and the two LQ-class robots that had accompanied him stopped there. Oki, after dropping his nerve paralyzer gun into his pocket, followed the couple. The area was dark, and Oki had to put on the long-wave glasses he had brought with him. His guides, on the other hand, took off their dark glasses. To them, this blackness was shining in splendid color.


                        It was an assembly hall. He had only come here once before. Almost two hundred men and women were gathered there, grouped around the scattered tables, whispering and laughing together. Due to the red shift, he couldn’t make out detailed patterns or colors, but in any case they wore old-fashioned, brilliant, even wild clothing. Better than “old-fashioned”, perhaps, would be to say “anachronistic”. They weren’t matched, but rather people chose whatever beautiful or rare style from whatever period they fancied, mixing them together.


                        As he entered, led by the couple, they all turned and applauded.


                        After waiting for Oki to reach the center table, a hugely fat man raised his arms and signaled for quiet. Oki had met him many times. He called himself the “Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Nenegia”.


                        “The King has come! Let the festivities begin!” he called. “This day is the annual festival for the glory of the Kingdom of Nenegia, and the day for change of Prime Minister. As the custom dictates, the retiring Prime Minister, myself, shall act as host for this party. Thank you. Let us hear the National Anthem!”


                        A prerecorded melody came from the wall speakers, and the massed people began to sing together.


                        He had forgotten – this man was retiring as Prime Minister – Oki thought while listening to the long “national anthem”. Who would be the next, he wondered. Well, whoever it was, they were all the same. After all, there were only about three hundred people here, including the children. They had their own “Kingdom” and “Prime Minister”, but it was only a trifling thing.


                        He suddenly noticed that the singing had ended, and the ex-Prime Minister was facing him, gesturing.


                        “Sire, we are waiting for your words.”


                        “My words?” said Oki. He recalled that SQ1 had said it was customary for the Administrator to give an opening address.


                        “Please,” repeated the Prime Minister.


                        Oki looked at the assembled people. What should he do?


                        If possible, he should attack their anachronisms, smash their pretences at “royalty”, demolish their twisted style of life. He should state clearly that they were not officially recognized colonists, and force them to reassess their own position. But what was the use of complaining to these isolated people, with no other standard to follow, and no place to go, stranded on this world of visual effects? He would just stir up resentment, and make the next Administrator’s job that much more difficult.


                        At the same time, though, he couldn’t fit into their role they had planned for him, as the King of the Kingdom of Nenegia.


                        There was no helping it – he gave them a standard greeting, wishing them all health, and promising to give full support to their efforts towards building a new society to suit this new world.


                        They were obviously not pleased with it, but nobody actually criticized him for it. The fact that they had made the Administrator their King indicated that they recognized his authority, and were trying to stabilize their worldview. And so, even if their King did un-Kingly things, they merely adopted the position that he was a strange King, without censuring him. At any rate, that was how it had been up until then.


                        “Thank you, sire,” politely intoned the ex-Prime Minister, and then, raising his glass high, called out “Let us drink to the fourth reigning King, to our noble selves, and to the Kingdom of Nenegia! Kampai!”


                        They all drank.


                        At once, the speech of the new Prime Minister began. The thin, sharp-eyed new Prime Minister talked on and on about the beginning of the advancement of the Kingdom of Nenegia due to the efforts of the citizenry, trade with the pig-frogs, and the contributions of the robots – however self-centered they may have been, Oki couldn’t very well let them starve, so the robots gave them enough material and manual labor support to keep them at a bare subsistence level – all leading to a new economic and spiritual glory. He went on to praise himself and his Kingdom for incorporating all of the good points of Terra and the other worlds into their culture. It was an awfully boring, long presentation, but the colonists listened to it avidly, not even fidgeting.


                        Oki let it wash past him. He didn’t get upset at their biases and self-defensiveness any more. They could only see the past. They could never imagine or foster new things, different things, things not covered by their custom or habit. What could give birth to these things was the Administrator and the Administrator system...


                        Really?


                        Was it really so? The Administrator and the robots were not of the past, but couldn’t you say that they were merely trying to maintain the present?


                        The future... Oki recalled Gugenge and his colleagues. Wouldn’t the real future be made by them?


                        Maybe that was true. After all, wasn’t the Administrator system merely an effort by humans to humanize other worlds? However much you quibbled about it...


                        When the applause flared, he snapped out of it. The speech was over, and the meal was beginning.


                        Oki put the food in front of him into his mouth. There was synthetic food and processed Nenegian vegetables. There was also something he didn’t recognize, with a more solid texture and a strange, meaty taste. He noticed that when he ate it, they smiled at each other with satisfied expressions.


                        Wasn’t this enough already?


                        Just as he decided to leave, the new Prime Minister approached, bowing.


                        “I pledge my loyalty, sire,” he said. “Still, I, as Prime Minister, must ask for cooperation in certain matters from the King in order to lead our Kingdom to prosperity.”


                        He bowed again.


                        “As I’m sure you heard from my speech, the political structure of this nation is a rarely-seen ideal form. As the base of the machine-supported King we have the selected nobility who both act as a brake on the King’s unilateral actions and give guidance to the natives. A strong bond of friendship exists between the King and the nobility... For this reason, we do not bestow the title of Emperor on the King, and the King does not interfere with the lives of the nobility. In other words, this Kingdom is a nobility with a King, and a King with a nobility.”


                        “...”


                        An absurd, self-centered logic, though Oki, but he said nothing.


                        “Both sides have the responsibility to ensure that nothing destroys the relationship of that trust.”


                        The new Prime Minister gradually shed his politeness. “Following this duty, I must counsel the King today.”


                        “Counsel?”


                        “How is it that the King himself and the pig-frogs have negotiations?”


                        “...”


                        “The King should leave all contact with the natives to the nobility. If the need presents itself, then the King should go through his mechanical servants.”


                        “Why should it be that way?”


                        “The actions of the King towards any group of natives must be same as to all natives. That is, though, obviously impossible, and would lead to contact with only a selected few. It would lead, in other words, to favoritism. The loan of a laser device, coupled with a visit by the King himself, leads to envy from other communities, and undermines the position of the nobility with the natives, that which we have built up with such careful planning.”


                        “...” Oki was amazed, speechless.


                        “We would like you to cease such contact at once,” pressed the new Prime Minister.


                        “Let me speak.” Oki stood up. “Do you truly understand what you are doing?”


                        “I believe so.”


                        “I don’t. I don’t believe you understand at all.”


                        Pressed this far, Oki couldn’t let it slide. Even if he offended the other a little, he had to make the situation clear. He had to give a clear warning.


                        “You are seeking to violate the authority of the Administrator appointed by the Federation, and attempting to prevent him from carrying out his orders.”


                        “...”


                        “It could be interpreted as rebellion against the Federation. I suggest you think about what you are doing – excuse me.”


                        Oki left the speechless Prime Minister and guests behind, and left the hall. As he left, he was not in a good mood.


                        Hadn’t he known it would come to this from the start?


                        Hadn’t he come to the party knowing at the bottom of his heart that he could always brandish his authority as Administrator and wave away any opposition?


                        When he reached the clothing room, he removed his vision glasses.


                        He turned... But there was no one following. There was only the dark, smooth blackness.


                        He slowly put on his protective clothing, and went out into the darkness and rain with SQ2A and the two LQ-class robots.










                                         – 4 –


                        Dawn.


                        Even though it was dawn, that wasn’t to say that the view from the window became any more blue. There was only a sensation that the darkness had retreated a little into the rain. In any case, there were no windows in this room.


                        Oki lay on his back, staring at the ceiling. It was too early to get up yet, but his consciousness was already jumping from idea to idea, trying to resist the weight of the surrounding buildings and the black rain. There were thoughts of anger, too.


                        His heart, which had been light for so long, was becoming blacker and blacker, threatening to be crushed, in these last fourteen or fifteen days. It was not a collapse into despondency as before, but rather the unpleasant tension of things that just don’t go right. And the sense of hopelessness towards the cause of it all...


                        ...the colonists, of course.


                        The words he had thrown at them at the party had set off unexpected ripples. He had expected them to become a little more firm against him, but he hadn’t believed that they were stupid enough to actively resist him, as they were doing now.


                        According to the robots’ reports, the colonists had begun to loan lasers to the native inhabitants the morning after the party. Nobody knew how many there were, but a number had been given to communities outside Pijajasta. Oki asked why they were doing so, but only received casually cynical answers, such as “For the advancement of the pig-frogs,” and “We learned from the King’s actions, and copy him”. When he asked them what would happen if the weapons were used for war, they said that the pig-frogs had been told not to do that, and even if they did, then it would merely be necessary to punish them – they repeated his own words, slightly twisted. They said that communities other than Pijajasta had also been requesting laser devices, and the nobility wanted to know why they couldn’t profit by responding to the pig-frogs’ wishes.


                        According to the robots, they had done nothing wrong. They were not recognized colonists, and as frontiersmen they had merely done what was customary, and it was nothing to blame them for. Of course, if the Administrator wished to deal with them under his own authority, they would follow his orders, said SQ1.


                        Oki asked the colonists nothing more. He thought there was no other method but to show them the danger of their own position – and as there was nothing he could do at that point, he decided to wait a little longer and see what developed.


                        A few days ago, that “a little longer” had become “at once.”


                        Gugenge had come to see him.


                        Oki didn’t remember exactly when it had happened, but he had lost the feeling that Gugenge looked funny. Also, since he had come to know the genius that was Gugenge, he had gained the habit of automatically comparing all other Nenegia to him, seeing Gugenge in them.


                        Gugenge had managed somehow to build the merchant fleet that Oki had mentioned, and had stopped in at the Administration Complex after a long trading trip to many communities.


                        Gugenge proudly showed his merchant fleet of forty rafts with trade goods, crew and guard troops to Oki, Oki gave it his approval, and then heard how Gugenge would return to Pijajasta in four or five days, and start intensive work on the laser-produced items – with the laser he had left in Pijajasta, under his assistants’ care.


                        After that, though, Gugenge told him an unexpected bit of horrifying news.


                        The colonists were using the Nenegia as a food source.


                        While on their voyage, Gugenge had helped a half-dead Nenegia who had been floating nearby. According to that Nenegia, he and another had gone to the colonists’ area to trade, were taken by force, and thrown into a large room covered with metal rope. That room was full of the corpses of Nenegia, and there was a single living Nenegia, in terrible pain and fear. The one they had rescued reasoned that the room was pierced by an invisible poison light, and hid among the corpses. A naked, black-eyed human (in other words, without protective clothing, and wearing sunglasses) came to the room and took away a number of Nenegia, not caring if they were dead or alive. When at last his own turn came, he feigned death, and then kicked his way to freedom half dead. What he had seen there was a view of the corpses of Nenegia being finely cut and cooked. He had managed to escape, but his skin was terribly ravaged and he died soon after in spite of Gugenge’s efforts to help him.


                        Gugenge had one other piece of evidence. He had seen a number of rafts with troops and maybe a dozen other Nenegia on each go to the colonists’ area – but when, by accident, he ran into the same group returning later, only the troops remained. Not only that, but those troops called to Gugenge’s fleet, and bought a large number of items with the special high-denomination currency. Gugenge didn’t believe that all of those Nenegia could have escaped from all of the rafts. Outside their forts, freely-swimming Nenegia would be quickly eaten by the flatfish and soft-bodied predators.


                        “We would like you to investigate the truth of this,” begged Gugenge. “If it true that free Nenegia are being forcibly taken, and either being sold into slavery or eaten, then the Administrator must do something about it.”


                        After that, Gugenge and his rafts left for Pijajasta.


                        Oki recalled the meat-like dish he had eaten at the party.


                        Was that... Had that been the flesh of a Nenegia? And when they looked at each other and smiled, had it been their smile of triumph – that they had managed to get the Administrator to eat it? Or maybe it was an attempt to draw him into their group by making him an accomplice to their crime.


                        In any case, buying a whole Nenegia would be unthinkably expensive under normal trading circumstances. That was why they had introduced the button as the high-denomination trading currency. That was the only possible reason.


                        Oki ordered the robots to investigate at once. He also told them to carry out the investigation under top-secret status, so as not to notify the colonists of his intent.


                        SQ1 carried out the order at once.


                        Proof came to light immediately. The colonists didn’t let the robots into their homes, so they couldn’t determine exactly what the situation was inside, but a huge number of Nenegia bones were uncovered in the mud near the colonists’ settlement, and large amounts of Nenegia flesh fragments were recovered from the sewage system.


                        The situation was clear. It was unclear if they were being used as slaves, but that they were being eaten was beyond doubt.


                        The next step was to enter and search the community by force. Then notify the Federation and wait for their judgment. Even though he hadn’t noticed it himself, earlier, and even though he had eaten the flesh of a Nenegia himself, he knew there was no help for it.


                        That was today.


                        Today he planned to lead the robots into the colonists’ settlement. All of the preparations were finished, but... He didn’t want to do it. He couldn’t help but feel angry at the colonists who had forced him into it. Why hadn’t they realized that it would come to this?


                        Had they really been that simple? Had they really thought that he could permit this? Had they drowned in their color-compensated high-noon world to the point where they became incapable of comprehending?


                        “Are you awake?” came SQ2B’s voice.


                        “Huh?” Oki focused his eyes.


                        “SQ1 has an urgent communication. It is not yet time to get up, but as you appeared to be awake, I contacted you.”


                        “What is it?”


                        “Reporting,” said the voice, a little deeper. SQ1 was talking through SQ2B’s contact. “A war has broken out among the native inhabitants.”


                        “War?” Oki rose up in his bed. It wasn’t that amazing for the Nenegia to fight among themselves. If SQ1 reported it now, then it must be something out of the ordinary.


                        “Twenty-five minutes ago, LQQ72 on standard patrol discovered two fleets engaged in combat three kilometers north of Pijajasta.”


                        “Pijajasta...?” Oki sprang out of bed.


                        “The reason I am reporting this is because one side is using laser weaponry. I dispatched SQ2A2 to the scene at once. SQ2A2 will arrive within minutes and begin picture transmission. After you have seen the pictures, please decide if you will refrain from interference as we have up until now, or act.”


                        Lasers?


                        The Nenegia with lasers?


                        Without knowing if it was Gugenge or another group that was using them, he dressed and took the elevator to his office.


                        The office screen was already bright with a black and white moving image.


                        Two fleets were fighting. No, it wasn’t really fighting. The pursuing fleet was firing bright laser beams, and the fleeing side was being destroyed: Nenegia burned, cargo aflame.


                        “According to the analysis of data received from SQ2A2, the lasers are being used by a combined fleet of several communities. The fleeing group is that of Pijajasta, attempting to return,” said SQ1, already in the room.


                        He understood.


                        They were being attacked.


                        Without being told, he understood.


                        Gugenge’s trade fleet was being attacked by other communities that had received lasers from the colonists.


                        They were probably after the trade goods.


                        No, wait.


                        Oki suddenly had a cold thought.


                        Could it be...?


                        Would Nenegia really make a combined fleet for that reason? Or... or maybe this was all engineered by the colonists, who didn’t appreciate the rapid development of Pijajasta, or the regard that the Administrator had for it. Had they felt their own existence threatened by the union of Gugenge with the Administrator, and so loaned lasers and initiated the use of buttons as high-denomination currency...?


                        He didn’t know.


                        He didn’t know, but it wasn’t impossible.


                        The Pijajasta fleet was scattered to pieces, and the pursuing fleet swept closer.


                        “There!” shouted Oki suddenly, “Close up on that raft!”


                        The order was followed at once.


                        It was the raft Gugenge was riding. It was making all speed to escape the firing range of the other rafts. It would make it.


                        It was already in front of the main gate of Pijajasta.


                        “What will you do?” asked SQ1.


                        “...” Oki hesitated for a moment.


                        It was easy to simply say destroy the lasers. The quickest method was just to make it impossible for the natives to use lasers, as they hadn’t yet reached the level of civilization where they could support their own laser devices.


                        But was that right? They had to pass through many experiences before they could use the tools of civilization properly. For that purpose, shouldn’t he let things take their course, and let them settle it in their own way?


                        And if he made it impossible to use lasers, then Pijajasta could be no exception. Gugenge and his plans for that big step forward in this world...


                        Giving lasers to the Nenegia other than Gugenge had been a big error. Give a pistol to an idiot, and he might shoot a genius.


                        He decided in all the turmoil. Gugenge would have to bear it for a while. The reformation would have to advance on its own power, in their own ways. Gugenge could do it, he was sure. Gugenge could do it...


                        “Intervene! Destroy the laser devices,” he shouted.


                        But it was too late.


                        Something he hadn’t thought of happened. A beam shone from the side of the main gate, from the tower.


                        Gugenge had left his laser in Pijajasta when he started on the trading trip. That laser pierced through Gugenge’s raft, then turned, and began to burn the invading fleet.


                        By that time, LQQ72 was already destroying the lasers from above, wholesale.


                        A huge war fleet came out of Pijajasta.


                        The combined fleet was already retreating. They had lost their lasers, and had no hope of winning against that huge fleet coming to fight them.


                        The soldiers of Pijajasta... Were different than he remembered.


                        The peda.


                        They all had many peda, some of them dozens of peda.


                        Then Oki understood. It was a coup d’état.


                        The traditionalists that had wanted to return to the old ways of living had taken advantage of Gugenge’s absence to rebel against the reformers. The laser had been placed in the tower for the purpose of killing Gugenge.


                        The plane flew on towards the site.


                        Oki was silent, sunken into his seat.


                        After examining the battle site, he would return to the Administration Complex for a moment, and then go to the colonists’ settlement.


                        It was a hopeless flight.


                        Gugenge was dead. All of his associates were no doubt executed.


                        That which Gugenge had almost built was gone, and none would understand it. Nobody understood it, but it should have been the dawn of Nenegin. Now, even if that dawn should come, it had retreated into the distant future. Their bright, distant noon had retreated far, far away.


                        At the same time, the artificial noon of the colonists was drawing to a close.


                        For him, thought Oki, for himself, wasn’t noon a far distant thing? Here... Here, nothing was permitted a noon.


                        The sky ahead was purple. Across the purple heavens, the headlight beams shone golden, glittering, lighting up the countless raindrops like a mirage as the flyer pierced through that lavender darkness...


                        Oki took the vision-restoring spray from his inner pocket, and pressed it to his arm.