Bound Janus










                                         – 1 –


                        Maybe it was better to call it a shaft, a mine shaft, rather than a tunnel. The greed for that damp glistening, which could only be found by burrowing into the mountain, was obvious from that incline... As always, be they mountains of metal, or silicate, or diamond. As he trod along the center of the tunnel, heavy cold air crawled up his legs, embraced him as if to call forth ancestral memories. That wind issued from the unknown mysteries deep in the gloom of the tunnel.


                        Ahead of Sei PPKC Konda and SQ2A in the procession were Gun’gazea holding high an edge-lit metal candle holder, and the four Gun’gazea that had become D’o. Behind Sei came another dozen or so Gun’gazea, but all of them shuffled forward, as if checking each gloom-enwrapped step. In spite of it, their footsteps melded together, echoing into an unexpectedly loud reverberation.


                        The timber and cement reinforced walls of the tunnel gave way to natural rock in less than twenty meters. It was obvious from the reflections of the dim candles that the walls were dripping with water, even without touching them.


                        The Gun’gazea were all silent. Sei, who had been to a Gun’gazea Vault of the Dead many times, kept trudging along in respectful silence, through the twisting, winding descent he knew would become a clawing ascent on the return.


                        Suddenly the candles that had been lighting the walls lost their support, became solitary. They had come to the main chamber.


                        In a few seconds, his eyes adjusted, and he could dimly make out the high rock ceiling and the line of fourteen or fifteen statues clustered together up ahead.


                        This was the Vault of the Dead. It was standard, even the scale of it. The Gun’gazea stopped, and knelt down before the group of statues.


                        Sei followed suit.


                        The Gun’gazea that was the oldest D’o signaled the other three D’o to advance forward with it to the statues.


                        The silence shattered under its own weight, and became a low murmur. The sacred incantation, the hymn, had started.


                        The oldest D’o placed its hand on the shoulder of the youngest, just recently become a D’o, and raised its voice higher. After this rite, it would be formally recognized within the tribe as a D’o. In other words, a physiological D’o would now become a social D’o.


                        Still kneeling, Sei watched the backs of the four D’o. Judging from the color and cut of their gowns, three were female and one was male, but their hardened skin, turned greenish-black, showed clearly that distinctions of sex no longer had any meaning. While they were still Gun’gazea, they were now D’o, and nothing but D’o.


                        Strange, thought Sei. The D’o were unmistakably the nobility of the Gun’gazea. But was there any social structure in existence except the Gun’gazea that demanded, as a condition for becoming noble, the onset of a hardening disease that promised death in a few years? Of course, it was possible to find parallels in the ancient Terran tales of sacred kings and immortal hermits, but the sacred kings were merely living sacrifices for the ceremonies, and the hermits were obviously quite separate from the power elite. They weren’t a systematized, ranked ruling class like the Gun’gazea D’o.


                        The basic reason it all developed was that this world, Gun’gazen, was far too rich in metals. The crust of Gun’gazen contained an immense amount of metallic elements, either as ores or ionic compounds, and the native organisms had some very special characteristics as a result of the complex interactions these metals had with their life chemistry.


                        Prominent among them was the hardening of the skin.


                        A great many of the lower life forms of Gun’gazen protected themselves with a unique skin made up of multiple layers of chitin and metal. The hardening that inevitably came to the skin was in some respect common to the life cycle of all fauna on Gun’gazen. Among the slightly more advanced animals, when the skin hardened after a soft-skinned period, it would be shed, to be followed by another period of soft skin, in a recurring cycle. The soft-skinned period of the even higher animals was much longer, and they could avoid the problem a number of times by shedding their skins, but their lifetimes were limited. If they failed to shed their skins, they became hard dead statues in the shape of their living forms.


                        Sei knew that those death-statues, especially that of the small creature called a “devilcat”, were valued as works of art among the colonists here on Gun’gazen. The statues of the devilcat (or in the Gun’gazea language, tsuzuluru) were being traded at high prices thanks to the iridescent colors of the skin, and its facial expression, which looked as if the beast were holding all the worries of the world on its shoulders. The older and bigger the statue was, the happier the colonists. It would be totally irrelevant to complain about treating a corpse like a work of art. In human eyes, the devilcat statue was certainly beautiful, and the Gun’gazea themselves worshipped the metallic corpses of their leaders, the D’o. The corpse assumed its own special existence, here. Human scientists had studied the life forms of Gun’gazen, with their special activity during the hard-skinned periods, and their deaths enwrapped in what had been their armor. They reported that there seemed to be a natural mechanism operating here such that when the organism became unable to excrete the necessary amount of metals, the skin hardened, leading to a much higher internal metabolic level.


                        At any rate, it was a fact that the underlying drive of evolution on Gun’gazen was escape from the metallic restrictions of the environment. At the leading edge of that evolutionary flow stood the Gun’gazea, the highest form of life on the world, who so closely resembled humanity. They had evolved to the point where they didn’t shed their skins at all, but rather, after twenty or thirty years, (a Gun’gazen year corresponded to about two Terran years), they entered the first period of hardening, which promised death to come.


                        Considered from an evolutionary viewpoint, this hardening of the Gun’gazea illustrated the abhorrent truth that they had not yet totally escaped the curse that ruled their world. To shatter that curse, it would be necessary to lead a life without that hardening of the skin... Or at least, from the Terran point of view. Among the Gun’gazea there were a few (a very few) seriously researching exactly that point. They were striving to liberate the Gun’gazea from the fate of other Gun’gazen organisms.


                        Still, those Gun’gazea were looked down upon as heretics. According to the general belief of the Gun’gazea, what they were trying to do was unacceptable. To the majority of the Gun’gazea, they couldn’t lose the chance of becoming D’o, even if it did mean death. As was seen in other organisms, the Gun’gazea who entered the period of hardening also became suddenly active metabolically. In particular, their ability to think and make decisions sharpened, and they wanted to exercise their minds. In addition, as the hardening of their skins made them able to withstand a high degree of damage from clubs and swords, they were the strongest warriors, and, to the Gun’gazea, led a valuable existence. In short, the D’o were perceived as a higher organism than the average Gun’gazea.


                        And not only that.


                        Among the Gun’gazea, there was also a feeling of the natural cycle of things. They felt that the common destiny they shared with all life on Gun’gazen – of hardening leading to death – was natural, and that the cycle of Gun’gazea to D’o to statue was the correct way, was the confirmation of the providence of nature.


                        To the Gun’gazea, escaping death by accident or disease (and these were very common ends) and living long enough to become a D’o meant that the individual was “selected,” and until death came in the form of their final hardening they had the right and responsibility to utilize their capabilities for the group. The Gun’gazea were perhaps insensitive to death, or at least looked at it as an honorable and fitting end to a life, and nothing to fear. The responsibilities and rights of the D’o were significantly greater than those of most Gun’gazea, and so they earned their respect. While suffering under an enormously heavily body weight they performed tasks far beyond those of their younger brethren, and those who excelled were honored with a place in the Vault of the Dead.


                        The difference between the ordinary D’o and those that were twice-selected, that were finally emplaced in the Vault of the Dead, was clear from looking at even a single example. A D’o might be killed – “sent to eternal repose” was the more accurate translation – but once they were enshrined, they would not be touched even if their nation ceased to exist. Just as the living D’o were sacred and inviolate to their own tribe, so were the enshrined inviolate to all D’o as a group. It was the custom that when one nation eliminated another, the conquering side assumed the duty of protecting the Vault of the Dead in place of the vanished ones.


                        The chant was still continuing.


                        Sei lifted his eyes slowly and looked at the group of statues lined up ahead of him. They had led their nation through decisive battles that had determined its existence, or perhaps invented a new technology to save them all from famine. They had now become statues, as they were when alive, and waited for their ranks to swell.


                        No.


                        They looked just as they had during their lives, but all that remained now was the exterior. The older ones should be totally lacking their insides. Their hollow metal shells preserved the shapes of their corpses...


                        Sei suddenly, for no apparent reason, recalled the Administrator System, of which he himself was a member. The memory almost forced itself upon him... The Administrator System that had, over the seventy years since its inception, been rebuilt and reorganized in response to changing conditions and the passage of time, achieving many of its goals while having many of its contradictions exposed. The system that the Federation had built up, employing the finest brains to firm up its foundation, and driven by the greatest authority... As a system, it was unquestionably superior, and somehow amazingly durable.


                        But it was not perfect... It couldn’t be. Wasn’t this system, with problems cropping up continuously both on colonial worlds and in the Central Body itself, already like those corpses, nothing but a giant exoskeleton with the vital interior rotted away?


                        Sei brought has gaze back into focus.


                        The chant was finally ending, and the rite was entering the final stage.


                        The newly-created D’o made a final obeisance to the statues, then turned his way. Sei hadn’t noticed, but a pottery jar with the national mark set in it had already been laid on the floor in front of it. It was a simple, lightly-glazed jar.


                        The Gun’gazea raised their voices into a roar together, their tails stretching out across the floor. Just as it peaked, changing voices suddenly to a strange harmony, the new D’o raised its arms, and smashed the jar with the sword it held. The Gun’gazea shouted excitedly to each other, praising the superb body of the new D’o. By passing through this ancient ritual, the new D’o was accepted into the ranks of the D’o through social acclaim.


                        When all was finished, silence descended again. The Gun’gazea began to rise silently and return to the surface. Sei and SQ2A maintained their places in the line.


                        That shuffling progress started again.


                        When Sei thought about his own position in the rite, he sometimes felt the humor of it, as if he were adrift in space. All of the Gun’gazea, of whatever nation, had strict rules defining who was allowed to participate in the ceremony. Among them, the position that the Administrator held was exceedingly strange and ill-defined. He was not a guiding member of the nation, but neither was he a visitor from another nation, or a mediator. He had been allowed to participate with his status remaining ill-defined. Naturally, Gun’gazea who were picky about formalities had made “Administrator” a special qualification, and thus invited him. They were recognizing the decades of effort that the Administrators had put in, using their robots, to introduce new technology and to foster better relations between nations. While the Gun’gazea understood he had a responsibility to protect the interests of the colonists who had come to this world, they also recognized that the Administrator, who brought new tools and methods over the years, had become necessary to their own lives. His special need to help both sides, the colonists and the native inhabitants, progress simultaneously, like a two-faced god, had made itself visible in this vague special status accorded him.


                        The Administrator was sometimes treated as the eldest D’o, occasionally as a mere rankless outsider. Once in a while he was received as an enemy. His status changed in response to the attitude of that particular nation and their personal reactions. Sei rapidly learned how to respond flexibly, as had the previous Administrator, as befit his unstable position. He had become supple, but that wasn’t to say he enjoyed this temporary stability followed by a sudden shift of status. That would be impossible. All he could do was to make a habit of constant reflection on his best course of action. From that viewpoint, the fact that he had been present at the ceremony from start to finish was due to one of two things: either he was being genuinely received as a friend, or they wished to use his driving power for something.


                        They left the tunnel, and the heat returned.


                        It wasn’t easy to press through the luxuriant trees along that narrow path. The unworked ground was rough, and he felt he would stumble if he relaxed his attention even for a moment. The sunlight here was only a trickle that dripped down through the overhanging leaves, but even so it was hot enough to feel on his skin.


                        He kept walking. There was no other choice. Overhead flew a number of LQQ-class robots monitoring the vicinity, and his personal craft, that had waited outside the cave, followed him now at the end of the procession. It would be so easy simply to ride, but of course he couldn’t. When walking with the Gun’gazea, you had to use your own feet if you wished to be treated properly by them. The Gun’gazea looked with distaste upon those who made more tools than were needed, or who used them when unnecessary. In particular, to use a vehicle to attend today’s ceremony would be nothing if not rude.


                        After about twenty minutes of walking through the forest, at last the low wall of the fortification appeared – it was made of cast iron poles, the cracks filled in with clay, and overlaid with a coating of mortar. The section facing the road was a gate.


                        The procession passed through that gate, and continued on inside. Inside the gate was a glittering plaza. The hardened skin of the four D’o, like finely woven fabric, caught the rays of the sun and shone an iridescent greenish-black. Their skins exhibited considerable differences depending on the district; some were glistening black, and others bright gold or blue. Perhaps it was due to the different concentrations of metallic salts left in their bodies, but in all cases it still caused the same hardening, the same angularity, the same brocade-like iridescent skin.


                        As there were D’o in the procession, the dozens of Gun’gazea working and talking in the plaza stopped, faced the line, and bowed, lowering their heads in respect.


                        Surrounding the plaza were dozens of large buildings. Most of them were two-story, but a few were three stories tall. They used many and various metals, finishing off the detail in wood... To human eyes they were just the frames of buildings, although they had windows, too. The buildings were much wider than they were tall, and the windows were real glass, however poor the quality. Their transparency was none too good, and they were bluish, so they were primarily used for lighting, rather than for seeing in or out.


                        Of all those buildings, only one – symmetrical, with three storeys – was built of steel and aluminum alloy. It was the newest building, erected with the help of the robots using the highest precision materials the robots made. Behind the main buildings were lines of barracks for the middle- and low-class members, then the agricultural and livestock areas, the industrial area with the coke ovens and the kilns, and finally the military training ground – but of course most of it was hidden from the plaza.


                        There were many different varieties of clothing and objects, reflecting the fact that this city was made up of many different groups, each distinct from the others. Still, there was the sense of a strictly-maintained, intricate, yet invisible thread binding them together. Scattered across the face of Babel continent were over two hundred nations of roughly the same character, in competition. The larger ones had populations of one hundred forty or one hundred fifty thousand, and the smaller ones seven or eight thousand, but none were any larger or smaller than those limits.


                        There was a reason for this.


                        In the larger nations, as the population grew too big, so did the number of D’o, and government functions became paralyzed. Most of the Gun’gazea died before the skin-hardening began. Not only in combat and from disease, but also their primitive mining techniques were extremely dangerous, with high fatality rates. As a result, only a very few were able to become D’o: usually about one D’o for every six to eight thousand population... The nations of one hundred fifty thousand had about twenty D’o, which meant that it was difficult to reach consensus during policy decisions. Even though the Gun’gazea society used group leadership, that was only practicable when the number of leaders was, at the most, seven or eight . Whereas humans would commonly create a smaller council at the top, or form a core group, the Gun’gazea hadn’t developed that way. It was the feeling of the Gun’gazea that while there were differences between the ages of the D’o, there should be no orders given or received among them. Regardless of how young a D’o might be, a D’o was still a D’o. The only method left to them was for the smaller faction to withdraw, and begin a new nation with their following of Gun’gazea. This gave the appearance that the Gun’gazea enjoyed a level autonomy that allowed withdrawal from the group based on individual judgment, but this was not the case. It was merely that the Gun’gazea were proud of the D’o that came from their own tribe, and followed them. In other words, when the number of D’o, the only nobility in Gun’gazea society, increased beyond a certain number, the nation automatically divided. The upper limit seemed to be about twenty D’o, as there were no nations with more than that number.


                        In the same way, there was a lower limit on the size of smaller nations. A group without any D’o was not socially recognized as a nation. For that reason, the smallest nations had to be composed of a group with at least a single D’o. It was theoretically possible for a single D’o to rule over a group of two or three thousand Gun’gazea, but in fact there were no tribes of less than seven or eight thousand, as it was difficult to become economically independent without a minimum number of workers in each field... It was wiser to join a larger nation, and wait for their numbers to grow. In that case, it also happened that additional D’o came out of the tribe, creating a power structure within the nation, and giving the tribe greater influence over the entire nation.


                        This reflected the complicated interactions of the Gun’gazea. It was true that the D’o were, in a sense, representatives acting for the benefit of their own tribes, but that attitude was harshly criticized. It was natural for the tribe to be proud of the D’o they produced, but also for the D’o to dedicate themselves to the entire nation, not just their tribe. It showed the special elite sensitivity of the D’o themselves, having left their tribes and submerged themselves into the vague, sexless, levelless D’o.


                        In this sense, the nation that Sei was visiting now, Kuwast, was an example of a nation keeping its balance well. It had started as a splinter group thirty years before, developed smoothly, and had now reached the level of eight D’o and almost seventy thousand Gun’gazea. It was a group that hadn’t forgotten its origins, and still had goals for the future.


                        The procession and its dark shadows cut across the plaza and entered the new building, which was being used as the government center of the nation.


                        One of the Gun’gazea who had come to greet them led Sei and SQ2A to a separate room, and asked them to wait for a while.


                        Sei sat down in one of the chairs facing the table, and told SQ2A to stand behind him. He sighed lightly.


                        It was hot.


                        The temperature was unquestionably over forty Celsius, but since the building was built for Gun’gazea there was, of course, no air conditioning.


                        Sei glanced over the maps pasted on the wall. They were all maps that had been surveyed and drawn by the robots. The Administration Complex of Gun’gazen, which had originally made the maps for the human settlers, had made them available to anyone who asked about twenty years ago. The demand had been growing with every year, and now they charged a small fee – and expenses – making it a kind of sales operation. It was also true that a variety of problems had come up since the Administration Complex had begun to charge for services that had once been free, and not only for the maps. There were about ten modes of payment, ranging from the coins he had minted, through the various currencies used by the colonial governments, to the gold, silver, alloys, mercury or rough gems of the Gun’gazea... And the problem was how to set the relative prices... Or to slide with the market. Recently, the demand from the Gun’gazea had become remarkably high. Now, the average nation had at least five or six sets of maps.


                        The map on the far right-hand side of the wall was the world map of Gun’gazen. In the center was the rather mundane shape of the continental group, and Unity Island where the Administration Complex was located. Naturally, the Administrator at the time had drawn the map such that the “Greenwich line” of this world ran through the center of the Administration Complex.


                        The name Unity Island had no particular meaning, and had been chosen by the first military governor assigned here. Maybe he’d wanted to raise morale, or improve his standing with his superiors. As proof that he hadn’t been merely a duty-bound drudge with no personal feelings at all, the island just south of Unity Island was called Hawke Island, after himself.


                        North of Unity Island spread the “island group”, with nine major islands and over a hundred smaller ones. The arrangement of the nine islands suggested the rough profiles of a beak, or a wing, or legs or tail, and together gave the impression of some strange bird. It had been given the name Rhamphorynchus Archipelago, after the flying reptile of the Terran Jurassic Period. That being somewhat hard to pronounce in everyday conversation, it was generally called “The Archipelago”.


                        Perhaps because the Rhamphorynchus Archipelago was so far north, it hadn’t been colonized by the Gun’gazea yet, so the human settlers moved in. Almost ten million settlers had formed nine governments centered on the nine islands, built their cities, and were progressing with industrial development. Perhaps not quite nine separate governments... Although the Administrator hadn’t officially recognized it yet, they were moving towards government through a single large organization.


                        Between Unity Island and the Archipelago was the Resort Group, famous for its clear, alluring sun and sea, and beyond that, to the east, south, and west, spread the Fishing Islands. Farther to the west, beyond the Fishing Islands – due south of Unity Island and Hawke Island – were the Jellyfish Islands. They had some limited tourist and fishing spots, but hadn’t been developed yet by either humans or Gun’gazea.


                        There was also the silent continent – the polar continent. It was a totally undeveloped, wild land spreading across the north pole, uninhabited except for a robot observation center monitoring the movements of its animals.


                        And then there was Babel.


                        The continent of Babel, which extended from the southwest of Unity Island, was the largest land body on this world of sea and sail, and it was the world of the Gun’gazea.


                        It looked like... No, it would be best to look at the map of Babel pasted on the wall. Babel presented an indistinct shape, like a potato, with one major mountain range. This range included the tallest mountain on Gun’gazen, Babel – that was what the Gun’gazea themselves called it, and as its shape reminded the humans of the Tower of Babel, the name had been adopted directly from the Gun’gazea tongue. There was a jungle belt in the southeast with three major rivers, and north of that stretched the huge Babel desert.


                        The third map was of the northern part of the jungle, where the Kuwast lived. Areas that had been unsurveyed, or had changed, had been corrected here and there by the Gun’gazea, including the names and locations of new nations. These maps were updated every ten years, and the robots were surveying even now... Maybe ten years was just too long, thought Sei.


                        If there was enough time to do it...


                        Maybe there wasn’t time anymore.


                        Sei turned.


                        With heavy footsteps on the metal floor, four D’o came in. From their clothing, Sei could tell that two of them had attended the rite, even though otherwise they all looked the same. One of those two was the eldest D’o, and the other was today’s newly recognized D’o. The others, who had not taken part in the rite, were no doubt handling the day-to-day affairs of the community.


                        The four D’o sat down slowly directly across from Sei, but said nothing.


                        Following them, seven or eight Gun’gazea came in, and stood behind the D’o, making preparations to record the meeting. They weren’t D’o, but were doubtless the highest-status veteran officials, acting here only as scribes and bodyguards.


                        After preparations were finished, one of the D’o spoke, for the first time. It was one of the two that had not taken part in the rite, and, as he remembered, had been second or third to gain D’o status in Kuwast. When the Gun’gazea spoke their nostrils flared, and their peculiar fast speech reflected the fact that they were barely breathing. Since he had come here, over a year ago – or two, by Terran standards – Sei had come to be able to use Gun’gazea speech, but it was still totally impossible to understand or speak at the speed the D’o used.


                        “We apologize for making you wait,” translated SQ2A, and Sei nodded in return.


                        “Thank you for granting us your precious time during your regular inspection rounds,” continued the D’o. “As the representatives of Kuwast we are in the position of having to make a request of you as the controller of the robots, possessed of the highest power and technology.”


                        “What would that be?” asked Sei in his own language, and SQ2A translated.


                        “Your predecessor, and you yourself, have forbidden trade between the Gun’gazea, including we Kuwast, and the colonist nations living in the cold lands to the north. This edict is still in effect, is it not?”


                        “It is.”


                        What the D’o had said was true, but Sei wanted to prevent a one-sided interpretation. “However, this policy is only until the worlds of the Gun’gazea and that of the humans can interact without great loss or friction. In other words, it is an edict that will be repealed at some future point.


                        “At the present time, though, it is still in force.”


                        “That is correct.”


                        “Even so, illicit trading has been going on under your predecessor and under yourself, and the scale has been increasing with each year. Are you aware of this?”


                        Of course he knew, and it was exactly for that reason that he was building a public trading center on the southern tip of Unity Island. Things had progressed to that point. Along with the human expansion had come the smuggling, finally becoming glaringly obvious about ten years ago, and growing worse every year. No matter how many times he exposed it, he couldn’t destroy its roots. The robots had sunken ships and arrested smugglers, but the situation had gotten even worse these last few months. Maybe they were enthralled by the vast profit attainable, but recently some colonists were willing to resist to the death.


                        Not only that.


                        According to the robots stationed in the Archipelago, a number of colonists had been killed during the arrests, and the facts of the story had been twisted in the telling to make it look like murder. This gave rise to a very strong enmity towards the robots among the colonists. On the one hand, he had ordered SQ1 (That damned SQ1...) to use its judgment and act to extinguish that enmity, while on the other he had started construction of an official trade center where he could check and control all trade. This would at least be better than the present situation.


                        The opening of the trade center was being put off until the colonists and the Gun’gazea both began to raise a demand for it. For the moment, he would hold it in abeyance, keeping track of the smuggling situation, and wait for the perfect timing.


                        For which reason, of course, he couldn’t talk about it with the D’o seated across from him now.


                        “I am aware of the illicit trading,” he nodded. “And, as you know, we continue our patrols, and punish both colonists and Gun’gazea alike as we find them.”


                        A metallic crash rang out.


                        The eldest D’o, seated to the right, had dropped its arm to the table. Sei wasn’t sure if it was accidental, or if it held some sort of threat, of warning.


                        “That also is so,” rumbled the eldest D’o deeply. “You and your robots are always impartial. Leaving aside for the moment the point of whether that is actually possible or not, you attempt to be so. But isn’t the age of that policy’s effectiveness now over?”


                        “...” By the time Sei had shifted his attention, the D’o was relaxed in its chair again, and talking in a humor-filled voice.


                        “Excuse me, excuse me. I didn’t mean to be rude; I was merely expressing my feelings.”


                        Sei bowed. What else could he do? What else could he do when faced with a fact that he himself had already accepted?


                        It was hot.


                        In contrast to the glittering outside views, the room was dark, but now that very darkness seemed to be making it hotter. And he wasn’t sure if the droplets of sweat rolling down his back were only due to the heat... He kept his face expressionless as he wondered.


                        “At any rate, the illicit trading is continuing as before despite your efforts,” continued the first D’o. “A number of nations near us are violating this edict.”


                        “How do you know this?”


                        “Because those nations – the very strong Toka and Cotoru among them – have made extremely heavy demands of us. They have raised the prices of the goods we purchase from them, and have insisted that we pay either in the currency issued by the Administrator, or in devilcats... if we refuse them directly, it seems it will unavoidably lead to war.”


                        The D’o took a breath, and continued.


                        “We Kuwast are not the biggest of tribes, but we have more than enough force to protect ourselves, and they know that. In spite of that fact, they are willing to fight us, which can only mean that they have received weapons from the colonists that we do not possess, and therefore have confidence in their ability to win.”


                        “At the present time, there are twenty-one D’o in the Toka, and nineteen in the Cotoru. They have made preparations for war,” added the youngest D’o.


                        Sei nodded


                        It was all just as they said.


                        What would happen to a tribe when it had more than the necessary number of D’o, but had neither reached the point where governmental functions became paralyzed, nor birthed splinter groups? Or, what would happen as the rights of each individual D’o became smaller and smaller while functioning within the nation? Recalling that there were no distinctions of higher or lower, better or worse, among the D’o. Human common sense suggested a change from government by council to government by a noble class, growing rapidly in size, and creating many various structures and functions. The Gun’gazea, though, didn’t do that. Whether they sensed the limits of the nation, or whether their methods of government and imagination simply hadn’t progressed to the point where they could handle a population of hundreds of thousands, or millions, he didn’t know, but at any rate, they didn’t let the population of a nation exceed one hundred forty or one hundred fifty thousand. Before that, they fought. As a result of the combat, the winning side gave eternal rest – death – to the vanquished D’o, and sent their own D’o to rule in their place.


                        To human eyes, that looked like conquest and provincial rule, but it was natural to the Gun’gazea. Regardless of the situation, all responsibility for the combat rested with the D’o, and it was better to give them eternal rest than to remove their authority. Even the losing side, though, needed D’o to be a nation, and so new D’o were dispatched from the winning side.


                        Sei could understand it thus far, but after that point it became incomprehensible to a Terran. That was because the outcome of a war varied widely depending on the combat, the relationship of the nations involved, and the mood of the moment. Sometimes a single D’o would go alone, sometimes with its group; sometimes a number of D’o would go, sometimes taking their groups. It was further complicated by the fact that sometimes intermarriage was forbidden, and at other times enforced, and there was also a wide variety of approaches to the rights of ceremony and the care of the Vault of the Dead. If you asked the Gun’gazea directly, they didn’t say much about it, and even those that were willing to talk didn’t know anything but their own opinions. Naturally, the robots had tried to analyze the situation under the orders of one of the previous Administrators, to see exactly what situation led to what kind of result, but they hadn’t been very successful. There were so many aspects that changed with time and so many that couldn’t be adequately quantified, and in spite of the need to define all these factors, the robots seemed to have nailed down so very few. They hadn’t even clarified the interrelationships between all that many of them yet. Anyway... Perhaps in another fifty or sixty years there would be enough data to reach some sort of conclusion, but at the moment it merely served to show the wide distance between two apparently similar intelligent species.


                        But... All that didn’t matter today.


                        It was clear that Kuwast was being targeted by the other nations. Both Toka and Cotoru each had a hundred and ten to a hundred and twenty thousand Gun’gazea, and about twenty D’o, and with that relatively large number of D’o, they were likely to invade another nation.


                        “In other words, we are being threatened by your failure to fully carry out enforcement of your edict,” pointed out the fourth, hitherto silent D’o, mildly but firmly.


                        “... I see.”


                        Sei had to answer something.


                        “Based on this situation, we, for the good of Kuwast, are left with no alternative but to make a petition to you,” spoke the eldest D’o.


                        Sei felt the back of his combination watch/communicator begin to pulse regularly against his skin.


                        A signal.


                        It was the emergency signal that SQ1 sent through the action chief (in this case, SQ2) to alert Sei during a meeting that couldn’t be interrupted.


                        What had happened?


                        Of course, Sei revealed nothing, and responded to the other.


                        “Petition, you said?”


                        “Yes, a petition,” said the eldest D’o. “We of Kuwast have respected your edict up until now. As a result, we are being threatened by those who have violated it. We therefore petition you to remove the threat from Kuwast.”


                        “What do you want me to do?”


                        “Either collect the weaponry that Toka and Cotoru have gained through this trade, or use your force to destroy them... But I suppose that’s impossible...”


                        “It is. If I were to enter their land to search for those weapons, I would never find them all, and the action itself would be interpreted by you Gun’gazea as a war against your species. It is totally outside my authority as Administrator to consider destroying a nation.”


                        As he was answering, he felt the signal again. It must be an extreme emergency, indeed.


                        “For those reasons, we believe you should loan us the needed weaponry to fight with and conquer Toka and Cotoru, officially.”


                        “Weaponry?”


                        This is a tough one, thought Sei. One mistake would be condemned from all sides as favoritism, and if he gave weaponry to all sides to avoid favoritism, the entire world would soon be in a war stance, and the problem would escalate. It was impossible.


                        “We realize this is extremely difficult, “ said the D’o that had spoken first. “We have expressed some specific ideas. If you reject them, then you must protect Kuwast through some other means, in the name of the Administrator and in the name of the one that forbade smuggling. You must remove by some means the threat over Kuwast... This is our petition.”


                        “I understand your petition in full.”


                        Sei bowed his head lightly. For this type of problem, he couldn’t give a quick answer even if he was already decided. If he acquiesced easily, there would be other demands, and if he refused at once the others would be offended, and lose face. Of course, he knew all too well that this reflection was undeniably Administrator-ish, and served to entrench his own authority. For now, he had to discuss it fully with SQ1 and develop a solid platform from which to respond. He had already felt the emergency signal for the third time, and he had to find out what the problem was as soon as possible.


                        “We will investigate immediately as to whether we can respond to your petition or not. If we accept your proposal, we will carry it out at once. However, if there should be an alternative way to protect your safety, then I would like to discuss it further with you, either here or at the Administration Complex. Is that acceptable to you?”


                        “May we expect your reply soon?”


                        “Of course.”


                        “In that case, it is acceptable,” answered the eldest D’o, after exchanging glances with the other three.


                        “May I interpret this to mean that our conversation is finished for the time being?”


                        “...”


                        The four D’o silently lowered their heads.


                        “In that case, excuse me. I thank you sincerely for the privilege and honor of being allowed to attend your rite today. It was glorious.”


                        Sei finished his leave-taking formally, and stood up.


                        As he did, the heat came burning back. He could hear the sound of metal being forged somewhere.










                                         – 2 –


                        The Administrator’s craft and the LQQ-class robots which had been inconspicuously protecting him had already taken up formation for the return flight.


                        As soon as he entered the craft, his breathing grew easier, and a cool breeze enwrapped his body. He sat down, opened the lock on the communicator, and spoke to SQ2A at his side.


                        “What happened?”


                        “According to the communication from SQ1, the colonists are assembling a major fleet in the southern bay of Hawke Island,” reported SQ2A. “Judging from the past actions of the colonists, SQ1 believes it to be for the purpose of illicit trade.”


                        “Not again.”


                        “The fleet is composed of fifty ships, starting from the four thousand ton class,” continued SQ2A unemotionally. “In addition, the ships are armed with advanced weaponry, including lasers. The larger vessels have magnetic resonators mounted.”


                        “Magnetic resonators?”


                        As he felt the craft rise, his eyes narrowed. This wasn’t the first time they had carried weaponry. It was common for them to carry arms, claiming that they were for protection from other governments or military craft. Were he to investigate it thoroughly, they would probably turn out to be in violation of the law, but as Administrator he took their psychology into account and silently accepted that much. It was hardly reasonable, though, to carry magnetic resonators. No doubt they had many excuses ready if he asked for them, but Sei had no choice but to believe they were aimed at the robots, and that they were installed for real combat against the robots.


                        A fifty ship fleet?


                        “And?” pressed Sei.


                        “Please hold. SQ1 wishes to communicate with you directly.”


                        SQ2A fell silent for a moment, and then began to speak in a slightly different voice. It was, of course, SQ1 talking through SQ2A’s enunciator. Due to the relatively poor quality of the speech synthesizer, it was much rougher than the voice SQ1 had in the Administration Complex.


                        “Reporting,” said SQ1. “The fleet gathered in the southern bay of Hawke Island has begun to move south from the Rhamphorynchus Archipelago in groups of two and three towards the Resort Islands. They appear to be engaged in fishing. There are also tourist vessels and research vessels in the group. One group has taken the route usually used for smuggling, but its size is small, so they are being allowed to pass.”


                        “They all assembled at the same point, same time?”


                        “Yes. They all set out for Hawke Island this morning, and began to assemble in the southern bay,” said SQ1. “I am still analyzing their intercepted communications from that time, but have not yet found anything resembling commands.”


                        “Isn’t it also possible they prearranged the rendezvous before setting out?”


                        “It is of course possible.”


                        “Well, we’ll find that out by asking anyone we arrest. Still... We can’t arrest them just for meeting at Hawke Island.”


                        “Just so.”


                        “If we arrest them, it’ll have to be at the actual trading spot, or when they use those magnetic resonators against the robots... Was it impossible to check if they had those resonators before this problem started?”


                        “It was impossible.”


                        SQ1’s voice seemed to have become a little deeper, but maybe it was just his imagination.


                        “It appears that they loaded the parts on piece by piece and assembled them on board the vessels.”


                        “Which means that they have a lot of technical people on board.”


                        “Correct.”


                        “Did you run any data checks as to the origin of the crews?”


                        “I am now checking... However, there are many null areas within the cities that make it impossible to run complete investigations.”


                        “... null areas...” muttered Sei.


                        Null areas.


                        The mere fact that they had developed was a major problem.


                        When the first Administrator had taken over from the military Governor some twenty-five years ago (or fifty years ago, in Terran time), the population had been only some fifty thousand humans, in the otherwise uninhabited northern areas, and the Gun’gazea on the Babel continent.


                        Those fifty thousand people, receiving aid from the Administration Complex, proceeded to make dwellings here and there throughout the Archipelago, then established thriving towns, and constantly pressed forward with development.


                        Each time the Administrator ordered the robots to protect or aid the settlers, the robots took a census of the group and stored the data, while sending the needed material or labor. On this accommodating world, the colonists used the rich metallic resources to the fullest, pushing rapidly into industrial development, and raising their living standards... As a result, Gun’gazen acquired a reputation of being a world where you could make a future for yourself, and new settlers poured in, raising the population geometrically. Even so, the robots didn’t stop collecting and storing data for each and every person. It was part of their job to service the immigrants.


                        At the present time, with the population almost exceeding ten million, that policy had come to be hated. There was a growing current of dissatisfaction, wondering why the Administrator had to keep track of every person. Plus which, the nine separate governmental bodies were now forming a single large government, which was coming into conflict with the robots, and the robots were being excluded more and more. Especially after smugglers began to die – as a result of their own suicidal resistance – the animosity towards the robots had been increasing, and now it wasn’t uncommon for ordinary procedural robots to be destroyed inside the towns. Under those circumstances, it became impossible to collect personal and demographic information... And so these unmonitored areas – null areas – had come into existence over the past six months. The robots could not tell who was in those areas, or what they might be doing.


                        Maybe Sei should have sent in an investigative robot team with combat capabilities, or spy robots. He had thought of it, but given the colonists’ way of thinking, he felt it would be better merely to wait a little longer.


                        “This is the first case of its type on this world,” continued SQ1, as Sei sat silent.


                        “After referring to your order patterns, the directives of the Federation, analysis of similar cases, and the information in the data bank, I propose the following assumptions and counter-actions. This fleet has assembled for the purpose of smuggling, and is heading for Babel continent. They are prepared to resist the robots more than they have in the past. Across their path for Babel, I have designated a line ten kilometers from the Babel continent coast as a defensive line, and stationed two hundred seventy LQS-class robots there.”


                        “LQS-class?”


                        “Yes. In the past anti-smuggling operations, it has been possible to use the LX-class robots to temporarily paralyze the humans, and control their freedom of movement, but even knowing the danger, humans have stationed themselves on the sides of the ships, and have fallen into the sea to drown. This must be avoided if possible. For this reason, I have decided that it would be better to utilize the LQS-class robots to destroy the ships’ propulsion systems, making it easy to collect them later in their non-controllable state.”


                        “... Understood.”


                        “Do you have any other directives?”


                        “No. Not now.”


                        To be honest, Sei felt a little apprehensive about SQ1’s strategy. SQ1 could only make decisions based on the past actions of the colonists, and Sei worried if that would be enough to handle the present situation. But what good would it do to leak that suspicion to SQ1? He added to his previous words.


                        “That’s sufficient. At any rate, for the moment.”


                        “Understood. I will communicate immediately any change in the situation,” said SQ1, and ended the communication. After a moment, the speaker adjusted its frequency, and SQ2A spoke.


                        “Shall we return as planned to the Administration Complex?”


                        “Mm...”


                        SQ2A no doubt relayed the order, because the craft suddenly regained the speed it had lost, and began to climb.


                        It was beautiful weather.


                        The thick jungle below him began to grow sparser, signaling the approach to the desert areas. Which meant that the craft, rather than taking the southern route which passed over Hawke Island, was taking the route from the northern desert of Babel, across the straits, returning from the west to Unity Island. More than likely, SQ1 had reasoned that if the smugglers near Hawke Island saw his craft, they would only become more violent, and had ordered this route.


                        It should take another three hours to reach the Administration Complex. He didn’t need to ask how long it would take, as he had flown both ways many times.


                        He wondered if it was really necessary to think that deeply... Was it really a benefit to take this route – as he guessed – to avoid being seen by the smugglers? Or mightn’t it even have the opposite effect?


                        Yes.


                        Lately, Sei had begun to think that the robot organization of Gun’gazen, with SQ1 at the top, had begun to act a little out of step with reality. Such a thing should have been impossible from the very structure of the organization, but... He felt that way.


                        No, maybe it was only natural. As Administrator, he knew well that the Central Body of the Federation received his reports very cautiously, almost as if they filtered them first. To look at it from another angle, it demonstrated that the Federation had lost the spirit it had had in its youth, that it had become bureaucratized. Those obese sections, afraid of being held responsible, had stopped accepting reports in their entirety.


                        It was true that part of the cause lay with the Administrators. The Central Body unquestionably wanted them to be loyal officials, but a large number of Administrators doggedly stuck to the original principles of the Administrator System, working not only for the Administration but for the good of their individual worlds. Not only was that the basic idea and tradition of the Administrators, but if they didn’t do so they began to question their own existence, thereby losing their ability to function on their world and finally being excluded from its society. The Central Body, though, without actual experience, couldn’t understand this. Even if you assumed, for a moment, that they could intellectually understand it, they would still not be able to sympathize to the point where they would protect the Administrator.


                        Looking at it historically, it was unavoidable that the Inspector System should have been initiated to bridge the gulf between the center and the problem.


                        An Inspector should be coming to Gun’gazea in the near future, too, but the Federation had stopped issuing any advance warning, to prevent the Administrator from altering anything. Well, that didn’t really matter, because the presence of an Inspector was totally irrelevant to Administrators really involved in their work. The Inspectors, too, had passed a deep-level psychological probe, and were filled with the importance of their orders. They couldn’t be bought. In that sense, at least, the Central Body and its members hadn’t completely rotted.


                        It was a big question, though, exactly how accurate their reports to the Central Body were – after only two or three weeks of inspection, to report clearly on the Administrator’s misses from the Central Body’s perspective. For that reason, the Federation had stopped trying to respond to the Administrators’ requests for new information updates for their robots’ data banks. Rather than that, it was more common for them to demand government based on the initial principles and values instilled into the robots.


                        Could you really expect things to go well on that basis?


                        Wasn’t it a bit peculiar to expect the well-ordered system of the colonial era, with empty worlds able to accept any number of settlers, to still apply well to this era of worlds populated many generations ago? Wasn’t it only common sense that there should be a gap, a difference?


                        Maybe there were people who said no. Maybe there were people who said the robots had the ability to coldly analyze and solve the current situation. It was true, though, that the data implanted into the robots when they were first established on the colony worlds was the strongest, and that all future decisions were based on and made within the framework of that basic data. Things might be different if you separated the robots from their old data base, and tried to rebuild the system... But no, if they did that, the robots might well judge that the Administrator System itself was inadequate. Basically, the fundamental contradictions contained in the robots made it necessary for the government to be an “Administrator-robot” system, and for decisions to be based on that relationship – even though relations between native inhabitants and colonists had changed dramatically over the years, and the situation of the colonists themselves had altered.


                        Well – it couldn’t be helped.


                        He was an Administrator. He was the Administrator that ruled the robots, and this world... There was nothing to do but to keep trying.


                        In spite of the situation, he couldn’t deny that the robots were working hard. There was no denying they had been given the abilities to handle any situation, and even if there should be a totally unforeseen event, as there was today, they would somehow manage to analyze it within their current data array, and deal with it. Even to the bare-faced demands and actions of the colonists these days, the robots managed to respond in their own ways.


                        But when the question became, “Is that enough?”, Sei had to think. Wasn’t there bound to be a gap, given that the robots couldn’t exceed their basic data by very much? The robots were still recognizing the problem as smuggling, and had changed their response to it as it grew larger. He felt that they only thought of the recent movement of the governments into a single body – the “Independence Movement” if you cared to call it that – as a sudden development... Even though it was vastly more important than smuggling. In other words, he couldn’t help but feel that their inability to fear unexpected changes in their world was a fatal weakness.


                        Maybe he was exaggerating.


                        If it is was only exaggeration, then well and good.


                        Even so, Sei’s vague uneasiness wouldn’t vanish.


                        For example, he thought...


                        For example, had SQ1 and its robots really calculated the effects of that man’s presence in the Independence Movement? Sei had questioned SQ1 on that point a number of times, and always received the same answer – they had taken it into account, of course. Then SQ1 would always ask Sei to explain why he asked the question. Sei could explain the feelings in his heart, but... He didn’t feel confident that SQ1 had really grasped it and incorporated that hard-to-explain apprehension into its data banks.


                        That man.


                        Mischer.


                        Mischer YF Gainue.


                        Formally, he was just a colonist. He was only one of the ten million colonists and descendants of colonists on this world. At least, that was how the robots viewed him.


                        Still, the facts were different.


                        To Administrator Sei, it was different.


                        To Sei, Mischer wasn’t just Mischer. He was “Mischer who failed as Administrator’”


                        Sei had met Mischer twice.


                        The first time... Hmm, yes... When he had been here half a year... One year by Terran standards...


                        From the very start, that middle-aged man in the group of representatives from the Archipelago governments had caught Sei’s eye.


                        For one reason, he was a new face.


                        Sei had been meeting all of the other representatives a few times every month or two since he had come here. The nine different governments would send their representatives, sometimes singly, sometimes in groups, usually carrying their various requests in their hands. The different governments had varying levels of development and scale, but they all wanted the same things – universities, rail networks, shipyards, research facilities, and expanded industrial areas.


                        It showed that the rash concentration of colonists was still continuing, but Sei always listened to a simple explanation, and if there were no major problems, then had the robots check the minor points and correct the plan, and granted the request. That was because under the present Federation directive, this world was Class V, Type A: he should generally approve whatever the local governments wished to do, as long as it didn’t interfere with the principles of Administration. There was really no need to approve each and every thing separately. It would be enough to leave it to the colonists, and just check them from going too far, and the fact that they continued to come for permission reflected not only that it had become a custom, but also that it was much easier to get technical and economic assistance from the Administrator after receiving formal permission. Still, according to the data banks, this formality had become limited to only the major projects, and they had stopped notifying the Administrator of the small jobs they could do themselves. Twenty or thirty years ago, they had requested even the smallest thing from the Administration Complex. The colonists finished many of their own construction jobs by themselves. One could say that they were only using the Administrator and his robots. Sei, though, didn’t draw attention to their selfishness; instead, he merely made as much time as possible to meet with and talk to the colonists. Sei felt it was a precious chance to build harmony with the colonial side. As a result, most of the meetings became friendly talk-fests. That was Sei’s feeling at least, although he didn’t really know if the colonists felt the same way.


                        That particular day, though, didn’t have that mood. A tense air hovered somewhere. It was amazing enough that representatives from all nine governments should come together. Among that group, the only new face was that rather middle-aged man. They hadn’t come with an appeal or a request, but rather with a demand.


                        Another thing that astonished Sei was that man’s attitude.


                        Generally, the people who came were much more conscious than need be of the fact that they were in the presence of the Administrator. That was because there were over fifty years of tradition behind the Administrator, and the Administrator was a clear symbol of authority to his audience – even if he didn’t actively project himself that way. He was a phenomenon that the colonists couldn’t respond to without preconceptions. To Sei, there were always the same speech patterns among the people who met him as Administrator. Either a strange friendliness, or obsequiousness... Or sometimes they would raise their heads and thrust their words at him ferociously. This man displayed none of those reactions. He was maybe fifty, fifteen or sixteen years older than Sei, with classical features. He came in with the others, sat down with them, silently casting his gaze around and about, and did nothing to break the etiquette or formality. In his eyes, though, there was an impression that he had come to meet with an equal opponent in a strictly business discussion.


                        I wonder who he is, thought Sei. He wished he could have investigated him before the meeting, but there had been no information other than his name in the guest book.


                        Sei dropped his eyes to the name list. Skipping the names he knew, he determined that the other was the representative from Kata Island, Mischer YF Gainue. Sei verified that during the greetings.


                        He was sure he had heard that name before, somewhere, but couldn’t recall just where.


                        What was much more important to Sei was the fact that this man seemed to have no connection with the so-called famous families of the colonists. It was unclear if his surname was Mischer or Gainue, but both were missing from the ranks of the famous families. It was most common on Gun’gazen, which had such a long history of use as a colonial planet, for representatives to be either members of one of the famous houses, or temporary leaders. That meant this Mischer was one of the latter. In other words, that he was a resourceful, talented man who had to be watched at all times.


                        But he couldn’t sit here pondering Mischer forever.


                        “What is the purpose of your visit?” Sei asked in an over-friendly voice as he accepted a thick sheaf of documents from the representatives. “I imagine if you’ve all come together like this, it must be pretty important, right?”


                        “...”


                        No one replied.


                        Sei softened his voice another notch, and said, almost laughing, “Has your Administrator done something wrong? Or is there some totally insoluble problem?”


                        The representatives exchanged glances, and at last the eldest, the representative from the Central Islands, urged him on.


                        “For the time being, won’t you please read the documents?”


                        “Oh, I see...”


                        Sei turned the page with his finger, and scanned it. As he read it, he recognized it. He had already read one just like it.


                        Right.


                        It was identical to the “demand” presented to the Administrator who had been here before Sei came. The previous Administrator had flatly refused it, and stored the documents themselves in the archives. Sei had read them there.


                        It was a list of demands that an Administrator had, of course, refused, but also that the Federation itself could not possibly accept. First of all, the nine independent governments would combine to form a single entity, to be called the United States of Gun’gazen. That nation would have total sovereignty over the Rhamphorynchus Archipelago, and would be governed by a ruling committee... And even the Administrator would not interfere with the decisions of the Committee. The Committee would be headed by a single person who would create the necessary political institutions, headed by selected ministers, and the directives of the government would take precedence over those of the robots. Not only that. It also removed the limits on the colonists’ land, giving them full rights to the Fishing Islands, and even, depending on their needs, rights to colonize Babel. The Administrator would give full support, including use of the robots, for the development of the colonial world... It continued in a like vein for some time.


                        When the previous Administrator received this demand for the first time, he didn’t change his expression, of course, but he was struck speechless. When he handed over the reins to Sei, he had said, with a wry smile, “You give a little to human beings, and they keep taking more and more and more...”.


                        Sei understood his feelings now. Of course neither the previous Administrator, nor Sei – nor, for that matter, any Administrator – could swallow such an audacious set of demands... And even if they did, the Central Body of the Federation certainly wouldn’t remain silent. If they were to allow the Administration to be ignored like this, the Federation would lose its authority in equal measure. True, the political level of this planet was at Class V – an exceedingly free level – but, even for Class V, no self-government was permitted for a population of over two million. According to caste sociology, levels of power elites and societal dropouts developed and became too fixed, too prevalent. After all, famous families and academies had already developed among the local governments here on Gun’gazen, with urban populations of only seventy to one hundred twenty or one hundred thirty thousand. It was just out of the question to consider a government for ten million that was not even under the control of the Administrator.


                        And there was more.


                        Among their demands, there was one that the Fishing Islands should be opened up little by little to settlements as the population increased. The same couldn’t apply to Babel, though. Babel had been given to the Gun’gazea from the start. Leaving aside the matter of Gun’gazea mental development, and only considering the level of their civilization, it was easy to see what would happen if humans were allowed unrestricted entry into Babel. There were countless examples in human history... Probably there would be a repetition of what had happened in America and Asia and Africa. Plus which, hadn’t the colonists themselves said, just twenty years ago, that Babel was not fit for colonization? They had become greedy with their industrial development, feeling a sense of confinement in the Archipelago, and lusting for the Fishing Islands, and the metal resources of the Babel continent.


                        However you looked at it, you could only see these demands as the result of total ignorance on the part of the colonists towards the immense power of the Federation and the Administrator System. Living for so long on this peaceful, lazy planet, they had come to think this was the standard for Administrators. Hadn’t they forgotten that there had been a time when the Forces crushed rebels mercilessly? And even now, those same Forces were still waiting for the opportunity to sharpen their claws and take power again, even though they were controlled by the Central Body.


                        Exactly because they knew that fact so well, the previous Administrators had kicked the demand out, and Sei felt exactly the same way.


                        The fact was that there were worlds with governments similar to what they were demanding – with no Administrator or robots, with self-government – currently in the Federation, although they were rare. They were exceptions to the rule, and they had been made to meet a tremendous number of special conditions to achieve their special status. To imagine meeting those conditions here on Gun’gazea was...


                        Downright ridiculous.


                        For the colonists of Gun’gazen, such a time was still in the far-distant future. There was no doubt they had to consider a little more deeply about those worlds that had achieved independent status already.


                        How could he possibly explain all that to these representatives seated here in front of him?


                        Sei placed the sheaf on a side-table and faced them.


                        “Well? What do you say?” asked the representative from the Central Islands.


                        “This is the same as was submitted before,” said Sei, tapping the papers lightly. “I’m sure you still recall what the previous answer was? My answer is the same.”


                        “Why?” asked another representative.


                        “Why?” nodded Sei, a half-smile on his face. “The previous Administrator should have made it clear before. Must I repeat it?”


                        “The times have changed!” shouted yet a third representative, desperately. “Maybe it was true in the past, but this is now! Things are different!”


                        “Would it be possible to at least ask you to investigate it?” asked the man from the Central Islands.


                        “In that case, may I keep these documents?” asked Sei as he gathered them up and stood. “Still, I feel the answer will remain the same. No objections, I trust?”


                        The representatives began to get agitated. They finally noticed that Sei was going to end the meeting.


                        “One moment, please.”


                        The man who had spoken was Mischer.


                        “We hate to bother you, but I wonder if we couldn’t have just a little more of your time?”


                        “If you wish,” said Sei, sitting down again. “My opinion, though, probably won’t change.”


                        “I know that,” bowed Mischer. “I merely want to explain our thinking to the Administrator of this world... To you.”


                        “Please,” responded Sei, thinking that the other was going to make his opinions heard no matter what.


                        “We know our demands are absolutely ridiculous to you,” said Mischer. “Our demands, in basic terms, are to grant Gun’gazen the rights of self-government as an independent colony world. And, for this world just granted Class V, Type A status, that right is only a dream, of the distant future.”


                        “...”


                        Sei was astounded – he didn’t show it, of course, but he looked at the other again. This was the first time he had even met a colonist who understood the approach of the Administrator to government so well.


                        “The Federation has made it a necessity for certain strict conditions to be fulfilled before granting complete independence to a colony world... But is there really any particular need for them to treat this right as a special dispensation?”


                        Mischer continued to speak softly.


                        “There is no need for it. The Federation’s Central Body, now more than ever, has become a bureaucracy, and looks upon the granting of independence as a special blessing. At the start of the Administration System, though, the final goal was to have all colony worlds controlled under a flexible system, and for each to be independent as fit its needs and possibilities. The Administrator System liberated colony worlds that had been under the military governors of the Forces, allowed them their own say in things, and worked towards making them pillars of the Federation – that was why the Administrator System was formed – it’s only natural.”


                        Sei didn’t try to say anything. There was no need. Everything Mischer was saying was true. Mischer was talking exactly like an Administrator.


                        This man was... Sei’s memory suddenly came back to him.


                        Mischer... Gainue.


                        Mischer PPKD Gainue.


                        Damn.


                        He was an Administrator. Or, rather, had been an Administrator. To finally become an Administrator, you had to pass countless tests and training without failing, as so many did. Even if you passed all the tests, and finally gained the PPKe status of an unassigned Administrator, you could still fail during field training, under the eye of an older Administrator. After all that, you were finally assigned as Administrator on a relatively easy-to-govern world somewhere. When you reached that point, you were pretty stable as an Administrator, but... There were still occasional individuals who intentionally threw away their painfully acquired status. There had been no cases during the beginning of the Administrator System, but there had been one or two a year lately. No doubt there were various reasons for them to throw their posts away, and they must have had many various thoughts, but none of it was explained to the current Administrators. Their names were simply stricken from the list.


                        Mischer was one of those.


                        The reason Sei had felt he had heard that name somewhere before was that he had seen it on the Administrator’s name list many times. He could verify it later by comparing the ID number, but he could sense directly that anyone who talked like this either was an Administrator, or was someone who had close ties to an Administrator.


                        “We would like to see this concept realized here on our world, on Gun’gazea, at least; even though what was once the target has now become a mere reward... That is why we brought this appeal.”


                        Mischer continued.


                        “We intend to continue submitting this appeal until we finally reach our goal. This is what I wished to explain to you as Administrator.”


                        “I understand,” nodded Sei. He opened his mouth to lightly counter what the other had said, then stopped. If this Mischer was an Administrator older than Sei, then he already knew exactly what Sei was thinking. It wouldn’t accomplish anything to put it into words.


                        After the representatives had left, Sei ordered SQ1 to bring the records on Mischer. On colony worlds, all colonists had ID numbers as a rule, and as that number was on the visitor’s list, it was easy to find the data. Over the last ten years, the colonists had come to refuse the robot censuses, and only half of them, at the most, were now recorded. The Administrator before last had tried to limit this to some extent at least by making it mandatory for anyone meeting with or having any connection with the Administrator to have a number. Both the previous Administrator and Sei had continued the policy, but Sei had lately come to wonder if it hadn’t produced a kind of status distinction among the colonists. The fact was that the representatives today, and the important business leaders in all fields, had numbers, but their nameless underlings involved in smuggling were all unregistered.


                        Sei glanced over Mischer’s personal file.


                        There was no mistake.


                        Mischer had quit as Administrator at twenty-six, and had come to Gun’gazen as an ordinary colonist. There was no data concerning why he had quit.


                        What was going on here?


                        Sei continued to look over Mischer’s record with surprise... It was impressive. Sei picked up only the major items. Settled on Ear Island in the Archipelago at twenty-six. Became a leader of the Unification movement at twenty-nine, at thirty-two was elected as sector representative as well as head of Ear Island.


                        Became a member of the Kata Island Industrial Promotion Council at thirty-five, and made the Kata Island inter-island trade figures immensely profitable over the next few years. At forty he became commander of the Kata Island Defense Corps. At forty-five he was the member of the Back Island representatives responsible for communication with other governments. In order to solve the problem of inter-island fishing rights, he convened the first nine-government meeting, and then proceeded to create a super-council that could even be called the Rhamphorynchus Federation. This functioned under the Administrator for a while, during which time he was appointed as a member of the United States of Gun’gazen Preparatory Council. Now, at forty-nine, he was the First Representative of Kata Island.


                        Before he slept that day, Sei thought about Mischer quite a lot.


                        Why had he quit as Administrator? Why had he become a mere colonist? Sei, of course, couldn’t imagine.


                        The only thing that was clear was that Mischer YF Gainue – and Mischer PPKD Gainue – were the same, and that since he had become a colonist, he had risen to a become major leader in a mere twenty years. In Terran time, of course: the colonists generally solved the time problem by counting one Terran year for each half-year on Gun’gazen. Considering that the various families were all jockeying for power, you could only call it incredible. Maybe he had revealed his past to the colonists and had used it to gain his position, but even so, to have come so far was a bit unusual.


                        Now that he had come out on top of the colonists, what did Mischer plan to do?


                        And furthermore... Sei was in the position of having to oppose him.


                        That had been their first meeting, thought Sei as he felt the craft begin to wing over the straits. Only a little more than a month later, they had met again. Hadn’t that conversation fostered a strange, inexplicable weariness in Sei?


                        It had been – but Sei couldn’t continue thinking.


                        SQ2A began speaking in its own voice.


                        “SQ1 wishes to communicate.”


                        “OK.”


                        The robot began speaking in a slightly changed voice.


                        “I will now report on the current status of the colonial fleet,” SQ1 said. “The fleet has begun to move towards Babel continent as predicted. However, ten of the fifty ships have not moved, and are still in the South Bay of Hawke Island. It is unclear what their goal is. The defense line held by the LQS-class robots is along the course of those forty ships, which should be rendered powerless approximately ten kilometers out to sea from the Babel coastline.”


                        “Satisfactory. If you receive any further information about those remaining ten ships, contact me at once.”


                        “Understood.”


                        After a fractional pause, SQ1’s voice continued.


                        “One more point. There is a highly unusual incident to report.”


                        “What happened?”


                        “A passenger vessel with almost two thousand colonists on board is approaching Unity Island. According to the report of LQQ8 on patrol, they are all armed, so I dispatched SQ2D and his group to question them on their purpose. They replied that they are a volunteer army.”


                        “Volunteer army?”


                        “Yes. They explained that they respect the Administrator and have sworn loyalty to him. They want to build a fort on Unity Island to defend you from the rebel army.”


                        “Rebel army!?”


                        “According to their statements, the rebel army disguised as a smuggling fleet should rendezvous at Hawke Island, set forth for Babel, then turn and land on Unity Island to attack the Administration Complex.”


                        “...”


                        Sei had absolutely no idea how to interpret this, either.


                        “Their statements and the actions of the fleet have points in common, and must be considered possible,” continued SQ1. “For this reason, I have intensified observation of the fleet while at the same time permitting the so-called volunteer army to continue and land on Unity Island. Naturally, the defenses of the Administration Complex are of sufficient strength even if the fleet should prove to be a rebel army, and therefore the volunteer army is unneeded. However, if I ordered this self-proclaimed volunteer army to return home as unneeded, it might well cause them to waver, and possibly even enter the rebel camp. For this reason, while I am taking precautions against the potential rebels, I have decided to allow this volunteer army to do what they wish... If you have any directives to alter this policy, I will effect them immediately.”


                        “No. It’s fine as is.”


                        There didn’t seem to be much else to do at the moment. Sei started to add “for the moment” to SQ1, then stopped.


                        “In that case, I will make contact again if there is any change in status, “ added SQ1, and cut the communication.


                        Sei leaned against the seat and watched the sea beneath the window. There seemed to be a wind, and there were many whitecaps. His thoughts were shaking, too, much as the unstable waves. These strange events... Something was happening, but he didn’t know what, yet. He’d have to analyze things as soon as he got back. He didn’t know if it would tell him anything or not, but he had to try.


                        Sei pushed the window-shutter button, and closed his eyes.










                                         – 3 –


                        Just before he fell asleep, he felt his thoughts drifting freely here and there, finally becoming enwrapped in a thick green-brown darkness. When that happened, he dimly perceived that he was about to fall asleep.


                        When his nerves were overtense, the image in his mind returned to reality once or twice, resolving into a clear, precise feeling of dread. He would lie in bed with his eyes open, realizing he had woken up again.


                        Like now.


                        The blankness Sei was staring into now was lit by perfect indirect lighting, the spray of its not-quite-visible radiance making the room a light darkness. SQ2B, who managed the visitors’ rooms and his, had dimmed the lights for Sei. As long as the Administrator didn’t touch a certain switch near his pillow, they would remain that way. Even if SQ1 communicated an urgent message, that darkness would persist until the Administrator himself requested a change.


                        Habit was a strange thing, thought Sei.


                        As Administrator, Sei had of course studied the history of the robots that supported the Administrator System. Over the seventy years of the System, SQ1, as the epitome of all the robots, had changed from being a mobile unit into the giant monster that was now buried deep below the Administration Complex... But SQ1 had never lost its unique character. As a result, SQ1’s sub-robots had been developing along an irreversible course. SQ2 and SQ3, which had originally been designed to assist SQ1 in command, gradually came to be directly responsible for the Administrator’s safety as SQ1 lost its mobility. For example, defense of the Administrator outside the Complex and translation functions were the duties of SQ2A, while SQ2B watched over him when he was inside. Now both were designed to receive orders from SQ1, but they were assigned robots under their own direct control and could move by themselves. In other words, by parceling out its jobs among the SQ2-class robots, SQ1 had freed itself to handle more complex work than in the past. At the same time, the LQ-class robots that used to work near the Administrator had been banished to the far perimeter, where they were allowed major duties. It was much the same as in the ancient Imperial courts, where kinship ties between the nobles and the Imperial bloodline grew thinner and thinner, and nobles became more powerful on the frontiers. At the same time, the nobility at court came to the forefront of power. It was the same phenomenon.


                        Naturally, there had been good reasons for it. It could be said that the positions of the highly capable LQ-class robots had been usurped by the SQ2-class, which held the wishes of the Administrator as their highest priority. In any case, it had reached this pattern now. The Administrator, who knew all of this, watched it silently, as it was not only highly useful, but good for his pride, too. Sei laughed cynically at himself for that sense of usefulness and for not doubting that it was for his benefit, even now.


                        Still... His consciousness of it was a mere wisp of fog in the back of his mind.


                        He was playing in his memories now. He was recalling his meeting with Mischer YF Gainue... With Mischer PPKD Gainue.


                        He wondered if you could really call it a meeting...


                        It was the second time they had met, half a year ago (or a year, by Terran reckoning), a non-official meeting in the largest city of this world, in the Rhamphorynchus Archipelago.


                        The music had grown quiet. It was tired, but it still continued. The brilliant chandelier that had been attracting stares up to an hour ago had dimmed, and was coalescing into dully shining shadows at the edges of his vision.


                        The only person sitting in front of Sei was Mischer. Sei didn’t know if it had happened that way by accident, or if the colonists arranged it on purpose. In any case, the party was still not over yet, people were clustered off in the distance, laughing and whispering together. Among those men and women of the upper crust, in their elegant attire, a slow, languid feeling drifted. The colonists gathered here were all of the top class – they all had wealth or power or rank or were merely famous – and maybe it was reasonable they should all be so languid. Mischer, of course, was no exception.


                        They were both silent. Maybe it would be better to say that both were aware that the others had left, and each was waiting for the other’s opening gambit.


                        Sei had tried explaining his opinions to many of the colonists, and had been rebuffed with painfully hard counters.


                        Sei wasn’t the host here. He hadn’t even been invited. He had simply showed up at one of the regular social parties of the ruling class. Sei knew he wasn’t likely to be greeted warmly. He knew it, but as Administrator he had to find out if they really knew exactly what they were doing, if they knew how close they were to a violent reaction: with all their intensified smuggling, their anti-robot sentiments, their growing independence and unification movements – the “United States of Gun’gazen”... It was difficult to do officially, and all the harder for the colonists’ stubbornness. At an official meeting, their actions were all recorded, and he was forced to go by the book. He might even have to use force to make them recognize his position. If he had to drop the hammer on them, then he would first have to inform the Federation, and issue an Emergency Condition order to SQ1. If he did those things, then he wouldn’t be able to stop in midstream. Before he went that far, Sei wanted to try correcting their views unofficially.


                        First of all, wasn’t it his right and obligation to monitor the colonists and their world? To some extent, Sei was berating himself for his own indecisiveness. He had avoided this type of contact because he wanted to avoid exciting them needlessly. Things had developed to the point where he had no choice, now. In general, colonists welcomed a visit by their Administrator, certainly without any hatred. That was simply the way relations were between colonists and Administrators. In principle... And, in truth, the robots reported that there were a few friendly colonists, awaiting stronger contacts with the Administrator. Insofar as that attitude didn’t prevail here, it demonstrated the complexity of this colony world’s problems... No, of the Administrator System itself.


                        As he had expected, he was received respectfully, and coldly. Sei entered the salon with only SQ2A – which was itself more than enough to anger them – and had started various conversations to blend in, conversations that would not offend anyone. Finally, he began on the real subject... That he wanted them to stay as colonists under the rule of the Federation, under its regulations. If they didn’t, forcible means would become necessary. He asked them to please reconsider their actions.


                        There was no response.


                        Or rather, their answer was a deliberate lack of response. Sei’s words had been completely expected, and while they wouldn’t counter him to his face, they certainly had no intention to follow his requests.


                        And was Mischer the same?


                        The music was still continuing. Not a tape, but a live band. Sei honestly couldn’t deny that this salon and these people were elegant and fascinating. To Sei, their parties were highly reminiscent of what he knew of nineteenth century Europe.


                        But what... What, asked his heart, what was this beauty? This beauty was merely honoring the accumulation of wealth. It was a splendor that would produce nothing more. Wasn’t it merely the glitter of apparent authority, actually nothing but using people, squeezing the land, controlling the channels of distribution, carefully built organizations? Sei knew that this splendor held a hard-to-resist fascination, a resplendence. This beauty was never found outside these surroundings, for example, in a public building, or a huge computer center built for the people. There everything was highly functional, too empty, too sharp. Sei looked on that emptiness and sharpness as a sign that new life was buried inside, and that there was still hope left in some form. To Sei, whether or not that hope existed was a major problem, and regardless of how gorgeous everything looked to him now, he could not permit himself to sink into it.


                        “I wonder if it’s all right to speak?” asked Mischer, looking at Sei.


                        “Please forgive me that my manner of speaking is not that of the colonists,” said Mischer, speaking softly. “Still, talking this way allows me to express myself freely, and you needn’t fear baring your teeth, either.”


                        He suddenly laughed.


                        “Actually, I’m hoping we might talk as two Administrators together. You’re a rank c, while I ended at rank D, and now I’m nothing at all... Do I offend you?”


                        “Not particularly.”


                        Under normal circumstances, this was an unimaginable event... But now, it might be the easiest way, thought Sei as he answered. Maybe the reason he felt so little resistance to Mischer was that he hadn’t talked freely with another human being for such a long time.


                        “That’s good,” said Mischer, switching his gaze directly to Sei. “Well? I don’t think you’re still looking at Gun’gazen as the same collective colony it was in the past.”


                        “Keep talking,” pressed Sei, deliberately being a little rude.


                        “We’re not, you know. Government has become absolutely necessary here; we’ve reached that point.”


                        “Government? There’s government in a society of two people.”


                        “I’m not talking about that sort of concept.”


                        “Well, what are you talking about?”


                        “You think you know government inside out. You’re an Administrator. With power behind you, it’s easy to rule by issuing orders, using coercion, and that works in simply constructed groups. When the group exceeds a certain size, a certain level of complexity in inter-relations – in other words, a high-level society – that type of rule becomes impossible. You agree?”


                        “You’re right, but what of it?”


                        “To give an example, think of an army. Even in such a perfectly strict organization, the army stops functioning as the commander wishes when the functions of its separate elements become too diverse.”


                        “Probably,” nodded Sei. “But it’s the Federation that decides whether or not a colony world has reached that stage. Until it reaches that stage, it is under Administration... You should understand that much, at least.”


                        “In a healthy system, yes,” replied Mischer, smiling with the special smile of a middle-aged man full of self-confidence. That Mischer should wear such a cheerful expression at such a time!


                        “However, as I pointed out before when we met with all of the representatives, that mechanism is not functioning normally any longer. No, it would be better to say that it is not being carried out, as it includes a certain degree of human intention. At the moment, hasn’t it become a special gift for a colony world to be separated from the rule of the Administrator? As an Administrator, of course you can’t state your agreement, but a fact is a fact. For that reason, a number of colony worlds are in trouble. To be blunt, a number of the worlds being ruled by the glorious Administrators under the protection of the Federation have become, for exactly that reason, ungovernable by the Administrator System. That is what I think. And this world is one of them.”


                        “Mischer, are you trying to make me believe that it can’t be helped, even when I fail? That it’s unavoidable?”


                        “No, why should I try such a thing? You will keep trying to the very end, I’m sure. You will because you’re an Administrator.”


                        Mischer slumped his shoulders. His face was turned away from the light, into a silhouette.


                        “At any rate, this colony world of ours, Gun’gazen, has become ungovernable by your methods. Needs outside your system have developed.”


                        “Like what?”


                        “Status.”


                        “Status?”


                        “Yes. A clear, unmistakable statement of social status, and recognition.”


                        “...”


                        “I don’t plan to argue about the techniques of government,” added Mischer, turning his face back to the light. “You Administrators are the cream of the crop, superior. But isn’t that superiority supported by your techniques and your knowledge? You have no knowledge of the conditions of the ruled, the experience of living tens of years on this colony world and rubbing shoulders every day with the colonists, living their everyday lives. Correct?”


                        “It’s not important, because Administrators are as they are, and the system has come to be supported in that way.”


                        “Wait a minute. What I want to say is exactly what that accumulation of small, apparently trivial experiences gives birth to. This foolish everyday living is the life of the colonists... It gives them a clear, solid position within their world, and a silent mutual recognition of each other. Have you ever thought about how that operates?”


                        “That is a point that only applies to a particular colony world.”


                        “Exactly, exactly,” nodded Mischer to himself. “As any Administrator knows, the principles of Administration are for the colonists and the native inhabitants, for both, not for either. The Administrator must never align himself with one or the other, always maintaining his logical viewpoint. For exactly that reason, the Administrator is excluded from the local society as soon as the colonists develop to a certain point and feel a sense of unity as a single world. The delicate and skillfully camouflaged thread of humanity binding Administrator and colonist breaks. After that point, what moves the colonists must be, not a mere figurehead, but a force from within their group.”


                        “Haven’t you oversimplified a bit?”


                        “I agree. But your mode of government has its limits, and I want you to understand that this is what I firmly believe. In a short time, Gun’gazen will no longer be amenable to rule by outsiders’ theories, and outsiders’ techniques. A system of rule that can function in more complex, more difficult, more indirect ways is needed.”


                        “I see.”


                        Sei was a little disgusted. This was merely a question of how you viewed the problem, and of course he had no choice but to defend the course he had to take as Administrator. He tried to change topics.


                        “And you are that true leader, I gather, with the weapons of your techniques learned as Administrator and your status as one of the colonists,” said Sei, looking at the other. “So that’s why you quit and came here to Gun’gazen, to test your theories?”


                        Mischer laughed, a little loudly.


                        “You try to place me so quickly. Human beings aren’t like that.”


                        “So that was why you revealed yourself so surprisingly,” continued Sei relentlessly. “And somehow your ideas have become the basic ideals of the independence movement. But how long will it continue?”


                        “It doesn’t matter.”


                        “What?”


                        “Just wait a bit,” said Mischer, quietly sipping the drink he had put down before. “At any rate, what I’m saying is just my – and the colonists’ – thinking. But you’re an Administrator, and as such you’ll try to destroy what we’re trying to do. Maybe you will in the end. However... Even if you do, you must know how difficult your position will become. The contradictions inherent in your function will cause it. The Administrator must work for the colony world, for the world. That is the most basic order. Even if the initial stages have the colonists weak and the natives of low civilization, you must realize that the future will bring a confrontation when both have become powerful. The Administrator himself forces it. What becomes of the Administrator in that situation? The Administrator is facing both sides; both the colonists and the natives... Like Janus, the two-faced god. But can he continue that double-faced existence? It’s probably occurred to you, but as Administrator, you must hold both positions to fulfill both goals... So what to do? That’s what’s happening on Gun’gazen. You’re bound... You’re on the boundary itself... And isn’t it merely a matter of time to see which way you jump?”


                        Mischer shrugged his shoulders, and leaned back into the seat.


                        “That got pretty long, sorry – I just said what I’ve heard... Forgive me.”


                        Mischer suddenly changed his tone as he noticed two or three party-goers approaching.


                        “Are you still in conference?” asked a young girl lightly, sitting down next to Mischer.


                        “The Administrator speaks bluntly, and Mischer has been a man who hates to lose for a long time.”


                        The man who spoke, and stressed the words “long time” was an elder statesman of the family that had controlled politics on the Central Islands for many generations. “Well, I believe the Administrator will come to understand our actions... Isn’t it better not to get too serious, Mischer?”


                        “Exactly,” bowed Mischer. “And the people here have all come to feel this way.”


                        Have come to...?


                        Sei glanced at Mischer again. He was smiling.


                        In that instant, Sei understood.


                        The strange feeling Sei had felt when he had asked how long Mischer could continue, and Mischer had replied that it didn’t matter... Suddenly, it all fell into place.


                        Wasn’t Mischer gambling? The fact that Mischer was continuing as a leader of the independence movement, knowing exactly how the colonists would appear to the Administrator and the Federation... He was gambling on that slim chance. He was striving to build up his own independent self-governed nation here on Gun’gazen, leading the blind colonists, who could only see their own interests, not telling them of the danger.


                        Maybe he was wrong in his analysis of Mischer.


                        Maybe he was just thinking too much.


                        But it certainly seemed possible. At any rate, it was something that Administrator Sei could well understand. It was certainly possible for Mischer, if he decided to become a real leader among the colonists. Mischer was trying to prove the validity of his thinking.


                        That was an extremely “anti-Administrator” position, but wasn’t it – at the same time – precisely the same feeling as that held by the Administrator himself?


                        He felt a weird, formless sympathy with Mischer... But maybe it was all Sei’s misreading.


                        Hmm...


                        Hadn’t he fashioned his own illusions and then been waiting for them to appear?


                        What had the colonists done after that unofficial meeting? If, as he had thought before, it could be called a meeting.


                        After that event, the very substance of the smuggling changed, resistance to the arresting robots increased, and human casualties began appearing. And hadn’t those strange handbills begun appearing after that, and the illegal broadcasts slipped into the colonists’ radio programs? Even though the robots had tried, they had never been able to locate or arrest more than the drones, just the low-level operators. Strange broadcasts – saying things like The robots are not working for the benefit of the colonists. As proof, it went on, hadn’t they killed, and wouldn’t they continue to kill? Ridiculous broadcasts, saying that the robots eliminated humans as mere objects, not treating them as humans, in the pursuit of their duties... It had all started after that meeting.


                        However he looked at it, it seemed that the instigators of the movement were among the colonists themselves, the upper levels of leaders among the colonists. The robots’ analysis bore him out. In addition, there was the problem that Mischer was among them... Or rather, that Mischer was pulling the strings. He strongly suspected that Mischer was behind the destruction of the robots, and the smuggling, and also those ridiculous broadcasts.


                        As for himself... Was he, perhaps, assigning too much weight to Mischer’s past as an Administrator? Was it a mistake – not to think that, as an ex-Administrator, Mischer would choose a more intelligent, more productive course? Now, the colonists... The Mischer-controlled colonists, that is... They were probably trying out the old time-tested methods, or if not, then a low-effect approach.


                        Has Mischer, then, really abandoned his memories as an Administrator? Has he become a mere colonist? Sei wondered. Was it really reasonable to expect Mischer to give him so much trouble, even occasionally?


                        No.


                        Sei suddenly sat up in bed. He had noticed something.


                        The relationship between Mischer and... SQ1.


                        Wasn’t the vague unease felt by Sei towards SQ1 actually being driven, deliberately, by Mischer?


                        SQ1 was, naturally, fulfilling all of its functions.


                        Today, SQ1 had reported the situation to him, and had taken care of it. After Sei had returned to the Complex, he had questioned SQ1 about the movement of the fleet.


                        Forty ships of the original fifty were still continuing towards the defensive line held by the robots off the east coast of Babel. The remaining ten ships were still at anchor in the south bay of Hawke Island. The self-proclaimed volunteer army had landed on Unity Island, and set up defenses in the middle of a fairly small desert. Nothing else had changed. The entire situation itself was extremely strange, but it was still progressing as SQ1 had predicted.


                        SQ1 also had another bit of information.


                        The Inspector’s starship was approaching the system, and would probably land in a day or two. Sei had no idea what kind of person the Inspector was, or what his schedule was, but there was no mistake that he represented the Central Body of the Federation, and that he wanted to uncover his, the Administrator’s, errors. That’s what most of the Inspectors were now. That was probably because the Federation had recognized the huge authority that accompanied the position, and the various attractions of the subject worlds, and had therefore evaluated the Inspectors closely and trained them thoroughly. As a result, a special type of person had emerged as Inspector, and no other type was ever seen.


                        At any rate, Sei had good reason to be apprehensive about the Inspector’s visit. It was a fact that the situation here on Gun’gazen was not just bad, but had become downright terrible. Even if he should try to pull the wool over the Inspector’s eyes, it was unlikely to work. Quite the opposite: by explaining the situation fully, he might be able to make the other recognize the difficulty faced by the Administrator. And if he were censured for that, well, it was just unavoidable. He was thinking about it rationally, but the reason he could was that on countless other colony worlds there were similar problems, and government was becoming more and more difficult and unsteady everywhere, not just here on Gun’gazen. You could go so far as to say that Gun’gazen was slightly, just slightly worse than the average. If Sei was censured for it, then the same punishment would have to be meted out to a great many other Administrators as well, and he doubted the Administrator System could survive it.


                        Probably this kind of thinking would have been impossible for an Administrator of twenty or thirty years ago. Twenty years before, the situation of an Administrator being driven into a corner itself would have been remarkably rare. Of course, Sei didn’t know from personal experience, but the records showed that if any world in the past had approached a critical level, as it had on Gun’gazen, then an ace Administrator had been dispatched to deal with it. Now, though, he was being forced to function at a level above his capacity. After all, he was assigned to this world as PPKC, not PPKA. Maybe it had become that much harder to turn out high-quality Administrators. The age when talented individuals who could have succeeded in any field yearned to become Administrators had ended, the position of the Administrator had become a mere concept, and the levels of society that should have been supplying new cadets was fast solidifying. No... Even if they repaid nothing to the Administrators, it was all still due to the fact that the Central Body and the Administrator System itself had begun to totter...


                        Sei cut off that line of thought. Where in the world had he picked up this habit of jumping from sidetrack to sidetrack?


                        Hadn’t he been thinking about SQ1?


                        Right.


                        If Mischer was still using his faculties developed as an Administrator... And if he was the actual power behind the colonists... Then wasn’t it reasonable to assume that there was a different motive behind that ridiculous “independence” movement of the colonists?


                        He began to mull that over.


                        For example, the hysteric shooting of the robots... That appeared to be an appeal to the colonists, but couldn’t it also be interpreted as a demand to SQ1?


                        Sei had to consider what effect that would have on SQ1 – knowing the colonists believed that, rather than assisting them, the robots were actually murdering the colonists. Anyone who had been an Administrator for any length of time soon learned the significance of SQ1. Assuming that Mischer knew it too, then it was only natural he should attempt to weaken the Administrator by striking an invisible blow at SQ1’s stability. Was there any way to affect an SQ1 as good as this one? Wouldn’t SQ1, trapped between its duty and the responses of the colonists, become aware of this total lack of a correspondence between its judgments and the results of its actions? And the only outlet for all of SQ1’s perplexity – if you could think of a robot’s problems that way – was the Administrator. The gap between the data banks and the actual colonists, even being called a murderer for fulfilling its duty... Wouldn’t SQ1 begin to ask the Administrator to approve its judgments and counter-actions?


                        Sei was covered with cold sweat, sitting up in bed.


                        Wasn’t that exactly what SQ1 was doing now?


                        No.


                        Not only that.


                        The rendezvous of the colonial fleet... True, it was an unusual case, but there wasn’t going to be any immediate combat... Wasn’t the fact that SQ1 had used the emergency signal a sign of just how far its distortion had gone?


                        And, to an SQ1 in that condition, Sei had asked constantly, as if not trusting the strength of the data, whether SQ1 had taken Mischer’s presence in the Independence movement into account.


                        That in itself must have had an effect on SQ1.


                        In other words, Sei had been following Mischer’s strategy all along, unknowingly. Or, if you preferred, SQ1 was beginning to alter under the pressures of the battle between the current Administrator and the ex-Administrator.


                        Sei still didn’t know what would happen. Still, unknowing, but possessed of a little more insight into the problem, Sei lay back on the bed... His eyes still wide open.


                        He slept, eventually.










                                         – 4 –


                        When he woke up, it was dawn. Sei ordered SQ2B to open up the windows, changed into his uniform, and listened to SQ1’s report.


                        “The fleet of forty colonial ships has reached the sea near the coast of Babel, and made contact with the LQS-class robots.”


                        “And?”


                        “As the colonists continued to attempt to forcibly penetrate the defense line, the LQS robots are carrying out the destruction of the vessels’ propulsion systems as planned. Shall I display a live broadcast on your private screen?”


                        “No. Send it to the screen in the office. I’ll take it there.”


                        “Understood.”


                        SQ1 fell silent, and Sei got into the elevator.


                        When he entered his bright, sunlit office, the dark thoughts that had tormented him during the night seemed like a dream. Weren’t they, after all, just worrying too much? Wasn’t this instant, what he was doing, the Complex, wasn’t everything exactly as usual? Everything was operating normally, under the appropriate policies. The work of the Administrator was being carried out efficiently. So what was bothering him?


                        When Sei sat down in his chair and looked at the screen, the situation began to look a little less pleasant.


                        The colonial ships were scattered across the screen, including some that were quite large. At a glance, over half of them had already had their engines smashed, and were drifting. Above the ships still under power, the LQS robots, with their blue-black wide-spread wings, were diving down to attack, then folding their wings and climbing on gravity propulsion, then falling to another target. It was a spectacle that must have made the colonists feel they were under attack by a host of demons.


                        Seen on the screen, it somehow failed to appear real.


                        Still, it does impart the advantage of being able to view the situation objectively, thought Sei, as he squinted his eyes. Just as he thought that, one of the LQS robots lost control, and plummeted towards the sea.


                        Magnetic resonators.


                        The colonists has begun to use the magnetic resonators!


                        “Idiots! What are you doing!?” shouted Sei. As he shouted, what he had feared came to pass. The robot smashed into the sea with a huge waterspout, and then its gravity propulsion system exploded with a flare of light. A number of nearby ships twisted as if hit, and began to sink. “It’s... It’s suicidal!” Sei bellowed.


                        The colonists, though, made no effort to stop. The drifting ships began to fire their deck-mounted magnetic resonators at the LQS robots, and the smaller ships continued to fire their lasers – even though the robots they picked off then plunged into the sea and exploded, sinking ships each time. The colonists continued to fire. They were resisting as if possessed, even though they knew further resistance might cost their lives.


                        It was a blind resistance born of terror. It was a scream to drive away those monsters in the sky – if needed, to be blasted by their explosions in the sea – anything was better than to be continuously attacked from above. If the planners of this attack – those who had deployed the fleet – had actually planned that far... It was a plan of unholy skill. As he stared, yet another LQS robot fell and sank, together with a colonial vessel, after exploding.


                        Already, how many colonists had died, wondered Sei, and shivered. The colonists would say they had all been murdered.


                        “Tell the LQS robots to...”


                        Even as he began to order them pulled back, SQ1 had already issued the order. The robots floating in the sky drifted away from the reach of the colonial disruptors, and began to regroup.


                        And...


                        Sei doubted what he was seeing.


                        The ships that still had engines chased after the robots ferociously. When the robots pulled still further back, the ships pursued again, firing every weapon they possessed. Naturally, the ships could not hope to catch the flying robots, but they seemed determined to follow them forever.


                        “They’re insane,” Sei said softly, unconsciously standing up.


                        He couldn’t believe that what they were doing was a rational act. They were motivated only by their hatred of the robots, in spite of the fact that it was flatly impossible to destroy them all, no matter how hard they tried... They carried the fight to the robots, knowing they might die for it. At least, that was all that Sei could imagine.


                        Sei calculated at full speed exactly what the result of this would be.


                        In this combat, dozens, hundreds of colonists must have died. Of course, his side had lost a lot, too, but robots were only robots, not people. Among the colonists, the image of the robots as mass-murderers would settle firmly, and their hatred and fear would rise like a flood. In addition, the original plan was to tow back the disabled ships and question the crews, but now that they had displayed such hysteria, it had become flatly impossible even to approach them. If a robot tried to approach, it would be shot down by that illegal weapon, the magnetic resonator. When that happened, there would be another explosion, more deaths. And while he was doing that, the colonists floating in the ocean would be drowning one by one. It looked like there was no way for the colonists to save themselves, either.


                        If he let things ride, more colonists would die, causing the Archipelago to view him as an enemy, actively disobey, and rebel against him. It was clear that the leaders of the Independence movement would use that enmity to stir up a full-scale insurrection. He had to avoid that at all cost.


                        Sei bit his lip.


                        The fact that SQ1 had still not yet commented must have been because it was still weighing the pros and cons of what it could do within the range of its permissible actions.


                        For the moment, he had to save as many colonists as possible, decided Sei. Save as many as possible now, and figure out what to do with them later.


                        “Prepare life rafts,” he said. “Drop them from high altitude.”


                        “Understood,” answered SQ1 at once. Sei didn’t know if SQ1 was satisfied with that answer, or put at ease. At any rate, it carried out the order at once.


                        As soon as the group of cargo robots left the Complex, SQ1 conveyed a totally unexpected bit of news.


                        A number of Gun’gazea had appeared on the coastline, and were making preparations to try to rescue the colonists.


                        Sei was speechless for a moment.


                        It wasn’t, strictly speaking, impossible. He didn’t know which group it was, but it wasn’t unlikely that they had been given radios. It was hardly strange they should set out in rescue boats in response to the colonists’ communication. Still, Sei had never thought that it might happen. Even though some smugglers might have that sort of relationship with some nations, he never thought that the Gun’gazea would display so openly that they were engaged in smuggling. And that they should do it in spite of the fact that the colonists had fired on the robots, which was forbidden... Sei felt a dull, deep pain in his heart.


                        Was he... Was the Administrator now respected so little? Had he become that kind of figure for both the colonists and the Gun’gazea? Had the Gun’gazea, too, gone that far?


                        Mischer’s words and the words of the D’o of Kuwast come back to him, together.


                        When the Administrator, the two-faced god, can’t satisfy both, then what happens?


                        You and your robots are always impartial. Leaving aside for the moment the point of whether it’s actually possible or not...


                        They were right.


                        The past Administrators had given careful thought to the contact of the Gun’gazea and the colonists, and had restricted it... And had come to believe that restriction was needed... But wasn’t that about to end? Weren’t they at the stage where the Administrator shouldn’t interfere: fighting together, communicating as they were now?


                        No! Sei opened his eyes.


                        Not yet.


                        Looking at it objectively, they hadn’t come that far yet. He believed it. And he was the Administrator.


                        He could not back down, he could not allow the colonists and the Gun’gazea to mingle like this.


                        Before it was too late...


                        Before it was too late, yes, he had to stop those Gun’gazea. He had to convince them, or stop them by force if needed... he had to make them withdraw. Even if he became isolated from both the colonists and the Gun’gazea, he still had to make a start somewhere.


                        For now, there was no choice but to order the robots on the scene to stop the Gun’gazea boats, and in the time so gained, he would have to fly to meet them, and personally convince them.


                        Having decided, he immediately issued the orders and went into action.


                        The dunes of the scorching desert streamed by beneath the window of the aircraft. They caught the morning sun, glowing yellow. They were crossing the fairly small desert in the south of Unity Island. Still, exactly because it was here on the same island as the Complex, the hand of civilization had touched it, as it had not touched Babel. There were artificial oases everywhere, and roads stretching between them. The silver flashes on the roads were the robot buses connecting the various facilities on the island with the Administration Complex.


                        Then he could see countless people wearing multi-colored clothes, and their tents along the coast. They were armed with rough, police-level weapons, and were walking around or sitting in their camp. Even without seeing the unfamiliar vessel moored in the harbor, he knew at once this was the “volunteer army” that SQ1 had permitted to land. They firmly believed the fleet that had assembled at Hawke Island was going to attack the Administration Complex and had come to protect it. Even if it were so, it was ludicrous to think that this motley, underarmed mass could fight anything. It was impossible that the Complex would fall to that fleet, even if the volunteer army should be defeated.


                        The reason Sei could see them so clearly, even without using the observation screen, was that the craft dropped down, slowed, and circled several times over their heads. The men and women of the “volunteer army” cheered and waved their arms. After that, the craft rose, and took the direct course that would take him to Babel in just a little over an hour.


                        “Was that directed by SQ1?” asked Sei shortly.


                        “Yes. Is there anything...?” replied SQ2, seated at his side. “No. Nothing,” countered Sei. He felt there was no need to do anything like that for this “volunteer army”, but he didn’t want to listen to SQ1’s long explanation about it. It was already done.


                        He felt himself grow depressed. SQ1 had never before given that kind of directive, even when Sei had first come to Gun’gazen. To think that SQ1 was respecting the feelings of the colonists to that point... Hadn’t that broadcast being circulated to the colonists entered SQ1’s data banks, and affected it after all? Hadn’t SQ1, in other words, significantly changed?


                        Leave it alone.


                        Sei drove away those thoughts that came bubbling up within him.


                        The sea unfolded beneath him.


                        “There is a communication from SQ1,” said SQ2 suddenly.


                        “What?”


                        “Hold on please...” The voice changed into SQ1’s. “LQQ5A and LQQ44A that were near the area have stopped the Gun’gazea from making preparations to rescue the colonists.”


                        “Stopped? By persuasion or by force?”


                        “For the moment, by persuasion. However, both LQQ5A and LQQ44A are surveying robots, and therefore their command of spoken Gun’gazea is very limited. In addition, as I cannot take over their speakers and communicate directly, it is only a matter of time before they will be required to use force to stop them.”


                        “I understand.”


                        “LQQ5A has managed to determine which group it is. According to its report, they are Cotoru.”


                        “Cotoru?”


                        Sei’s eyes narrowed.


                        Cotoru was one of the nations trying to crush Kuwast, wasn’t it? The Kuwast D’o had said that the Cotoru and the Toka had received highly advanced weaponry through smuggling... Which meant they had a need to try to rescue the colonists, even though they had attacked the robots in broad daylight.


                        “Aren’t the Cotoru based a little further south?”


                        “Yes, but nonetheless, they are there now,” responded SQ1. “It appears they came for smuggling and were waiting there.”


                        “Hmm...”


                        “There is another report,” continued SQ1. “The ten ships moored in the south bay of Hawke Island have begun to move.”


                        “Move? Where to?”


                        “It is still unclear. I will communicate as soon as I know.”


                        “As soon as possible.”


                        SQ1 cut the communication.


                        So the remaining ten ships had begun to move...


                        To where?


                        Were they following the other forty to Babel? Or were they withdrawing to the Archipelago? Or did they really intend to attack the Administration Complex as the “volunteer army” said?


                        He didn’t know.


                        He didn’t know, but... In any case, he had to let it ride for now. How, he had to make the Gun’gazea – the Cotoru – stop trying to rescue the colonists.


                        His craft flew over the colonists’ fleet at a high altitude. In this clear weather he would certainly be seen, but there was no point in – or need to – avoid it now. As long as they couldn’t reach him with their magnetic resonators, that was sufficient. He observed them carefully through the screen, and could see the countless drifting ships, and the dozens of liferafts dropped by the cargo robots. There were colonists riding in the liferafts. For now, that was enough.


                        He finally arrived on Babel. Where the jungle ended and changed to beach, the craft hovered down neatly.


                        Two robots flew up to meet him, and then landed flanking him. Of course, they were LQQ5A and LQQ44A.


                        The first to step out of the craft was SQ2A. After SQ2A had exchanged data with the other two robots, it turned to Sei.


                        “They are saying that they absolutely must set out to sea.”


                        Sei got out of the aircraft.


                        In front of him, six or seven metal and wood constructions that could only be called boats were lined up at the water’s edge, each capable of carrying maybe ten passengers. As if to protect them, twenty or thirty Gun’gazea were gathered in front, watching him. A number were carrying guns, and the rest had shining blue swords at their sides. Side-lit by the sun, they all looked incredibly fierce.


                        “The Administrator has come!” blasted SQ2a at full volume.


                        The Gun’gazea jumped, startled, and then as one of them fell to his knees the others followed suit. It showed that his title still held the same authority it had held in the past.


                        Then one of them rose, bowed quickly, and ran off into the forest. Immediately, a single D’o heading a number of Gun’gazea come forth. The D’o’s skin was of woven gold and black.


                        As usual, SQ2A translated.


                        “This is the first time we have met... They say you are the Administrator?” asked the D’o in its unique high-pitched speech, looking at Sei as if trying to humor him.


                        Sei nodded.


                        “Yes. I am Sei PPKC Konda. I am the Administrator, as I lead the robots,” he said, then paused for a moment. “Also, further proof is in the fact that they do not contradict me.”


                        “Excuse me. Now I see,” bowed the D’o. “I have only met the Administrator once, and at that time it was not you. It was your predecessor, or the one before that... I am a D’o of the Cotoru.”


                        “My pleasure.”


                        As he answered, Sei felt his tension rise. The fact that this D’o had only met the Administrator once showed that the nation had little connection with the Administrator or the Administration System. Even if that were merely due to chance, it still revealed that they were fairly unfriendly... In other words, it meant they were relatively independent. Which was certainly true of the Cotoru. If he wished their cooperation, he would have to exert tremendous effort. And under these strained conditions, as well.


                        “To get to the point, it appears you are making an attempt to set to sea.” Sei felt he had to control the course of the conversation, so he began at once. “Could you please tell me why you must do so here and now?”


                        “To rescue humans,” answered the D’o abruptly. It seemed that this D’o and his nation would be treating Sei as merely another D’o.


                        “People?”


                        “Those that live in the cold world... the colonists... seem to have had an accident. We want to rescue them.”


                        The fact that the word “colonists” had come out was proof of this D’o’s extensive contact with the people of the Archipelago through smuggling. Sei let that lie for the moment, and progressed.


                        “I see. But how did you discover this fact?”


                        “We had a communication.”


                        “A communication? Through some machine?”


                        “No.”


                        The D’o refused to say he had received a smuggled communicator.


                        “They were seen by some Cotoru that were afloat in the bay.”


                        “Oh, really? In that case, those Cotoru must certainly know why the colonists are in trouble, and how they came to be there.”


                        “I haven’t any idea,” said the D’o calmly. “When we saw them, it was already after whatever caused it.”


                        It seemed he couldn’t trap this one too easily. Sei changed his tactics.


                        “OK. Let’s say it happened that way. However, you are here, away from your lands, with many Gun’gazea, many boats, and goods hidden in the trees over there. I wonder if you made all these preparations after finding out that the colonists were in difficulty.”


                        “Am I under an obligation to respond?”


                        “I wonder. Didn’t you assemble here for the purpose of smuggling?”


                        When he said that, the D’o hunched a little, and stared at Sei fixedly.


                        “Administrator,” said the D’o, “I am talking with you as D’o to D’o. Therefore, I would like answers to my questions also.”


                        “Do you have any questions?”


                        “I have. The fact that your underlings are trying to prevent our actions... Is this because of your order...?”


                        “Of course.”


                        “And why are we not permitted to rescue the colonists?”


                        “An interesting manner of speaking. Aren’t you in fact, more interested in the goods they carry than in saving their lives?”


                        “...”


                        The D’o fell silent for a moment, then spoke deliberately.


                        “I will permit those words because I am a magnanimous D’o. It is also a fact that the colonists may be dying even now.”


                        “It will suffice to leave their lives to the robots. Even now, life rafts have already been dropped.”


                        “...still...” The D’o shook his head. “We can hardly stop our attempt for that reason. We have come here as a result of a decision made by the D’o council of Cotoru... What is this?”


                        The D’o’s shout was due to the fact that the robots following the conversation – LQQ5a and LQQ44a, and even the aircraft itself – had moved to surround the Gun’gazea, and taken positions that showed they were ready for combat.


                        “Oh, excuse me. I’m so sorry,” said Sei quietly. “I hope I haven’t offended you... At any rate, as long as I have responsibility to stop smuggling, I also have a duty to prevent you from setting out to sea. This is the duty of the Administrator... It appears that you have not considered this very deeply... But it is a fact.”


                        “Very well. We will withdraw,” said the D’o after a pause, its eyes flashing. Sei, of course, had no idea of what was bubbling up in the D’o’s heart. “However,” continued the D’o, “I will be unable to carry out my duty as a D’o, and will be viewed as having failed, causing this problem to be magnified many times. I request you to come to Cotoru and explain in detail to the D’o council... If you do not, we will have no choice but to fight to the death here.”


                        “...”


                        Sei turned and looked at SQ2A. It appeared there was no choice but to go to Cotoru... And travel with the Cotoru was always on foot. He had to consider how long it was likely to take to get there.


                        SQ2A analyzed the data from LQQ5A, LQQ44A, and its own sources, and estimated the time at two hours.


                        Two hours.


                        Well, it was unavoidable.


                        Plus which, if he entered Cotoru, he would have a chance of finding out if the Cotoru really possessed smuggled weapons, as the Kuwast said.


                        He should go.


                        Just as he decided, SQ1 communicated. “It is now clear that the ten ships from Hawke Island are bound for Unity Island,” reported SQ1. “SQ2D and its group were attacked at once when they approached to question the ships as to their destinations, so I pulled them back. Estimating that they may well land on Unity Island and attack the Administration Complex, I have taken the following actions: One, as the so-called volunteer army could well be destroyed by combat, I have made preparations to take them safely inside the Complex. Two, I have raised the emergency exterior wall around the Complex. Three, I have entered full combat status. Do you have any additions or directives?”


                        “That’s sufficient. What about the forty ships?”


                        “They are still drifting. They are still prepared to resist, but there will be no further loss of life due to the life-rafts. I plan to wait another twelve hours, and them collect them as planned, when they have become tractable.”


                        “Good. You should have received the communication from SQ2A by now, so you know I will be unable to return for two to three hours. Take full control during that time.”


                        “Understood,” answered SQ1, and then revealed its true colors. “If you will be traveling with the native inhabitants, your current protection is insufficient. For your protection, I am dispatching a platoon of fifty-one combat robots. They will take up positions above you and monitor the area.”


                        When the communication ended, Sei faced the Gun’gazea, who were looking increasingly alarmed.


                        “Well, then,” he pressed, “Let’s be on our way to Cotoru.”


                        It was hot.


                        They formed a military column.


                        In the front of the column were Gun’gazea carrying their trade goods, followed by the D’o and its group of bodyguard Gun’gazea. About two meters behind them came the Administrator’s group, led by Sei and SQ2A. The form of the column had evolved so they could advance while watching each other. It was a design that allowed the D’o and Sei to talk to each other, while also ensuring that one could be immediately taken hostage if his side did anything wrong. The D’o had requested this arrangement. At first, the D’o had requested that Sei walk among them alone, but Sei had refused, and they had settled on this.


                        It was clear, though, that the Administrator had the advantage. The robots had tremendous power, not readily visible, and overhead there was the platoon of combat robots protecting him.


                        Whether the D’o knew all this or not, it sometimes slowed, talked to Sei, sent off runners to inform Cotoru – or so it said – and sometimes urged on the baggage carriers.


                        The Gun’gazea carrying the goods were chanting a monotonous melody together, repeating it. The goods were being carried in various ways; some in carts, some on the backs of the Gun’gazea, but all were covered and Sei couldn’t determine the contents.


                        The road through the jungle was no mere path. It was a wide, hard-packed road, and it was obvious it was well-used and well-cared for. Probably it was used for smuggling... He had no complaint with the Gun’gazea building roads. The problem was that SQ2A had taken this easy-to-walk road into its calculations, which meant they still had a long way to go.


                        During that time, SQ1 sent another communication.


                        The ten ships had landed on Unity Island, and engaged in combat with the “volunteer army”. The volunteers, with fewer weapons and no training, had been crushed at once, and were fleeing north. The colonists that had landed – at this point, SQ1 asked for confirmation to call them rebels – assembled some rough cars for the apparent purpose of pursuing them, so SQ1 had dispatched a dozen or so robot buses to carry the fleeing volunteers to safety inside the walls of the Administration Complex.


                        Sei wondered just how SQ1 planned to look after some two thousand people inside the Complex... But SQ1 must have already thought of that. Sei had no choice at the moment but to leave everything to SQ1, and dedicate his energies to the negotiations with the Cotoru. He felt a little uneasy at it, though. He was uneasy about the black-and-white contrast that SQ1 had drawn between the “rebels” and the “volunteers”, but he could verify the facts himself when he returned and issue new orders if needed.


                        For now, it was hot. The sun piercing through the trees was hot, and the humidity was even higher than yesterday.


                        “Aren’t you tired?” asked the D’o, slowing its pace. SQ2A translated it almost immediately.


                        “No. Not at all.”


                        “Oh, I see,” nodded the D’o, and continued. “I have something I would like to ask you.”


                        “What is it?”


                        “Will the Administrator be on this world forever?”


                        “Hmm...” Sei kept his voice expressionless. “How long... Well, not forever. If the Federation so orders, I could be gone tomorrow.”


                        The D’o looked at Sei with something like disbelief in its eyes.


                        “No, not that meaning. Not you personally. My question was: when will there cease to be an Administrator on this world?”


                        “I’m afraid I can’t say.”


                        Sei felt a bit of surprise at the other’s rudeness. “And it is not a question that can be answered easily.”


                        “At any rate, not for a long time?”


                        “I would expect that to be correct, yes.”


                        “Why?”


                        The D’o refused to quit.


                        “Why must you be on this world for such a long time?”


                        “What do you want to say?”


                        “Shall I speak, then? The Administrator, from the outside, has helped Gun’gazea in many ways. New skills, new ways of thinking... We should thank you, certainly. But it is also a fact that the Administrator is helping the colonists.”


                        “...”


                        Not again? thought Sei, listening.


                        “Thanks to the efforts of the Administrator, both the Gun’gazea and the colonists have grown greatly. At any rate, I have so heard,” continued the D’o. “Isn’t that enough? Hasn’t this world become capable of progressing quite well without the Administrator... No, better? It is said that the Administrator himself thinks that he should yield to a successor that lives on this world, and watch and protect from his own world.” He looked at Sei.


                        “Or maybe the Administrator doesn’t have the ability to make his own decisions; I don’t know. Maybe he is merely an extension of the Federation’s will. A mere stand-in for distant rule.”


                        “I have no intention to explain myself here,” said Sei coldly. It seemed this D’o, or rather, that Cotoru itself had come to sympathize with the colonists, and held the same opinions. “I will speak of it in Cotoru. To all of the D’o.”


                        “Ho-hoo...”


                        The D’o wanted to say something, but a runner returned just then, so it moved to the front of the column.


                        Sei suddenly noticed that the jungle above his head was dark and solidly overgrown. The distance between the groups had increased, too. Sei felt a sense of apprehension, especially since they had been together up until then. The road was changing to a narrower path, the growths were swelling out into the path, and Gun’gazea in front had become hidden.


                        “Will it still take a long time?” Sei asked SQ2A in a low voice. SQ2A replied at low volume.


                        “The Gun’gazea of Cotoru are leading us along a roundabout route, rather than the direct route.”


                        “What?”


                        “The Cotoru may have something in mind... I cannot make a definite analysis,” said SQ2A in its usual tone. “I have been trying to contact SQ1 to investigate, but SQ1’s circuit has not opened for the last ten minutes, so I cannot determine SQ1’s opinion.”


                        “...”


                        “However, the combat robots are in position overhead, so the Administrator’s safety is assured.”


                        Sei wasn’t listening, though. He was still thinking about what SQ2A had just said.


                        SQ1’s circuits were closed?


                        Wasn’t that impossible, especially considering SQ1’s current attitude?


                        What was going on?


                        It was as if Sei’s stopping was a signal. As he stopped, shouts came from the jungle on both sides. The gunshots were loud, and SQ2A issued its three kilohertz alarm signal while using its heat screen to neutralize the bullets.


                        Sei automatically crouched.


                        Again, there was the sound of bullets cutting through the air.


                        Screams, shouts.


                        “Kill him! Kill the Administrator!” translated SQ2A, and added a note of apology, “The Cotoru D’o’s words...”


                        Simultaneously, the Gun’gazea from the front came charging back as others burst from the jungle on both sides.


                        Sei, still crouching, was speechless.


                        Was this... Was the possible?


                        Was it really possible that the native inhabitants could be attacking the Administrator, trying to kill him?


                        While Sei was frozen, though, the robots silently, quickly surrounded him and began defensive combat. A number of Gun’gazea carrying guns or flashing swords fell, torn to pieces.


                        Not only that.


                        From above, the platoon of robots came dropping down, led by their larger command robot, spitting fire left and right. One platoon of robots... Combat robots.


                        The combat robots had, in less than ten seconds, burned, cut, smashed, killed all the Gun’gazea in sight.


                        “Stop! Don’t kill him! Don’t kill the D’o!” shouted Sei, but he was too late. As the air cleared, all that was left was the laser-cut trees... And the mountain of corpses.


                        Sei stood up unsteadily.


                        “The command unit is apologizing for failing to fulfill your orders,” reported SQ2A.


                        “No... No, it’s all right.”


                        He was still in shock. He still couldn’t fully believe that the Gun’gazea would really try to kill him when ordered by their D’o. It had certainly been planned... That D’o had told the other Cotoru about it – the runner! – and the D’o council had decided to eliminate the problem of the Administrator, luring him to a side road and attacking him.


                        In other words... The Administrator meant that little to the Cotoru. The D’o council couldn’t have considered whether the robots could dig out the truth of it or not... What would happen to them, finally... What the final result would be. Probably, he guessed, the colonists hadn’t given that information to the Gun’gazea they had contact with.


                        The Cotoru had been used by the colonists! They had been used, but, as Administrator, he couldn’t let it end there. He didn’t want to do it, but he couldn’t let groups alone that tried to harm the Administrator. He had to punish them.


                        Punishment.


                        “What about SQ1? Still no contact?” asked Sei, throwing his words like rocks.


                        “Not yet. Still no connection,” answered SQ2A. “The circuits are still... new information... a communication has just come from SQ2D.”


                        “From SQ2D?”


                        Given the way their communication system was set up, this was unheard of.


                        “According to SQ2D’s communication, SQ1 has been destroyed,” reported SQ2A in an unconcerned voice. “According to the data SQ2D has collected, it appears that the central sectors of the Administration Complex have been destroyed by explosions.”


                        “...”


                        “A similar communication has just entered from SQ2E... and now from SQ2C. SQ2C reports that investigation by SQ2C3B indicates that the destruction was caused by the ‘volunteer army’. Shortly before the explosions, all members of their group left, saying they intended to fight against the rebels. They forced SQ1 to lower the exterior wall and left. After the explosions, they met with and joined the rebels, and returned to the coast together. SQ2C believes this to mean that the so-called ‘volunteer army’ was in league with the rebels from the start.”


                        “...”


                        Sei was still silent.


                        The shock of being attacked by the Gun’gazea had vanished. He couldn’t feel its reality any more.


                        He wanted to say it was a lie. The robots, though, didn’t lie.


                        He wanted to say the data was wrong. That many similar reports, though, left little chance of it.


                        Even so, even so...


                        SQ1 was... destroyed?


                        Wasn’t that itself strictly impossible? That SQ1, the most important, most protected thing next to himself, should be destroyed?


                        What did it mean... Sei tried to think, confused.


                        If SQ1, the main support of government on this world, had been destroyed... Then, wasn’t that government also destroyed? Wasn’t all government now reduced to mere mechanical actions, stripped of adjustment and decision? Hadn’t Gun’gazen become a world where its Administrator was totally useless? Powerless?


                        Yes.


                        Sei suddenly understood it all. He felt that all of these separate incidents welded together, revealing a single fact.


                        This was what the colonists had been aiming at. Mischer had manipulated the colonists, had played a strategy to reach exactly this end.


                        The colonists anti-robot movement... The smuggling with the Gun’ga-zea and their education... The strange handbills and broadcasts, all aimed at SQ1... In these ways, Mischer had steered things at his own pace, slowly making SQ1 hold a fixed opinion, then shifting to action. He had sent the apparent smuggling fleet to Babel, drawn out the Administrator with that suicidal resistance, making him waste his time talking to Gun’gazea drawn by the lure of profit – the subsequent actions of the Cotoru D’o were no doubt caused by their own patriotism: Sei couldn’t believe Mischer’s strategy had gone that far – and then attack the Administration Complex while he was busy here. At that point, the “volunteer army” skillfully used SQ1’s biased view of pro- and anti-Administrator factions to enter the Complex, and then had their experts burrow down into SQ1’s innards and destroy the central core... These were the facts.


                        Sei fully realized that this strategy would have been totally impossible unless Mischer were accepted as one of the colonial leaders. If an Administrator had ordered the same thing, the colonists would have resisted to the death. For us, for us colonists, for all the colonists of Gun’gazen, so the slogans of the Independence Movement ran... Plus greed for the profit that would flow from an open Babel continent, the expectation of opening virginal Fishing Islands and Jellyfish Islands... Without a leader, the plan would have fed on itself, failed, but Mischer had been that leader. Mischer had accomplished exactly what he had said he would. Even so...


                        Even so, what would be the result of this temporary control of Gun’ga-zen? The colonists were no doubt drunk on victory, but why had Mischer, who knew the power of the Federation, and the Forces, and the Administration System, done such a thing?


                        Maybe it was Mischer’s vanity, thought Sei. Maybe he had wanted to prove that there were leaders better than the Administrators. Well, he had proved it. Rather, it had been a fight between an Administrator inside his organization and an Administrator sunk deep into the side of the ruled. And Mischer had won. Which meant that the whole thing was just an armwrestle between two Administrators. Sei had not lost to an amateur. He had lost to an Administrator.


                        “New information has just come in, reported SQ2A. “A fleet of hundreds of ships has just set out from the Archipelago.”


                        SQ2a made no other statements and drew no conclusions. That was SQ1’s job. But there was no more SQ1.


                        Which meant...


                        Which meant that Sei had to do it himself. Sei understood what was happening. That was the military fleet that the United States of Gun’gazen had launched to dominate this world. Destroy the Administration Complex, occupy the islands, invade Babel, crush and enslave all Gun’gazea except those they had already befriended, take the resources, and then... Sei thought he understood what Mischer was aiming at after that. After that, they would make application for world-state independent colonial world status. They would use bribes and whatever else was needed to grasp, to gamble on that chance in a thousand. Even if it failed, Mischer would die boasting of his triumph. Maybe they would all be crushed by the Forces before they conquered this world, in which case Mischer would probably be killed by the colonists themselves.


                        Still...


                        Still... He hadn’t lost completely yet, Sei said to himself. He could still...


                        No.


                        He had to discard that individualistic thinking. He was the Administrator. He couldn’t allow this mud to continue to stain the authority of the System. He had to show all the colonists, all of Gun’gazea, exactly what an Administrator was.


                        SQ1.


                        Could he enter this conflict without SQ1? He could. He would.


                        He would personally shatter the army of the United States of Gun’gazen to splinters and dust. Maybe it was vengeance. Maybe that was not permitted to Administrators. But unless he did it there was no way to rescue the name of the Administrators, fallen into the mud. “SQ2A,” he said quietly, in a low voice. His eyes hardened with resolve. “Order all robots you can communicate with to rendezvous here at once.”


                        “But that is SQ1’s authority.”


                        “There is no SQ1.”


                        Sei looked into the distance. “Tell them the Administrator is giving the order directly.”










                                         – 5 –


                        The fierce rain sprayed off the grass and pounded the mud. His field of vision was dark. In the darkness, Sei could hear the heavy footsteps booming ahead and behind, to the left and the right. They were the sounds of his Gun’gazea warriors, a group of warriors with a solid core of Kuwast. Their bodies encased in their traditional armor, the army plodded in silence through the pouring rain. The drenched but unstoppable army...


                        Sei was wet through and through. He could feel droplets of rain rolling down his almost unfeeling skin.


                        SQ2A, walking at Sei’s side, was in the same condition. So were SQ2C, SQ2D, and SQ2E.


                        Since then... Since he had found out that SQ1 had been destroyed, a week had passed. In that week, they had built this united army, fought, and smashed their way through the enemy, moving forward, ever forward.


                        The number of robots that had responded to Sei’s order to assemble, and that were now under Sei’s direct command, was much smaller than he had expected.


                        Out of all the robots under SQ1’s command, most of them were still mechanically carrying out their functions. Robots with different control frequencies were theoretically controllable, but they couldn’t be contacted. On top of that, the triumphant colonists tore any single robot they found to pieces, and broadcast jamming signals, making communications between the robots much more difficult. As a result, the robots under Sei’s command consisted of only SQ2A and its group, SQ2C, SQ2D, and SQ2E, and their groups. Also, as the only robots that could talk to him directly were those four high-level SQ2-class robots, he had to issue all commands through them. In addition, there was the platoon of combat robots sent by SQ1 to protect the Administrator, but they were under the control of SQ2A, and it was sufficient to deal with them through SQ2A... And that was the extent of Sei’s combat strength. After he knew that, he had, without hesitation, added the Gun’gazea nation that had asked for his aid – the Kuwast. No doubt the colonists headed by Mischer had already prepared a strategy to deal with the headless army of robots, understanding its weak point. He couldn’t fight with only the robots. By using the strength of the robots, and adding a thick layer of Gun’gazea warriors to the front of his lines, the colonists’ plans should go awry. For that reason, he had joined with Kuwast.


                        The D’o of Kuwast had gladly cooperated with Sei in first smashing the Toka and the Cotoru – Sei had a reason for that too: not only were they allies of the rebels, but also they had to be punished – and then helped Sei to fight the colonists. From the viewpoint of Kuwast, if their safety could be protected with relative simplicity by the robots, then they should cooperate fully.


                        The united army of the robots and the Gun’gazea had set forth – north through the jungle. The awesome power of the combat robots had incredible effectiveness. After Sei’s army had shattered semi-civilized Cotoru and devastated its land, they had smashed the attacking Toka grand army to the point where it could never be rebuilt. As that news filtered around, the nearby Gun’gazea responded to the ambassadors of the Kuwast and came swarming to Sei’s standard, adding their strength to his.


                        Sei’s immediate objective was the restoration of the Administration Complex – or of its ruins. After they smashed through the Toka, they turned to the northeast, and advanced soldiers towards the coast facing Unity Island.


                        At that time, SQ2A’s attack units had reported in with information. The colonists had already landed a major force on Babel, which had left the area Sei was heading towards and proceeded to build a base camp in the hills just south of there. Considering the timing, he couldn’t consider this was the main force that had set out from the Archipelago. More than likely they were from the fifty ships and the “volunteer army”, coming over first on their own high spirits of victory. Sei burned. Before he grappled with the colonists’ main force, it would have invaluable impact to smash their vanguard. No, more than that, they were the ones that had destroyed SQ1. He had to smash them totally, completely. Sei’s army kept advancing. They advanced at full speed towards the others.


                        They were just entering the hilly terrain now.


                        The rain was lifting, slowly.


                        As he walked, Sei felt the weariness of his body. His body was supposed to be well-trained, but this constant walking was taking its toll after all. There was no choice but to walk. If he was to go with the Gun’gazea, he had to. That custom was deadly serious for their rites and their wars.


                        There was another reason Sei was tired. There was nothing at his side to take care of him, to make his meals. That had been the duty of SQ2B. SQ2B, though, had been built into the Administration Complex, and had been destroyed with SQ1. Sei had to make do with the provisions stocked in his aircraft. He could, if needed, eat the nuts and fruits here, but they tasted of heavy metals. He needed the processed food of the Administration Complex, and the plants raised hydroponically nearby... That was one reason he had to retake the Complex as soon as possible.


                        Strangely, though, Sei hadn’t felt his helpless frustration or emptiness for a week. The situation was no longer uneasy, but had passed a climax point. Because it was behind him, now, or maybe because Sei had stopped all doubting and questioning, fixing his mind to combat... Probably for both reasons.


                        The rain had almost stopped now, and his range of vision increased. The landscape of grass and shrubbery began to become clearer and clearer.


                        “There are four kilometers remaining to the enemy camp,” reported SQ2A.


                        “Good. Tell the robots to hold here,” Sei ordered, and then called the two Kuwast D’o nearby. “Let’s all rest here. During that time, I want to hold a council of war.”


                        The D’o nodded, and called another D’o waiting nearby to relay the message to the Gun’gazea.


                        The SQ2-class robots relayed the command to their underlings by radio, and reported the order carried out to Sei.


                        The Gun’gazea were throwing up the crude war council tent now.


                        Just as Sei made to enter that tent, SQ2A broke in with a strange report.


                        “A flying object is approaching.”


                        “A flyer?” asked Sei, turning to look at SQ2A. “Whose group?”


                        “It is still unclear. It is not one of my group.”


                        “Well, then, whose is it?” SQ2C, SQ2D, and SQ2E didn’t know either.


                        “It must be one of the remaining robots. Can’t you make contact?”


                        “Impossible. I can’t contact it on the SQ2 frequencies.”


                        “What kind of flying object?”


                        “Judging from the reports received, larger than your aircraft.”


                        “...”


                        Sei crooked his neck, but couldn’t imagine what it might be.


                        At any rate, now he had to concentrate on the coming battle.


                        “Keep watching it,” he said, and entered the tent.


                        By the time the council of war had ended, the rain had let up completely. The troops were aligned as the battle plan called for. The spearpoint was a group of Kuwast warriors, followed by the other Gun’gazea, including the robots. Behind them came the main force of the Kuwast, and Sei as the central main force. There was no rearguard. In that pattern, the entire army advanced. From the top of one of the hills, he could see ahead. The meandering hills, and the enemy gathered ahead. Beyond them the glittering sea and the clear outline of Unity Island...


                        The enemy was advancing towards them. It was a wide crescent, moving forward with magnificent control, no random movements at all.


                        The gap between the two armies grew smaller by the moment.


                        When the distance between them shrank to about five hundred meters, the enemy stopped, and Sei stopped his own forces to dress their lines.


                        Showdown.


                        He took a breath. Another. And then...


                        Flashing brilliantly in the sun, the flyer cut across the battlefield, flying towards Sei’s central force at top speed.


                        “There. That is the flying object,” reported SQ2A.


                        By then, the platoon of combat robots whose main duty was to protect the Administrator had risen up and blasted towards it.


                        The flyer shook off their attacks easily, and came settling down towards where Sei was standing.


                        “Make them stop! Make them stop this attack!” came an undoubtedly human voice from the ship’s speakers.


                        Sei was taken aback by amazement for a moment.


                        A woman.


                        A woman’s voice.


                        “Why don’t you order them to stop?”


                        The voice grew sharper. “I am the Inspector. Order them to stop attacking the Inspector of the Federation!”


                        Inspector?


                        Ahh... SQ1 had said the Inspector was approaching Gun’gazen.


                        “Stop them,” ordered Sei, and the combat robots stopped at once.


                        The flyer landed... And a woman leading a number of robots stepped out. A woman... But the real thing. A real Inspector’s uniform.


                        Sei was still standing frozen. He had heard the Inspector was coming, and that there were women in the ranks now, but he just couldn’t seem to grasp it all here, now.


                        “I arrived on this planet one day ago,” said the Inspector. “No matter how much I radioed, there was no reception and no answer, so I investigated and found SQ1 destroyed. If there was no SQ1, then I had to search for the Administrator alone. My robots can only communicate with the SQ1 of each world, so it took this much of my time.”


                        “Oh, I see...” muttered Sei.


                        One of the Kuwast D’o came to his side.


                        “Please order the attack now.”


                        “Stop it.”


                        The Inspector had spoken.


                        “Stop this playing at war. It’s over.”


                        “I don’t think that’s possible,” countered Sei. “To restore the authority of the Administrator, I must smash these colonists. And now they are attacking me.”


                        The Inspector sneered a little.


                        “Isn’t it enough to run away?”


                        “To... run away?”


                        “This kind of game is not for Administrators. For war, we have the Forces.”


                        “Just wait one minute, “ said Sei raising his palm. “I don’t want solve this by borrowing the power of the Forces. This is ... this is a problem that the Administrator must deal with himself.”


                        “It’s already too late.”


                        “What?”


                        “When I saw the turmoil this planet is in, I immediately issued a request for Forces assistance. They should arrive here in another five hours. They are the finest troops of Kalgeist III. These rebellious colonists will be suppressed within hours.”


                        “You would do that?” cried Sei. Above all, he had to avoid letting this world fall into the hands of the Forces. If that happened, then what was the purpose of the Administrator System?


                        “Aren’t you overstating your position, Sei PPKC Konda?” continued the Inspector mercilessly. “You are an Administrator. The authority of the Administrator has collapsed on this world because of you, but the Federation has countless ways to restore that authority. After the Forces have crushed these insolent colonists, we will send a new SQ1 and a new Administrator... The Federation can do that much without blinking an eye.”


                        “...”


                        “Withdraw your troops. Let these colonists do what they like. They will all be killed by the Forces in another five hours, anyway.”


                        Sei didn’t reply.


                        He couldn’t.


                        That he had failed as Administrator... that he knew. It was only natural that would be the decision.


                        But... what was an Administrator?


                        Was an Administrator really only that, only what the Inspector had said?


                        No. No, or at least, it hadn’t always been that way. The Administrator had been necessary for the world he was in charge of. He had been needed on that world, even with those inherent contradictions... Of the two-faced god. That was how the Administrators had preserved their independence from the Federation.


                        It wasn’t that way any more. Here on Gun’gazen, two Administrators – with Mischer, the ex-Administrator, leading the rebels – were opposed, heading for a conclusion. And now, it was all to be ended so easily by the Forces – the very same Forces that had once proved the value of the Administrator System, precisely because they were not permitted to enter the colony worlds. At the same time, the age where the Inspector had been partly the rival, and partly the partner of the Administrator was drawing to an end.


                        Yes...


                        The Administrator System was dead. The Administrator, under fire from both sides, from both the colonists and the native inhabitants, now had to withdraw from the scene. His role had ended...


                        Ended?


                        Had it really?


                        Was there even a single world that had achieved the basic concept of the Administrator System – to protect the colonists and raise a unified, appropriate culture for that world? To forge bonds of peace between the colonists and the native inhabitants?


                        That was... Sei suddenly understood. Hadn’t that been nothing more than a dream from the start? When the mask had been stripped away from that dream, had fallen away – in other words, now – wouldn’t the Administrator vanish and the System lose all of its meaning?


                        A sudden shout entered Sei’s ears as he stood there.


                        The enemy – the rebels had begun their charge.


                        “Quickly, the order...!” shouted the Kuwast D’o.


                        “Stop it!”


                        The Inspector pointed at Sei. “Right now! Order them to avoid this battle and flee! Order it!”


                        “...”


                        Sei smiled. It was the first smile he had ever smiled as an Administrator – one who must never reveal his emotions. It was somehow a sad smile. Sei shook his head slowly.


                        “I must do it,” he said. “Even if you try to strip me of my identity as Administrator... I must put an end to what I started as Administrator... It may be only foolishness to you, but that is what an Administrator is.”


                        He faced forward, raised his right arm high, and shouted.


                        “Attack!”


                        Screaming himself, Sei ran into the center of the maelstrom of screaming warriors. In an instant, the armies crashed together, and the slaughtering ground emerged.


                        Sei ran forward, forward. At his side was SQ2A. And the D’o of Kuwast. Sensing it with his body and his very soul, he ran.