The Wind in the Ruins










                                          – 1 –


                        Noon must have passed some time ago.


                        Kazeta PPK Moro set down his work, and walked over to the window.


                        Today was beautifully clear weather. Again.


                        And in spite of that brilliant blue sky – or, rather, due to its excessive brightness – he felt the disturbance spreading through him.


                        Maybe it would be better to take a break.


                        He approached the door.


                        As he did, SQ2B spoke through the speaker built into the wall: “Are you going out?”


                        “Mm. Think I’ll take a stroll.”


                        “Yes, sir. However, don’t you think it would be better to eat your meal first, Administrator?”


                        “I’ll eat later.”


                        “Understood,” answered SQ2B, and the door opened with a soft click.


                        He stepped outside.


                        It went without saying, of course, that the responsibility for his protection shifted at that instant from SQ2B, who was responsible for the interior of the Administration Complex, to the mobile chief, SQ2A, and at that instant SQ2A and his group took up a defensive posture around the Administrator. The central robot, SQ1, silently checked and approved their actions.


                        In his younger days, Kazeta used to be constantly aware of the close interaction between the robots... But that awareness had become a distant thing now. To Kazeta, their relationship was now the same as pushing a button and making a machine move. That was enough, and if knowledge of the mechanism itself was ever required, he had it.


                        The garden was at the bottom of a wide staircase of white stone.


                        In the garden, the blossom-grass one saw everywhere was covered in pale crimson flowers, ruffling in the wind. There were small mounds of dewsipper here and there, masses of tiny white flowers. Scattered between them, the neckbrushes hung their semi-transparent blooms, still and helpless.


                        Kazeta faced into the gentle breeze, and took a deep breath.


                        There was a sweet, slightly sharp fragrance in the air. On this world, flowers bloomed almost all year round, except in the polar regions, and the multitude of species couldn’t be counted. The wind always wafted the aromas of countless flowers, and that delicate harmony changed with each slight variation in wind direction, or temperature, or humidity. Without that constant play and variety, humans would undoubtedly become used to one fragrance in a short time, and couldn’t enjoy the full play of smells like this.


                        No, it wasn’t enough to merely say “enjoy”. To the people who lived here, the constant, sometimes strong, sometimes subtle, sometimes simple banquet of totally indescribable fragrances mixed together – that ever-changing dream – had become an essential part of their pleasure in life. People recalled their memories through the smells, wrote their imagery. The sense and expression of the fragrances of the air was now firmly bound to all their lives, not only for the dozens of perfume specialists with their sharp sense of smell and analytic ability, or the small number of “artists”.


                        And Kazeta, who had been here seven years, was no exception.


                        In the wind now was the image of a child’s toy, he thought. It quickly melted with the smell of the dewsipper, which recalled metal, and became the memory of his ride on the starship when he had been a cadet specializing in politics, and then finally returned to the overpowering scent of blossom-grass.


                        Whenever he came across blossom-grass, he always recalled the previous Administrator, Bart. That was probably because Bart had loved it so much. He thought that maybe it wouldn’t be correct to say that Bart had loved only the blossom-grass. Bart had loved this planet – had loved all of Tayuneine – and had especially loved the blossom-grass because, to him, it symbolized Tayuneine.


                        “This world is the last stop for Administrators, you could say,” white-haired Bart had commented quietly when he handed authority over to Kazeta.


                        “Here, everything is oh-so-peaceful, even including the hulks of the native race’s ruins. When I first came here, I had been an Administrator on many other worlds, and drove myself to continue to perform here, but... But I lost it before I knew it. Anyway, the only problem here is an occasional spectral visitation, and it’s probably the easiest job of any Administrator anywhere. And you change, too, become the same. You come to feel that a relocation to a new world is merely an annoyance. That’s why I left the straight and narrow path, and declined to accept my next assignment to another world.”


                        Well, maybe that was so. Not only Bart, but all of the previous Administrators of Tayuneine, with one or two exceptions, had stepped down from their posts as Administrators. The Federation seemed to understand, too, and only sent older Administrators who already had an impressive list of achievements. They were telling you to take a rest, and even to resign should you desire. Of course, whether you did so or not was strictly a matter of personal choice, but you couldn’t deny that this place had the feeling of being a “last stop”.


                        Still, the Administrators who resigned after Tayuneine didn’t choose to live here. It was most common for them to withdraw to Terra or one of the advanced worlds nearby to enjoy their special citizenship status, awarded for their years of service, or to take up a lower-status, lower-importance job within the Federation bureaucracy. Maybe they couldn’t bear being citizens on a world where they used to be the Administrator, being controlled by their own robots... Or maybe it was merely too boring to end their lives in this utopia, for those who knew other worlds of complex vitality... Or yet again, perhaps they wanted to maintain their memories as memories, rather than reliving them as illusions on too-beautiful Tayuneine. In any case, they hadn’t elected to stay here as citizens. Bart had thought about staying here, too, but in the end he left with his wife. Bart was one of the few Administrators to be married to a member of the opposite sex in an open-ended contract. If his wife hadn’t been from one of the older colony worlds near Terra, then he might well have been the first Administrator to stay on Tayuneine, Kazeta felt. Bart had loved this world that much. Or at least, he had certainly looked as if he had.


                        The current Administration Complex and the garden had all been built by the robots about fifteen years ago, when Bart had been Administrator. Naturally, that was because the previous structure had become so dilapidated that it couldn’t be compared to the colonists’ buildings, and although the design had received the formal approval of the Federation, it still strongly reflected Bart’s personality. In the size and layout of the garden the reflection of his personal likes was especially strong, and the flowers and shrubs somehow imparted a pleasing impression.


                        Kazeta began to stroll.


                        The flowered path gradually rose, and Kazeta crossed the peak of the hill the Administration Complex was built on, continuing towards the forest.


                        From the top of the hill, he could see Yusa, the largest city on this world – the largest, but it still only had a population of seventy thousand. The buildings of Yusa, scattered among the trees and grass, shone peacefully in the afternoon sun.


                        But... That scene called forth the shadow in Kazeta’s heart that he had forgotten for a time. If he stayed too long, that shadow would become too heavy. He turned towards the shining white Administration Complex, decided to walk a little more, and set off towards the forest again.


                        Everyone called it a forest, but it wasn’t really very big. You could walk through it in fifty minutes, but inside the wind was hushed, and the fragrances changed completely.


                        He saw something bright and shining move between the trees. From that glance, he was sure it was SQ2A-3. Wherever the Administrator went, SQ2A and its underlings always followed for protection. Bart had instructed the robots to be as inconspicuous as possible, so far as it didn’t interfere with their jobs, when the Administrator was thinking like this – and they still loyally followed his command under Kazeta. The robots would never feel self-loathing or stress, no matter how many Administrators they worked for, thought Kazeta, somewhat cynically.


                        There was a wooden bench under the trees.


                        He sat down.


                        Even though he sat, the heaviness didn’t leave his heart. Maybe it was uneasiness rather than heaviness. Something had been bothering him for a couple of days now. He knew what it was, exactly.


                        The Schedule.


                        An Administrator cadet would come here in one week. After a month of hands-on training, he would leave again, but Kazeta had to evaluate him from his position as Administrator. Although he was called a cadet, he was actually an unassigned Administrator. He had been selected, undergone intensive training and study, and gained qualification as a political specialist – then gone on to choose his specialty, and had again been selected. Finally, he and his classmates would become Administrators if that was their choice, but they were not immediately assigned to work. Before they could be entrusted with their own worlds, they had to tour many worlds to be trained and evaluated by Administrators in the field. If they failed, then they would rise to a different job within the Federation, that of a mere political specialist. In that sense, although they were Administrators on paper, they were still only candidates, cadets.


                        Kazeta had already trained many cadets on other worlds. There shouldn’t be any problems training another here. There shouldn’t be any, but it bothered him, strangely.


                        Why?


                        The answer, though he didn’t want to recognize it, was simple: he wondered if he was still capable of honestly assessing the performance of a cadet.


                        It had been seven years since he had come to Tayuneine.


                        Over those seven years he had fulfilled his duty as Administrator. The native inhabitants had become extinct – they estimated it had been several thousand years ago – and there was no other advanced life on this world to trouble the colonists. The colonists themselves were extremely quiet. There were the spectral visitations, of course. Shadows without substance appeared sometimes, and startled people. The colonists firmly believed they were the spirits of the vanished native inhabitants, as did Kazeta himself, but nobody claimed to have proven it yet. But the ghosts had never done any harm except to frighten people, and they weren’t his responsibility. The Federation no doubt desired a little stimulation on this all-too-quiet world, and the researchers, whether from this world or others, were neither damaged by the spirits nor able to damage them. Apart from the spectral visitations, there was a phenomenon that had come to be a problem on other worlds – the newer generations of colonists, who didn’t know other worlds, had begun to show resentment against the Administrator System – but it had yet to be much of a problem here.


                        In other words, he could be an Administrator here without too much effort. Not only without effort: he could actually enjoy himself as the months and years passed. Over the years he had lost his fighting spirit and get-up-and-go, just as Bart had done, and the other Administrators before him. He no longer possessed the spirit or habits to let him work on another world. Even if he should desire a new assignment, he realized it would take a tremendous effort on his part.


                        Was it really acceptable for him to grade the cadet? And not just evaluation, but could he truly train him? If the training were real training, wouldn’t he merely pass on his own indolence, which wouldn’t befit an Administrator? And if he didn’t turn out that way – then he could only think it was because he looked upon the Administrator with scorn, couldn’t he?


                        If at all possible, he wanted to refuse this training. He wanted to say that with so many other colony worlds, it was hardly necessary to bring him here to Tayuneine. It wasn’t possible, though, for the Administrator to refuse the assignment. If Tayuneine had been listed on the cadet’s schedule, then the Federation must have some plan in mind.


                        One week later.


                        That schedule had become a lead weight in his heart.


                        Not only that.


                        It wasn’t just that a cadet was coming for training.


                        There was another plan, too.


                        Samielle PKA Freyn was coming.


                        And he was coming as a Federation Inspector.


                        An Inspector.


                        It was a post initiated under the newly established Inspection System. The Federation had judged that the old methods were no longer adequate to check the Administrators’ performance as the number of colony worlds increased, and had added an Inspector who would tour colony worlds and report essential data to the Federation Government. Still, they knew that data collected by people who had only been in the government would be beside the point. Although the highest levels of the Federation realized it might lead to collusion with the local Administrators, they decided, for the time being, to select candidates from among the present Administrators, retrain them, and appoint them as Inspectors.


                        At the same time, it was also proof that the Federation was beginning to lose the absolute faith in Administrators that it had enjoyed fifty years ago, when the first group was assigned... But, as compensation, they had opened up to the Administrators the chance of obtaining positions as high-ranking Federation officials.


                        Kazeta knew Samielle PKA Freyn well as a fellow student from the training academy. He was a man of decision, and had managed to tame a number of worlds that had broken other Administrators, starting with Katamin II and Kirienin, which had native inhabitants of high intelligence and military capability.


                        It was perfectly natural that Samielle PKA Freyn should be appointed Inspector... But not on his world. Inspectors, once they passed down a decision, wouldn’t change their mind except under extreme circumstances – they knew no compromise. And any report to the Federation would be in exactly that style... Not anything to be happy about. Not here, not in this condition...


                        Kazeta opened his eyes. He was still sitting on the bench


                        The sun spilling through the trees pooled here and there, totally silent. And the standing stones...


                        Those now-indistinct monoliths, half-hidden by the drifting leaves, weathered by the long years of wind and rain, smoothed with moss, but still stones with a definite shape – they peered at him.


                        Ruins left by the native inhabitants.


                        A memento mori from a species that had become extinct so long ago – long before humanity arrived.


                        When he saw them, an unexpected sense of peace returned to his breast. He felt he could understand the long, long years that vanished race had waited, and their present eternal rest. The slight irritation he had felt when he first saw their ruins and their artifacts, and realized that humanity, too, would come to this, had vanished at some point. These past two or three years, he had come to feel a strange contentment when he saw them. He didn’t know if it was due to him advancing beyond a certain point in life, or maybe he was merely seeking rest when he was tired, but when he gazed on what they had left, and thought of them, a strange tide of peace washed over him.


                        And.


                        Mmm...


                        When he felt that warmth, that emotion, he always felt the presence behind it. Expecting it, he turned around to face what was there.


                        The shadow.


                        Wavering, pale green... An “almost” existence, impossible to pin down. A specter. What the people called a “spirit” was there with him.


                        Even when he looked at it, it didn’t retreat. It merely continued to hang there... And began to darken a little, as if to increase the weird sense of familiarity that welled up inside him.


                        Spirits.


                        He couldn’t explain even to himself why these ghosts that so frightened, even terrified, other people felt so tranquil to him. He couldn’t explain it, but he thought it might be because he felt an admiration, a yearning, for that race. Different people saw totally different spirits, but none of them had as gentle a shape or color as that which haunted Kazeta.


                        The spirit wavered a little longer, and then became fainter and vanished. At the same instant, the sense of peace in his heart vanished. Still, he didn’t lose the memory of the tranquility he had felt.


                        Kazeta smiled quietly to himself. Somehow, he thought the spirit had come to comfort him.


                        “Thank you, my friend,” he whispered softly, and left the bench.










                                         – 2 –


                        “As per the previously reported schedule, the unassigned Administrator will land at the starport today at four o’clock in the afternoon. I have received confirmation,” said SQ1.


                        “Right,” nodded Kazeta.


                        Of course SQ1 was using Tayuneine time. SQ1 had revised the time reported from the way-station planet, which had been in Sol Standard, to local time. As Sol Standard had absolutely no meaning on other worlds, it was only used in formal communications and directives. Tayuneine, along with many other worlds, used Terran hours as time units. As there were no native inhabitants, the colonists had used whatever time units they had brought with them, and there had been total confusion at the start. The person in charge at that time (a Federation Forces officer, as the Administrator System hadn’t been established yet) had made Terran time the convention on his own authority. However, as Tayuneine had neither the same year nor day as Terra, one day had become twenty-six hours, and one year had thirteen months, including two months with twenty-eight days, in addition to having a minor leap year every other year and a major leap year every four years. A number of Administrators had tried to rationalize the system, but the colonists had proven unexpectedly conservative, and had overwhelmingly favored leaving things as they were – and so the system remained irrational.


                        Four o’clock in the afternoon meant the sun would still be up. He thought it would be good to go and meet him.


                        “All preparations, including the dormitory, have been completed for his use. SQ2D and his section will see to his needs during his training period here,” continued SQ1. “Do you have any other directives?”


                        “Let me see ... “


                        Just as he was about to ask SQ1 to make preparations to go meet the unassigned Administrator – the cadet – SQ1 began talking.


                        “Excuse me, but LQ1 has just made contact. There is a request from Yusa City.”


                        “What is it?”


                        “I will summarize LQ1’s data. Today predawn there was an optical phenomenon across an significantly large sector of Yusa City...” – SQ1 corrected itself, perhaps recalling that Kazeta had said that even though robots couldn’t sense it, it hadn’t been proven to be an illusion – “... in other words, a spectral visitation. According to our sources, the City Council opened a meeting at the request of those who saw the disturbance two hours ago to discuss the phenomenon, and decided to ask the Administrator to attend and explain how he intends to deal with it. This request was submitted to an LQ-class robot five minutes ago.”


                        “... again...” muttered Kazeta.


                        This kind of request came without fail two or three times a year from one city or another. It was the second time that Yusa City had made the request since he had become Administrator. The spirits were constantly appearing, and rarely became a problem because there were only one or two people involved, and a City Council meeting wasn’t held unless it was a massive problem. But... When a large number of people were plagued by unusually terrifying spirits at the same time, the City Council couldn’t ignore it either, although that just meant running to the Administrator with their tails between their legs, unable to think of any good policy themselves. Of course, they knew from experience that the Administrator could do no more than they could on their own, but whipped by the people, they were left with no choice. The root of the matter was that the Administrator controlled the robots, and had absolute power over them all, judging all inter-city problems. Even their Administrator, though, couldn’t make the spirits vanish, and when requested could only listen to the reports, promise to investigate the causes as much as possible, and, when no results were forthcoming, try to convince them that worlds as suitable as this one were very rare, and they would just have to put up with minor problems like spirits. And the people, even if not totally convinced, still adopted the attitude that this was the way things were, and became quiet and returned to their work until the next disturbance.


                        It was, to be blunt, a ritual. A play.


                        That fact should be well-understood by colonists over a certain age, because this problem happened every ten or fifteen years in every city, and it was those too young to remember the earlier disturbance, or those who had forgotten it, who opened the city meeting.


                        Still... Kazeta frowned. Following that cycle, this disturbance at Yusa was too early. The last time had been the year after his assignment, and only six years had passed since then, which meant that it was probably a disturbance on a massive scale, or that there were new conditions that hadn’t been present before.


                        “Will you attend the Yusa City Council meeting?” asked SQ1.


                        “I’ll go. Make preparations,” returned Kazeta. If he said he wouldn’t go, then SQ1 would relay that to LQ1, and LQ1, who was in charge of the observation and protection of the colonists, would take steps to prevent any problems from occurring. He had, though, no reason to refuse, and it was best to take every opportunity of this type to meet with the colonists. Plus which, he had an interest in why Yusa should issue such a request after only six years.


                        “Preparations for the trip to Yusa have been initiated,” said SQ1 after a pause of about two seconds, and spoke again after another slight pause. “Do you have any instructions concerning the unassigned Administrator?”


                        “...Oh, yes...” recalled Kazeta.


                        He had planned to go greet him himself, hadn’t he?


                        If he went to Yusa, though, there wouldn’t be enough time. Well, what the hell.


                        “I am awaiting your instructions,” pressed SQ1.


                        “No, no instructions,” answered Kazeta.


                        Yusa was a beautiful city.


                        The widely spaced homes and buildings had parks and plazas, white roads and ponds reflecting the sky between them, full of natural green and buried in varicolored flowers.


                        Not only Yusa, of course. Whichever city you might name on Tayuneine, each had its own unique beauty. It was only natural, here where there were no dangers such as wild animals, and where high technology and advanced materials were available to a small population in a fertile environment.


                        The people living here in these cities were warm and pleasant, and had astonishingly fewer quarrels than people did in similar cities on other worlds. To be more precise, no one except that sort of tranquil person could stand to live there. In the early period of colonization, there had been a number of people with combative personalities or the lust for power, but there was nothing for them to do on this world. Here – where the fragrances of the flowers talked, where tilling the soil and harvesting fruit filled the days, the people playing together, with all their other needs supplied by the robots – those early settlers hadn’t been able to stand it. If this had merely been a peaceful Eden, they would have organized the people, created wealth and rank and sought to grasp power at the apex, striving for it. But... There had been robots here from the first, with instructions to crush any movements of that sort, and the robots never missed. To fulfill themselves, those aggressive people had turned to the more competitive worlds near Terra, or to the colony worlds on the frontier.


                        At the same time, there were many people who heard of Tayuneine, and came, by some accident, to be enthralled by its beauty, and to migrate there. Of course, a large percentage finally elected to become permanent residents... The current Administration Complex welcomed them happily, waited for them to settle down in some city, and supplied robot labor to construct their buildings. The cities didn’t always welcome new citizens. They had their own rules – such as a trial period to make sure there were no problems with the newcomer, or the need for sponsorship by some number of city residents – or they merely watched to see how the immigrants fit in. When people couldn’t fit in where they wanted to, the Administrator had to recommend another location. And the rich ground of Tayuneine was still wide and open, unaffected by any population increase.


                        The car carrying Kazeta and SQ2a proceeded towards the City Hall of beautiful Yusa, in the eastern region. Even though it was the Administrator’s car, it wasn’t a long-distance car. It was a handsome car; it even had windows... And it was only accompanied by the LQQ7 car carrying SQ2A-2.


                        However, Kazeta’s car stopped before it reached the main door.


                        One of the city people had come out to greet him.


                        As Kazeta had privately expected, it was Raine, the City Hall Manager.


                        She came running over to the car at once. The robots, knowing she was harmless from previous encounters, gave way, though they stayed alert for other possible dangers.


                        “It’s been a long time. How’ve you been?” she asked in a small voice as Kazeta got out.


                        “Pretty busy. I wanted to call you, but... I didn’t really have anything to say... How are you?”


                        She shrugged in response.


                        “As well as could be expected. Not all that well, I guess. Ahh... Had a lot of work here, too.”


                        She looked Kazeta straight in the face.


                        “You came at once today. I thank you on behalf of the people of Yusa City. They’re waiting. If you’ll come with me, Administrator,” she said, and began to walk ahead.


                        Kazeta hesitated for just a moment, then followed after Raine with the robots.


                        The City Council Hall was overfull, and the men and women were shouting something at the Council members on the stage. When they noticed Kazeta’s arrival, they all fell silent, following his progress with their eyes. By the time Kazeta ascended the platform, a deathly silence held sway.


                        Kazeta was tense. He had been to many Council meetings in many cities, but this was the first time he had encountered this atmosphere. When the Administrator made an appearance at a City Council meeting, he was usually greeted with either applause or polite bows.


                        Today was different.


                        What was going on?


                        As he and Raine were settling down in the chairs offered to them, he tried to assess what had happened by reading the people’s faces. There was no indication of enmity on the faces of the men and women turned his way. It didn’t seem to be the “don’t come here” attitude of the younger generation towards the Administrator, either.


                        What was it?


                        He didn’t know.


                        He didn’t know, but as the veteran Administrator he was, he didn’t make any slip that would let them know he was lost. Administrators, regardless of how lost they might be, didn’t reveal it in even a single muscle of their faces. Especially in this situation, where he didn’t know what might begin to happen, he had to show the same blank expression as the robots behind him.


                        The head of the City Council stood up.


                        “As the Administrator has now arrived, I would like you to relate the events of this morning once again.”


                        The men and women in the hall began to stand up one at a time in response to his summons, and retold their experiences. In general, things took this form when there was a disturbance. The people who had seen the spirits wanted to express how terrified they had been to the people around them. As they were so used to expressing the delicacies of the fragrances of the atmosphere to each other, their expressions were vivid, and the scenes of that morning came to life brilliantly... Of course, there was also a tendency to exaggerate, so he had to discount their stories slightly.


                        Still.


                        As he listened to the unceasing flow of experiences, even from that point of view, he noticed that the situation was not simple.


                        Usually the shapes seen by people all varied, were all different. When many people saw the same vision at the same time, they revealed many differences under questioning.


                        This time, though, they had all seen the same thing.


                        “I saw it too!” shouted a thin old man, leaping up. “Me, too, I saw it too! It’s no lie, Mr. Administrator, Sir. At dawn... In my home, standing in the kitchen. It was about a meter tall. I had just gotten up to get a drink of water, and I tottered and fell. My daughter came at the sound when I fell, but... She froze when she saw the ghost. Then it spoke. ‘Depart. Leave this world,’ it said, then went through the wall and outside.”


                        “And what form did it have?” asked a councilor.


                        “The same as they all say,” he panted. “Those extinct natives of Tayuneine... Uh, right. Just like that famous picture they draw, based on the scientists’ research. And it had angry eyes.”


                        Mmm...


                        All the stories were the same. All of them said they had seen images of the original inhabitants of this world.


                        Kazeta had, of course, seen that famous picture – quite some time ago, the scientists had come here, and painted it based on recovered bone fragments and ruins and artifacts they had located. According to their theories, the natives had been about a meter tall, like a horned owl with two arms, and seemed to have possessed a civilization totally different from that of humanity. Since then, many had studied the native inhabitants, but none had yet challenged that original hypothesis.


                        Specters exactly like the hypothetical picture had appeared all across the eastern side of Yusa City.


                        “After hearing these stories, you must all be aware that this is of a totally different nature from the visitation of six years ago”, said the Council Chairman after the retelling was finished, facing half the audience but speaking to Kazeta.


                        “In other cities as well, I have never heard of a disturbance across such a large area, and all with the same appearance. Do you know of any other example similar to this?”


                        “No,” answered Kazeta, left with no other choice.


                        “We have come to believe that the visions that appear and vanish on Tayuneine are the ghosts of the native inhabitants,” the Council Chairman continued slowly. “The... hatred, perhaps? Well, at any rate, the thoughts of that race that lived thousands of years ago still remain. No, it has never been proven, but that is what we believe. But... today is the first time I’ve ever seen them in their actual forms.”


                        “...”


                        “What is your opinion concerning this?”


                        “Mm. At the moment, I can’t say very much.”


                        “We have been discussing the problem since this morning,” said the Chairman. “Our conclusion is... We have somehow angered the spirits of the native race.”


                        The hall quieted again until you could hear a pin drop.


                        “What exactly do you mean?”


                        When Kazeta spoke, the people began to make a little noise.


                        “You have no idea?”


                        “None.”


                        The people fidgeted even more than before.


                        “In that case, although it may border on being rude, I will inform you,” said the Chairman, shifting his gaze directly to Kazeta. “We have heard a rumor. That rumor is... That a number of people will come to Tayuneine from the Federation.”


                        “A number of people?”


                        “That another Administrator will come, or that a high Federation official will come...”


                        “That is not a rumor.”


                        Kazeta forced himself to speak placidly. “It’s a fact... And the appropriate people were so informed from the beginning, and it has been publicly announced.”


                        “Exactly.”


                        “It looks to me as though you have misunderstood it.”


                        Kazeta spoke in a light voice, but none of the listeners showed it in their expressions.


                        “An Administrator will come, but he is an unassigned Administrator, or merely a cadet, if you prefer that term. He will come for training. The Federation official is an Inspector.” He could not express his apprehensions as to what Samielle PKA Freyn might do. “The Inspector has merely come to see if this world is going well or not.”


                        “I wonder...”


                        “Excuse me?”


                        “Would those people come here for that? One Administrator is enough for Tayuneine. It’s been that way in the past, and it should work fine in the future. And now two people from the Federation... No, probably many people in the future. And if they send so many people, isn’t their goal to change Tayuneine?”


                        “...” Kazeta was silent. Rather than reply, he thought it was time to listen to what the other had to say.


                        “That is what I meant by rumor,” grumbled the Chairman. “That the Federation wants to change things.”


                        “...”


                        “From the viewpoint of the Federation, this world is too fruitful, and too lacking in development – and that’s true. But we like it this way. We don’t want to become a lively world, a world that changes every day.”


                        “I understand that completely.”


                        “And don’t the spirits of the native race also want to stop changing? They that vanished and had been sleeping peacefully haven’t quietly accepted our invasion thus far, have they? That’s why they appear every so often... And if the Federation, like it so often does, turns things upside down, then it’s understandable they should get angry. They have begun to drive out all humans. That’s what we think! Isn’t that right?”


                        “Right!” shouted a single voice, and all the others took it up.


                        Then, applause.


                        After the applause ended, the Chairman continued.


                        “Of course, this is not your fault. But you, as Administrator, can alter the course of the Federation, can’t you? For the spirits of the natives, sleeping... And for us, can’t you exert your power? This is what we beg of you.”


                        “Please!”


                        “Help us!”


                        “Please!” shouted the people, many people.


                        “You are making a grave error,” said Kazeta, cutting out one word at a time, silencing their shouts with his hand. “At least, that is the only conclusion that I can draw at this moment. As Administrator, I have access to much more data than you, and according to that data, there’s no way they could be planning to change Tayuneine.”


                        “You lie!” shouted a young man on the right end of the front row.


                        “Listen to me.” Kazeta sharpened his tone. “I love this Tayuneine, as do you, just as it is now. Let me state that very clearly. I want to add this. You are imagining things, and misunderstanding the Federation. That is what I think, but I promise you that I will exert every effort within my power to prevent the situation you fear. That I promise.”


                        They cheered.


                        The Chairman clasped Kazeta’s hand, and shook it wildly.


                        Kazeta and the robots descended the platform, and slipped out of the City Hall, led by Raine. This time the long, long handshakes continued until they finally reached the outside.


                        “Thank you.”


                        Watching the Chairman and the other members of the City Council who had come out to see him off, Raine whispered quickly. “I knew you’d promise them that.”


                        “You’re all just jumping to conclusions, you know.”


                        “I wonder. Then why did they all appear in that form? And...” Raine started to speak, and stopped suddenly when the Chairman and the others appeared. Not only the Chairman, but everyone in the city pressed forward towards him, and the robots trying to protect him were busy scurrying back and forth.


                        He finished his goodbyes, exchanged a glance with Raine on the other side of the human fence, and climbed into his car.


                        When would he meet her again, he wondered?


                        He looked at his watch. It was past five in the afternoon.


                        The cadet had already landed at the starport, and been led to the Administration Complex by the robots.


                        The cadet – and later the Inspector, Samielle PKA Freyn.


                        He wasn’t likely to have the spare time to meet Raine for a while.


                        Not for a while.


                        Not until the cadet and the Inspector left...


                        He opened the car window.


                        Countless strong fragrances enveloped him at once. As always, they changed quickly to one he remembered, and called forth a vivid memory.


                        A memory.


                        A memory of the ruins.


                        It was a memory of one small ruin in particular, among all the hundreds on Tayuneine.


                        Yes, yes, that memory...


                        It was the ruin he had walked through with Raine on official business.


                        I’d like to go there again, he thought. I want to go to that tiny ruin again, together with her.


                        Suddenly...


                        He felt his heart grow mellow. More than the lightness he felt thinking of Raine, a much more expansive, softer, defending presence was there.


                        The shadow.


                        Next to him, inside the Administrator’s car, at the side of SQ2A, wavered that ever-so-gentle pale green shadow.


                        “Here!” he thought, and fell into that peaceful land. As he crossed over, he looked at the shadow, and felt the familiar longing for that vanished race come bubbling up.


                        He felt like he had heard a song. The song of peace of that extinct people... Not an angry voice, nor a deluded screaming, but a song that would lead to the peaceful land, a song that you couldn’t quite catch the words of, no matter how hard you tried. Maybe not a song, but a thought. A shapeless, silent thought...


                        The shadow vanished.


                        He sank into his seat deeply, still silent. He had never let it be known to others how the spirits that terrified them so much had such a gentle face for him. Not even to Raine. It could lead to no good end to have it said that the Administrator liked the spirits.


                        “Do you feel ill?” asked SQ2A.


                        “No,” he answered.


                        Now that he thought about it, there was no need to tell the robots about it at all. After all, they couldn’t see the spirits.










                                         – 3 –


                        The instant he returned to the Administration Complex, SQ1 told him that the unassigned Administrator had already arrived and was waiting for him. The reason that SQ1 hadn’t informed him while he was returning was that everything was proceeding on schedule, and the Administrator hadn’t asked. Since he would find out as soon as he returned anyway, SQ1 had judged that there was no need for a special announcement. Of course, from the viewpoint of SQ2D, who was responsible for the unassigned Administrator, Kazeta should have been informed at once, but SQ1 had stopped that. One of the main duties of SQ1 was to process as much as possible at the robot level, and to cut out unnecessary data so as not to disturb the Administrator.


                        “And that cadet, uh, unassigned Administrator, is not waiting in the room you assigned him?” asked Kazeta.


                        “No. He is waiting for you in the Administrator’s Office.”


                        “The Office?”


                        “Yes. According to SQ2D, he expressed that desire.”


                        “Hmm...”


                        It was so much more comfortable to wait for the Administrator’s directives in a private room. It was a strange cadet who would go out of his way to wait for him in his office.


                        When he entered his office, the small-framed man sitting across from SQ2D turned, then rose and came to meet him.


                        “Administrator Kazeta? I’m Thomas PPKe Jackson. Pleased to meet you.”


                        “My pleasure.”


                        As he responded, Kazeta noticed that the other was unusually old.


                        He had known the name of the unassigned Administrator who was to come here through the assignment system, but they had refused to tell him anything of the other’s age or past history. It hadn’t been that way in the past, but now they said they only sent the person’s name. They said they wanted the training to be as fair as possible, and for the Administrator to have no preconceptions. Since he could find out easily enough just by asking the cadet, it seemed a little strange to go to such lengths... The central body of the Federation had grown too big, too complex, and was finally starting to flow along purely formal currents... There were more than a few examples of it ignoring the facts of a situation. In any case, that was why Kazeta knew only the name of the cadet coming to Tayuneine, and had unconsciously assumed, based on past experience, that the cadet would be a young man, possessed by his duty.


                        But the man in front of him now was not like that. He was maybe five or six years younger than Kazeta, but by no means a young man.


                        Probably this cadet Thomas had fallen behind the others for some reason, or had, as others had, been a specialist in politics or some other field and had transferred on his own initiative or the Federation’s order.


                        Even so, Kazeta had no choice but to treat him the same as any other cadet.


                        He spoke.


                        “I had intended to greet you... But there was a problem.”


                        “No matter. Don’t worry about it. It’s not as if it’s an official duty of the Administrator to go and meet unassigned Administrators.”


                        “...”


                        Kazeta looked at the other’s face. What Thomas seemed to be saying, and what his voice revealed were a little different. Somehow, this cadet seemed to feel his pride had been hurt. It looked like he’d been stuck with a noisy one, this time.


                        Even so – Kazeta noticed the room had a slightly different feeling than usual. Somehow hard to breathe. When he saw the windows, he understood – he always left them open, but now they were tightly closed.


                        He started to walk towards them, to open them up.


                        “Uh... If it’s not any trouble, could you leave them closed?” asked Thomas.


                        “Why?” asked Kazeta, stopping his hand.


                        “I get a headache from it,” Thomas grimaced. His expression was a bit too obvious for someone who was likely to become an Administrator.


                        “In this air, there’s something... It’s saturated with the smell of flowers or something, right? Somehow I just can’t... “


                        “...”


                        If that were the case, then there was no help for it. Kazeta faced Thomas and sat down.


                        “Each planet has its own special characteristics,” he said. “This Tayuneine is no exception. If you’re going to undergo training here, you’re going to have to get used to it.”


                        Thomas smiled strangely.


                        “But... Isn’t this planet special?”


                        “What do you mean?”


                        “The Administrators who come here... This is hard to say, but... “


                        “Say it.”


                        “I’ve heard that all of the Administrators that come here become – satisfied with their situation. In other words... Don’t get upset, but they say that Administrators all fail here.”


                        “... I see.”


                        “I think I can understand the reason. The smell. The smell of Tayuneine. You all become drunk on it, and lose your ambition.”


                        Thomas gained confidence, and continued.


                        “That’s why I’ve decided to avoid smelling this atmosphere as much as possible...”


                        “...” Kazeta was silent for quite a long time.


                        Failure, he had said.


                        The phrase “last stop”, that Bart had used, echoed in his heart. Of course, this Administrator could only interpret it in that way.


                        Still.


                        What of it?


                        As long as Tayuneine was included in the map of the Federation, someone had to be Administrator there.


                        Now, it was him.


                        And now that Administrator had accepted a cadet... If he just treated everything that way, it would be all right.


                        Kazeta grabbed hold of himself, and asked a question.


                        “Before you came here, where else did you train?”


                        “This is the first. After this, I’m to go to Rendolune and Luxerne,” answered Thomas, looking curiously relieved.


                        “Rendolune... I served there for three years,” nodded Kazeta. “At that time, it was a standard frontier-stage colony. Now they’ve made land treaties with the native inhabitants, and industrialized the human territories.”


                        “That’s right.”


                        “I don’t know Luxerne very well.”


                        “It’s a new colony world in system 1325,” explained Thomas. “A Class III, Type O world, and the native inhabitants seem to be going well, too.”


                        Including Tayuneine, all of those worlds are doing well, thought Kazeta, and nodded instead of saying it aloud.


                        “And after that?”


                        “That’s all.”


                        “Only three? In my time, we had to go around to at least twelve worlds of varying types.”


                        “Yes, but I’m only going to three,” repeated Thomas. The same brazenness he had shown at the start appeared again. “The Federation decided on three, so three is enough, right?”


                        He talks just like a member of the Federation central body, thought Kazeta. Thomas just wouldn’t fit the mold of other cadets in Kazeta’s memory.


                        “Tell me a little about the disturbance you mentioned before – another spectral visitation?”


                        “Uh-huh, that’s right. You asked the robots?”


                        “Yes. But it was not easy trying to pry information out of them,” he said cynically. “Are these robots under some special order? They don’t seem to be too interested in serving an unassigned Administrator.”


                        “What do you mean by that?”


                        “Well, it’s true, isn’t it? The main chief, SQ1, merely falls silent and refuses to answer my questions, and SQ2A doesn’t even answer my call – and it’s supposed to be your outings chief, according to the robot organization chart. I was forced to call the SQ2D assigned to me here, and question it.”


                        “Naturally.”


                        “What?”


                        “You are misusing the robots. Of course SQ1 and SQ2A will not respond to your directives.”


                        “But SQ1 is the overall-in-charge for this world... “


                        “SQ1 has responsibility only to the Administrator. SQ2A is under SQ1, so as far as a cadet is...”


                        “Formally, unassigned Administrator.”


                        “OK. Anyway, the entire robot complement of any world is controlled by SQ1, which is under the control of the Administrator. Only the Administrator can give this network orders. Unless unassigned Administrators are given special authority, they are outside the chain of command. You can only control the section controlled by SQ2D, and even that is subject to the control of SQ1.”


                        “Oh, I see.”


                        “It would have been better if you’d stayed in your room. As long as you stay there, SQ2D will meet all of your needs. For you, SQ2D serves the same role as SQ1, but is not, of course, in contact with the other robots.”


                        As he spoke, Kazeta felt his anger rising. Why hadn’t this cadet been taught these things when he went through training?


                        Was this what they called a cadet?


                        Was this what they called an unassigned Administrator?


                        Well, he probably had the literal qualifications. That was why the Federation had sent him, but... Was this performance now acceptable for an Administrator?


                        And in spite of only having such a small smattering of knowledge, he had entered the Administrator’s Office alone, tried to control the robots, and wasn’t even reflecting on his own actions now.


                        When Kazeta had been a cadet, under the first Administrators such as Kurobe and Rainan, this kind of thing couldn’t have been imagined. Even a minor miss had been recorded as a major demerit. Even his friend and classmate Kalgeist Jr., who had achieved such brilliant success during training, had finally had to give up his dream of becoming a cadet because of a failure in field training. Not just his own past, but the cadets he had received on other worlds had actually possessed ability, and had respected the limitations of their own positions. Had things really changed this much in the past ten years?


                        “I understand. I’ll study harder.”


                        Thomas somehow understood what Kazeta was thinking, and relaxed. He started his earlier conversation again.


                        “But about these spectral visitations... I wonder...”


                        “What?”


                        “Do the people living here really believe in spirits and things?”


                        “...”


                        Kazeta didn’t understand what the other was trying to say at first.


                        “In other words,” said Thomas, shaking his head, “The people here believe that the spirits really exist and appear by their own volition. That’s what they think, right? In spite of it being only an optical phenomenon.”


                        “Is it?”


                        “Of course it’s only a visual effect. It can’t be detected by the robots, so it can’t exist. I studied a bit about this planet before coming here. I learned a little more from SQ2D today, and I think I’ve figured out the real situation here.”


                        “Really? Please, do tell.”


                        “Even if it’s not a particularly astonishing opinion, it is my own. It’s not especially different from what many others have said... It’s just an illusion born from the minds of the people.”


                        “Why do you suspect this?” pressed Kazeta, though of course he knew this theory well.


                        “Well, there are many ruins from the original inhabitants here on Tayuneine, so the colonists began to feel eyes behind them. After all, this world wasn’t a human world, at first. Living here, they gradually came to feel that it was somehow bad, and that thought became an illusion that ghosts were appearing. You can explain it all psychologically.”


                        “I see. But this isn’t the only world that has had native inhabitants. So why is only Tayuneine plagued with spirits?”


                        “That’s easy. Haven’t the people here become used to living easily in peace together? That’s why they see illusions and become terrified at trivial psychological pressures. In other words, they’re over-protected.”


                        “According to your theory, people who are not colonists, for example the two of us, should never see these spirits.”


                        “Of course. We’re not mentally sterilized. Wait a minute... Surely you’re not scared of these ghosts, too?”


                        “I’m not frightened of the ghosts.”


                        “Right. We’re different from the native inhabitants and the colonists, because we’re standing on the side of the government.”


                        At that statement, Kazeta felt yet again that the other was not an Administrator.


                        “I’ve been thinking,” said Thomas. “If we respond to each and every colonist’s complaint, then these disturbances will continue forever, right? To dispel their self-indulgent illusions, we should use a more forceful...”


                        “I’m the Administrator.”


                        Kazeta stood up.


                        “I am governing this world as ordered by the Federation as a Class IV, Type S2 world. Under that method of government, the amount of individual decision permitted the Administrator is great, but I will not accept your directives... Return to your room and rest. We’ll be busy from tomorrow.”


                        “Yes, sir.”


                        Thomas left.


                        After he left, Kazeta threw open the windows. The fragrances of the night came rushing in, totally different from those of the day. He breathed them into his lungs deeply... But his heart didn’t lighten at all.


                        From tomorrow, he had to progress with Thomas’ training in addition to his regular duties.


                        Training meant finding out exactly how much politics he had learned, exactly how well he could respond to the needs of a real colonial world. Even so, though, it was dangerous to entrust an entire world to this inexperienced man, so it meant allowing him to deal with only carefully limited problems. Cadets first saw how to handle robots by observing the Administrator, and constantly compared their methods, sticking as close to him as possible and striving to breathe in tune with him. At last, the cadet would govern under strict control, using his assigned robots as if they were the entire robot complement of the world. The Administrator would, in turn, watch and test him from the start, forcing him to study areas that were insufficient, gradually leaving more and more to the robots, finally only meeting with the cadet occasionally while listening to reports from SQ2 and giving whatever directives might be needed. Still, any bad effects caused by the actions of the cadet were his responsibility, so he had to pay attention, close attention.


                        Especially when that cadet was, like Thomas... a pain.


                        Much as Kazeta had feared on that first night, Thomas’ ability was far below the minimum. True, he had some degree of knowledge and technique, but when you pressed for more, it all got pretty hazy. In particular, his basics weren’t clear. Sometimes he would dash out the right answer immediately, but at other times he would be at a loss, floundering in totally unrelated areas.


                        Even so, Kazeta continued to earnestly teach the cadet – Thomas continued to refer to himself as the unassigned Administrator. If Kazeta had been the Administrator of one of the more difficult worlds, he probably wouldn’t have had the time or interest. He sometimes felt that the Federation had seen Thomas’ inability, and that was why he had been assigned to Tayuneine... But Thomas worked hard, managed to learn how to handle the robots, learned the tricks of the trade, and even stopped showing his distaste for the atmosphere.


                        To say that Kazeta had started to feel a sense of good will towards him was wrong – it was just the opposite. Thomas became more disagreeable with every passing day. Thomas’ personality was simply unacceptable. His willingness to draw the name of the Federation like a sword, his prejudice towards native inhabitants and colonists, his terrifying habit of deciding things on his own, his pushiness when explaining his own opinions... Kazeta just couldn’t accept his way of thinking or his attitude. He couldn’t accept it, but he couldn’t let it affect his objectivity. Kazeta kept guiding Thomas, supported by his strong sense of duty, one of the special characteristics of an Administrator.


                        Still.


                        He couldn’t become entangled in Thomas only. This training was merely an extra, and his real work was still the government of Tayuneine.


                        And Tayuneine was increasingly in turmoil.


                        Shortly after Thomas had arrived, the spirit disturbances began to accelerate.


                        They weren’t the same as before, either. The same thing that had happened at Yusa City – the appearance of the natives themselves crying “Leave this world!” – began to occur in many other areas as well.


                        At the same time, the rumors that he had heard in Yusa – that the native inhabitants were angered at the machinations of the Federation, plotting to develop and energize this world – it spread from city to city like the plague, whispered from mouth to mouth.


                        Still, at that point, it seemed that the people hadn’t lost their trust in the Administrator, and many cities begged him to attend their City Council meetings and explain if the Federation really intended to do such a thing or not. He always responded to their requests, saying that it was a rumor with no basis in fact, that they should be calm, and that he was also against any change on this world. He couldn’t cancel Thomas’ training, so he cut his sleep time short, squeezing in extra hours to teach him – and many were the times that Thomas complained about training at such odd hours. But Kazeta felt there was still a great deal of worth in visiting the cities, calming the citizens.


                        And then.


                        A message came in that the Inspector would arrive in one week.


                        Kazeta was at a loss as to whether he should publicly announce this fact as he always did. If he announced it, people would become excited, and there was certainly no obligation to do so. On the other hand, if he didn’t, and people found out somehow, then their suspicions would become certainties. If Inspector Samielle PKA Freyn came unannounced, and they knew of it, then someone would explode, maybe in front of the Inspector himself. In the end, he publicized it all in good grace.


                        As he had known they would be, the reactions of the people were fierce. This world was, they said, the target for the Federation’s reconstruction after all. Rumors spread that the current Administrator didn’t have the power to stop it, or worse, was actually working with the Federation to deceive them. SQ1 relayed a number of such reports to him, but the robots must have been collecting many thousands more.


                        The number of spectral visitations rose dramatically. Almost every city had one every night, and the terrified people would throng the streets wailing.


                        At last, they stopped asking the Administrator for help. They had come to believe that he was merely a tool of the Federation.


                        As Administrator, though, Kazeta couldn’t let the situation go. City functions were becoming paralyzed, people were terrified. He led his robots from city to city, forcibly arguing that the Federation had no such plans, that the visitations must be for another reason, and that the true reasons would become clearer with time.


                        It had no effect.


                        They were already terrified of the ghosts. In addition to the other rumors, one started that the end of the world was coming. The native inhabitants had seen through the Federation’s schemes, and rather than let development ruin their eternal sleep, they had decided to destroy the world, ruins and colonists together. Kazeta kept trying to convince them, but there was no help for it. He kept trying, though it seemed hopeless.


                        The Inspector would arrive on Tayuneine early the next morning – and it was dawn now.


                        “Any effect?” came Thomas’ voice as Kazeta finally returned home exhausted. “Why don’t you quit, stop this useless effort?”


                        Without waiting for Kazeta’s answer, he gave a thin laugh, and continued.


                        “They won’t even listen to you now. They’re all saying ‘To the Ruins! To the Ruins!’”


                        “I know,” replied Kazeta in a low voice.


                        It was true.


                        Who started it he didn’t know, but, in this last day or two, the colonists were leaving their homes and setting out for the ruins as if possessed. To them, as they could no longer believe in the Administrator, they needed something to rely on, and had turned right around, turned to the ruins, and to the spirits of the native inhabitants. They sat in the ruins, stretching out their arms, entreating them to help, entreating them to stop the Federation from doing this.


                        It was a strange psychology... Maybe it was only a natural development for the colonists. To them, this world was home. When they feared that they would perish along with their home’s destruction, they had chosen the supernatural forces of their homeland over the Federation and the Administrator.


                        “Peasants. Idiots.”


                        Thomas laughed.


                        “Nothing’s going to happen even if they go to the ruins – they’re scared of the illusion they’re making themselves. They don’t understand that if they just stop believing, the ghosts will stop appearing.”


                        “...”


                        “They’re all dancing to the pipes of their own illusions. They say that the Inspector is coming, and then powerfully imagine these ghosts. So they have the appearance of the native inhabitants – so what? That picture was painted by scientists, right? Does anybody really know if they looked like that or not? And if you think of the way they appear, it’s even clearer. The frequency increases with each announcement, each time a visitor comes from outside. If it’s not psychological, then what is it?”


                        “...” He’s repeating the same hypothesis again and again, thought Kazeta silently.


                        Or maybe they really were just psychological disturbances, like Thomas said. Or at least, you could explain a lot of it that way.


                        But if that were true, then what did Kazeta see every two or three days now? Was that an illusion, too? Was the peace the shadow imparted to him an illusion, too?


                        He couldn’t believe it, but... He didn’t offer any counter-arguments. Lately he had stopped arguing with Thomas, except when necessary. It only made him angry.


                        “If you see things like that, it just shows your suggestiveness and your lack of mental freedom. As proof, healthy people... We don’t see them.”


                        Thomas suddenly looked straight into Kazeta’s eyes.


                        “Why? Administrator Kazeta, why are you so soft on them?”


                        “Soft?”


                        Kazeta returned his gaze, piercingly.


                        “That’s right. Since I’ve come here, I’ve been watching the way you work. You’re a highly able Administrator, but I think you’re a little misguided. You’re too soft on them. To say it bluntly, you’re flattering them, playing up to them.”


                        “Do you have any idea of what you’re saying?”


                        “Yes, I think so. Your evaluation of me is going to be terrible, so whatever I say from now on won’t make it any worse. You should discipline them until they don’t have the time to play at seeing visions. You should drive out these illusions, wake them up, even if you have to kill a hundred of them, or two hundred. You should develop this sleeping planet, completely, and smash those ruins.”


                        “So this is the real you.” Kazeta approached one step. Thomas retreated one step, and continued to howl.


                        “The reason you don’t do it is because you’ve become too much of Tayuneine. You’re drenched, drowned in this world!”


                        “Listen, you.”


                        Kazeta grabbed the other’s shirt front. He had lost his self-control as Administrator. “Just where the hell do you think you are? Tayuneine! You think you can be a real cadet, when you abuse your own world like that?”


                        “I don’t care about your damn evaluation! It doesn’t have any meaning in my case!” shouted Thomas. “I’ve had enough. It’s because people like you exist that this world is accepted, is a member of the Federation!”


                        “...”


                        Kazeta dropped his hands. When he argued with this man, and lost even a little self-control, he was not proud of it.


                        Thomas fell backwards, sat down hard, and continued to wail from the floor.


                        “I’ll show you! I’ll do it the right way, you wait and see!”










                                         – 4 –


                        The luxuriant growth of flowers thronging both sides of the road seemed to have floated up as one, bathing in the sun.


                        “It’s as beautiful as they say,” said Samielle PKA Freyn as the car left the starport. “And the fragrances are wonderful. Even for a while, I’d like to live on this world.”


                        “...”


                        Kazeta glanced at Samielle’s profile. When he first got off at the starport, Kazeta thought he hadn’t changed a bit from the old days, but seen from this close, the once-stern face had softened, and his hair had thinned. He’d gotten at least that old. Maybe Kazeta looked the same in Samielle’s eyes.


                        Even so, I wonder what Samielle meant by that, thought Kazeta. He must have heard about what happened on Tayuneine, and to Administrators who came here.


                        Cynicism?


                        Samielle wasn’t the type of man to speak cynically.


                        “Compared to when you were an Administrator, how is it now?” he asked.


                        “...Mmm.” Samielle left his answer at that, and without even trying to add anything, counter-questioned Kazeta.


                        “Cadet Thomas PPKA Jackson should be here just now, right?”


                        “Mmm. He’s here.”


                        Kazeta had left him in the Administration Complex.


                        “Something about Thomas?”


                        “No, no nothing.”


                        Samielle shook his head once, and turned his eyes out the window again.


                        The car kept moving.


                        “I read your situation report on Tayuneine just before I came in,” said Samielle. “Is it still the same now?”


                        “It’s gotten worse,” answered Kazeta bluntly.


                        “Tell me about it.”


                        Kazeta summarized the current situation, explaining it.


                        “So I’m part of the cause of the trouble,” said Samielle as if it were humorous. “I guess I can’t make a public inspection, then.”


                        He’s changed, thought Kazeta. The huge anger he used to have has vanished. Kazeta thought he liked the new Samielle better.


                        Suddenly SQ2A, sitting next to Kazeta, began to speak.


                        “SQ1 wishes to communicate with the Administrator.”


                        “Connect us.”


                        SQ1 began to speak through SQ2A’s contact.


                        “The unassigned Administrator has commanded SQ2D and its group to make preparations to go out. It is not listed on his schedule, so I am reporting it to you.”


                        “Go out? Where to?”


                        “SQ2D has received an order to go to the ruins where the greatest number of colonists have gathered. According to LQ1, the site corresponding to that command at this time is east-northeast of the Administration Complex, at a distance of about forty kilometers.”


                        Kazeta knew the spot, as it was the location of the largest ruins.


                        “Will you issue a cancellation order?” asked SQ1.


                        “No, let him go,” directed Kazeta. He wanted to see what Thomas would do. Then he ordered SQ2A to direct the car to those ruins.


                        Overgrown with trees and flowers, huge slabs of stone, step-like, were scattered in a complex arrangement across the huge caldera-shaped space, bathed in an eerie light.


                        The ruins.


                        It was still a mystery what those huge stones had been used for, what kinds of buildings had been erected on top of them. The silent existence of those scattered monoliths seemed to be smiling, sneering, at the humans trying to fathom the civilization of the native inhabitants.


                        But it was different now than it had always been. People were swarming over every inch of the ruins, kneeling, stretching out their arms and crying plaintively. It was a massive hymn, and had the cadence, the modulation, of countless voices.


                        Without any warning, a single man burst forth onto the highest slab, standing tall and upright.


                        “Over there! That’s him, isn’t it?”


                        By the time Samielle had spoken, Kazeta had already ordered the car to hover, and close with the man.


                        It was, of course, Thomas.


                        “Listen to me!” shouted Thomas through a hand-speaker. “Listen to me, all of you!”


                        The surrounding people, surprised at the noise, turned to face him.


                        “What you are doing is meaningless!”


                        Thomas’ voice reached to the farthest depths of the ruins.


                        “No matter what you ask for, these ruins will change nothing! There are no such things as ghosts! They are nothing but illusions bred in your own minds! Do you hear me? There are no ghosts! The natives are extinct! And the dead have no power!”


                        Thomas bent over, picked something up, and waved it.


                        It was a nerve-tissue destructor.


                        “Go home!” he screamed. “Leave, go home, think it over again! There are no ghosts! Nothing can be achieved by your coming here! Go! Go! I’ll kill you if you don’t go!”


                        Kazeta understood.


                        Thomas was trying to move the people of Tayuneine with a speech and a gun. He held to his theory, and was going to prove it to them.


                        Terrified people beseeching the spirits for help weren’t going to be moved by that.


                        Thomas might even murder them, if things went badly. Their hatred would focus on Thomas, then.


                        Dangerous.


                        Kazeta’s car had already landed next to SQ2D’s car, at the base of the stone.


                        “Stop!” thundered Kazeta, bursting out of the car.


                        “Get out of my way!”


                        Thomas turned the handgun towards Kazeta.


                        “Mind your own business, failure!”


                        “Stop, Thomas.”


                        “Shut up!” shouted Thomas. “It’s lazy bastards like you that are guiding these idiots! You value this warm lazy life more than the Federation!”


                        The people gathered across the ruins silently watched the spectacle.


                        “Thomas, come down. This is the Inspector!”


                        Just as Samielle’s voice rang out, it happened. The people screamed. Mixed in with their voices, Thomas’ could be heard.


                        “What the...! This is impossible...! No! Impossible!”


                        At the same time, Kazeta felt the warm presence he was used to.


                        The shadows.


                        The pale green shadows, hundreds of them, were swarming through the ruins. The shadows so sweet and warm to him were terrifying the people, making them flatten themselves to the ground, or flee screaming in sheer terror.


                        And Thomas.


                        They were pure terror to Thomas, too.


                        He had dropped his speaker and gun, and stood with both arms hanging limply, screaming.


                        “No! No! I can’t be seeing... Stop it! Don’t come any closer!”


                        Kazeta clearly saw a large group of shadows floating towards Thomas, clustering towards the top of that slab.


                        “Help! Stop! Go away!”


                        Thomas hid his face behind his hands, and tottered a few steps back. He lost his balance, and fell tumbling down.


                        At once, SQ2D and its retinue shifted to where he lay.


                        Kazeta and Samielle ran over, too.


                        “Is he all right?”


                        When Kazeta asked, the answer came slowly from SQ2D, which was already suffering functional damage due to its inability to protect Thomas.


                        “Life processes are... not stopped... Recovery possible... I... judged... no danger... to the unassigned... Administrator’s life... and caused... this accident...”


                        “Take him to the Administration Complex at once and treat him,” order Kazeta to SQ2A, and then noticed the atmosphere was strange, and looked up.


                        What...?


                        He looked up at the slab where Thomas had been standing.


                        The shadows were still clustered there. As they clustered, they came drifting slowly down towards him... But there was no longer any terror on the faces of the people that saw them.


                        “Look!” someone shouted. “That’s not the shape of the natives! It’s pale green! It’s just a pale green blur!”


                        “What is it?” asked a different man. “Just by looking at it, I feel so good inside...”


                        “Aren’t they... The spirits of the natives?”


                        “The spirits of the natives punished that evil man!”


                        “That’s true! They took the shapes they did to make us reflect! When we showed them the proper respect again, they revealed themselves to us!”


                        “I feel so warm, so happy!”


                        They were right.


                        What they were seeing now was what he had seen all along. Somehow, he sensed it directly.


                        The shadows came down around him, and then finally vanished.


                        I was blessed, he thought... Or maybe it was just a whim, a caprice of the shadows... In any case, it took much longer than usual for the warmth in his heart to fade.


                        But... Why?


                        What was this phenomenon, really? What were those shadows? Were they really the spirits of the native inhabitants? That was impossible. Impossible, but... What were they? Maybe the final form of the vanished native inhabitants – or maybe they were another life-form that humanity didn’t know, and had no connection at all with the vanished race.


                        He didn’t know.


                        Still, wasn’t it acceptable for there to be something he didn’t know? To have something inexplicable by human knowledge...


                        “Kazeta.”


                        Samielle clapped him on the shoulder.


                        “Kazeta. What are you mooning about?”


                        “Ah...”


                        He returned to himself. When he looked around, he saw that all of the people had vanished from the ruins.


                        “I didn’t see anything,” said Samielle as they were returning. “I just can’t believe it’s the supernatural force you say it is. I can explain it even with Thomas’ hypothesis.”


                        “How? Through a simple psychological trick?”


                        “No, not just that.”


                        Samielle pursed his lips.


                        “Another cause can be imagined. For example, this atmosphere.”


                        “The atmosphere?”


                        “Right. This air is always full of a variety of smells. Wouldn’t it be effectively impossible to detect some gas or pollen that caused people to see illusions? If you consider that it only takes effect after some time, then it makes sense. People are, after all, always afraid of something, always looking over their shoulders. That fear just appeared as those ghosts, that’s all.”


                        “...”


                        Now that he thought about it, it seemed possible... Which meant that he had the type of mind that could give birth to that warm shadow. That he had birthed that warmth, that kindness, from the start.


                        He didn’t know. He decided to think about it at length, later.


                        “I would like to caution you about Thomas PPKA Jackson,” said Sami-elle. “You’ve no doubt already figured it out by now, but he’s not a real cadet.”


                        “Not real... ? But his qualifications were...”


                        “He’s qualified. But he’s only a quick-assembly unassigned Administrator, taking this course for appearances’ sake. He won’t become a real Administrator.”


                        “What do you mean?”


                        “He’s targeted to become an Inspector.”


                        “...”


                        Kazeta looked at him suspiciously.


                        “The Federation initiated the Inspector program to monitor the Administrators,” continued Samielle. “They can’t, of course, make somebody Inspector who’s never had experience as Administrator, so they had to take somebody from the ranks of we Administrators. Still, no matter how much they train us and retrain us, we’re still both Administrators – the Inspectors and the inspected – it’s only a natural development. True Administrators have always loved their worlds more than they’ve loved the Federation – and we’re even proud of it. That’s why the Federation decided to try raising an Inspector from the very beginning.”


                        “From the start?”


                        “Right. They decided to make a loyal watchdog for the Federation, with only the vaguest Administration experience. Accelerated education, field training reduced to the minimum, and even then run him around worlds where everything is going well. The problem is that the number of worlds where everything is going well is limited, as there are so many where second- and third-generation colonists are having problems with their Administrators. So, just as I suspect you noticed, he was assigned to peaceful Tayuneine, where it is obviously impossible to gain any real field experience.”


                        “...”


                        When he considered it now, all of Thomas’ utterances fit perfectly.


                        “Well, it’ll be different when they do their own inspecting... You’re here now, so relax and be merry.”


                        Samielle continued, “Before, I talked about my own beliefs concerning the spirits, but the fact is that as an Inspector it doesn’t make any difference. I came up from being an Administrator, and don’t really care if they are real ghosts or just runaway psychological problems... Just as long as the government runs smoothly.”


                        “...”


                        “But it’s going to be tough from now on. I think now that they’ve lost their fear, and have begun to beg the spirits for protection instead, that now those same spirits are going to become the targets of a type of religious fervor... And you’re going to be forced into the role of standing between the gods and the believers... It’s going to be tough.”


                        Kazeta nodded.


                        Outside the car was a solid stretch of flower-covered prairie... The sweet fragrances flowed in through the open window. They’d arrive at the Administration Complex soon.


                        Tayuneine.


                        It wasn’t bad.


                        And in time... Or rather, at the appointed time, he’d meet Raine again.


                        At that special tiny ruin.