The Flame and the Blossom










                                         – 1 –


                        He wondered again why he was so moved by the sight. From the first time he had seen it, it had always moved him. It always perturbed him: that strangely plaintive spectacle, strangely bald, for all its brilliance. He could feel something awaken and cry out deep inside him, desolately. Each time it did, he would be perplexed, at a loss for how to control it.


                        To be more precise, it had changed from when he first saw it. It now was more wrenching – he was more biased, and he realized that change now.


                        Maybe it was because of Amilla.


                        The fact that it was Amilla’s kin covering the dome of the sky, pressing across it, was twisting the balance of his judgment.


                        How he felt about them: who showed such reason, who were symbolized to him by Amilla – finally unable to resist the demands of instinct and dancing up into the sky...


                        No.


                        Wasn’t he merely jealous?


                        Countless bits of colored confetti were floating in the sunset sky. These strangely shaped beings rode the powerful seasonal winds that blew once a year – by human standards, once every four months – floating up into the air, spreading, filling in the sky with color, and drifting. Flowers, two or three meters in diameter. Changing colors every few seconds, red and yellow and purple, all the possible hues, flowing through the sky like the legendary locust swarms of Terra, on their great mating journey.


                        It made an awesome harmony all together. When that group over there was yellow, the ones over his head would flash pure white, and those thousands in the distance shone a blue deeper than the sky – the endlessly covered sky was a variegated pattern, flowing away to the horizon, ever to the horizon. This year, it had started this afternoon, their numbers growing rapidly, through this sunset, through the night, through dawn... As long as the fierce seasonal wind continued... The great hordes that would persevere as long as the wind lasted, even if he didn’t like it... On their great reproductive flight.


                        To them, whether this “floating” was a liberation or an end, whether it was an act of suffering or in the realm of love – as a Terran, he didn’t know. He had to admit that it was like entrusting your body to the summoning voices of your kind, a being that had come from the distant past. He had to admit it marked a phase of their existence as reasoning beings.


                        How would he feel then?


                        Amilla, too, would finally drift in the sky like that, and what would he think then?


                        Was he jealous? He searched his heart again. Even though those were Amilla’s kin, Amilla wasn’t with them this time. He told himself Amilla wasn’t there this time, but still... Amilla would be, someday, and he was upset by merely thinking that it was the normal manner of reproduction for Amilla. That thought showed him how much it had affected him, and though he understood, there was no helping it.


                        Still.


                        The degree to which he had let it affect him... Wasn’t it inevitable, really? Didn’t all of his life, before he was officially installed as Administrator, force him to become this way?


                        Right.


                        He had to admit that he had such a weak point in him.


                        A fault.


                        And that fault was the reverse side of attaining the position of Administrator. In his same class, there were no doubt happy ones who never realized it, and others who were able to overcome the problem easily.


                        But he wasn’t one of them. He, Kurobe PPK Taiji, wasn’t such a person.


                        Of course, he had been selected out as a candidate for Administrator and had been sent here after training upon training, over ten years of concentrated study. Mentally and physically, he had been forged into a member of the elite. Naturally, he felt the contradiction in that. As much as he thought of his “eliteness”, he thought of it as a strenuous process that he had invested himself in, with his elite status as the end result. Thinking like his would never produce so common a result as looking over his own shoulder into the past. He and his group were many hundreds of times more competitive than the masses who merely inhabited Terra. They were still unquestionably in the highest group, even when compared to the judges, so strictly selected, or – to go to the other extreme – the space service men, who were at the very summit of the reflexes and senses.


                        Still, his had been a selection process made with the deletion of emotions as a prerequisite. There was a basis to the quiet whispers of condemnation and complaint against him and his kind throughout Terra and Terran space. That was because theoretical and multi-objective training were thought to be essential in the training of an Administrator, and that idea was put into practice.


                        But was it really possible to delete the emotions?


                        In spite of that oath at the beginning of their training, many candidates, possibly even possessed of outstanding political capabilities, were unable to withstand the sympathetic vibrations of their emotions, lost their balance, and failed. He had managed somehow to finish the entire process without running, and received his post, but you couldn’t say he had no emotions at all. He had simply frozen his yearnings, and was inviting disruption by always putting it off until later, until later. It only supported him.


                        Yearnings?


                        No, wasn’t it better to change that to desires? And infantile desires, at that...


                        Right.


                        For example, what was this strangeness deep in his heart? Was it really anything more than mere illusion?


                        He thought.


                        He thought about what his strangeness was.


                        Mmm...


                        A very wise, innocent, lovable, too-knowing little girl. A girl that used her cunning only for a man, for the man she loved. A girl with a good, clear head, who was solitary though everyone knew her. A young woman come like an angel, a sprite, like a shadow, her life full of the ups and downs of men. Weak courage, strong will, a nobility that encompasses the anger of the masses...


                        Where was that person? Not likely to be anywhere. That kind of woman existed only in the mind, was made to suit the reader as the heroine of a story. Even though he knew that, he couldn’t rid himself of the image – and believing that she would appear somewhere, someday, had only convinced him more firmly.


                        What could he call it except infantile illusion?


                        Wasn’t he hoping deep in his heart that he could fulfill that desire somewhere in Terran space, if not on Terra itself? And could he stay as he was without exploding?


                        Frankly, there were times when he wondered if those who trained the candidates didn’t make full use of these illusions.


                        There was no mistake that this repressed longing, this never-to-be-realized hope, had erupted when he came to live on this different world. Hadn’t that eruption fused too brightly with the principle that long-term administration was impossible without a strong connection with the native inhabitants? While claiming it as a necessary action for the performance of his duty, hadn’t he tread this path to its inevitable end?


                        No... Stop it.


                        It was no use attacking himself like that. It would only make his heart heavier the more he berated himself. Luckily, no one else had noticed that psychological bent in him. Yet. And even if someone did, he had done nothing reprehensible.


                        I wonder when... he asked himself. I wonder when this started...










                                         – 2 –


                        “The seasonal winds will begin soon, Administrator,” said SQ1.


                        “Uh-huh.” Kurobe lifted his head.


                        “The seasonal winds,” repeated SQ1, the chief of all the robots scattered about the planet, its stainless steel face turned fixedly to the sky. “In about ten days or so, the seasonal winds will blow, and the flowering native inhabitants will rise up into the sky. If we are going to control their landing zones, we must begin preparations at once. Will you give permission to begin operations?”


                        Kurobe shook his head slightly. “No. Permission denied.”


                        “For what reason?”


                        “Because there is no need for it.”


                        “Such control has always been exercised up until now. The spermatozoa will wait where they land, and then reproduce without order. We cannot protect and raise them all with our limited materials and capacity. As a result the wild native population will increase dramatically. Is that acceptable?”


                        “That’s OK.”


                        “Why? During the previous seasonal winds, we applied control. At that time, weren’t you already in full command here as Administrator?”


                        “I was here, and I’d already taken over command, but it’s going to be different from now on.”


                        “Would you explain why?”


                        “I thought I’d already explained, in general. Well, it doesn’t matter. Any detailed directive has to be explained... In the past it was best to do as you said. That was the ‘war preparatory stance’ – in other words, Class II. However, that is over now. The Federation is putting a new governing method into practice, and this world has been redesignated as Class III, Type B... I said all this before, right?”


                        “Yes, I heard that one hundred and eight hours ago,” said SQ1 expressionlessly. “Still, as I said at that time, I don’t understand the use of the word Class.”


                        “I know. That’s because it’s a new concept, which accompanied the change in the policy of colonial government. Of course it is not in your memory banks. Well, this idea was around long ago, too, but I imagine it was only made into official policy recently. At any rate, a detailed explanation has arrived, and if you’ll go to the library and read it you’ll understand.”


                        “I will do so.”


                        “If you read it, you’ll understand easily – but to sum it up, a ‘Class III, Type B’ designation means allowing the world concerned to revert to its original condition as much as possible, to maintain a policy of minimum interference. That’s why we won’t easily interfere any more. If the winds blow, let them blow. If the flowers fly, let them. OK?”


                        The robot didn’t answer immediately. After a pause, it said “After I verify the documents, I will follow your directive.”


                        After it replied, SQ1 turned its four wheels and left the room.


                        A bitter smile floated on Kurobe’s face as he watched it leave.


                        Just like a stubborn old man.


                        Of course, that didn’t mean the robot was stupid or bad. For the express purpose of controlling possible excesses by Administrators, the robots were intentionally built to be unable to accept new orders without going through the proper procedures, and they were unable to erase previous orders. An application of the principle of inertia. That’s why SQ1 was so irritatingly methodical, even to Kurobe. And it was true that there was a real danger in having the robots changing the color of government policies like a chameleon at the Administrator’s whim. It would cause misunderstanding and friction between the native inhabitants and the various local bureaus... And Kurobe was unable to deny that such Administrators did currently exist, or that they might appear in the future. Still, there was no mistake that the many Administrators installed on various worlds were not happy about their robots’ sulky attitudes.


                        Even so, you couldn’t say the robots were a loss to the Administrators, or only a nuisance. Quite the opposite. As groups of specialists on the various worlds, the robots were an absolute necessity for government. They functioned as superb teams, always fulfilling their duties. The only problem was how well that new type of government, the Administrator system, could utilize those abilities.


                        It was night when he finished his work.


                        He had to retire to his room and rest. He just couldn’t seem to adjust to this twenty-hour day, but it felt like he had finally grasped the tempo instead of being pushed along by it.


                        As he stood, the blinking of the desk light caught his eye.


                        A communication was coming in.


                        He picked it up.


                        It was a message from the commander of the patrol that covered System 925 – including this world, Sarulunin – asking to come and meet with him in the near future. The patrol base for System 925 was located on the next planet out, and if he chose to come here he could do so easily. This commander, though, was a little young, and put work first, and so always gave a few days notice before his visits.


                        Kurobe fed the communication into his “Handle” box. Now the robots would go to meet him, and make all the preparations.


                        He entered the small elevator in the Administrator’s Office, and rode down.


                        I wonder what in the world the commander wants to talk about, he thought. After meeting the commander one or two times, he knew he wasn’t likely to come for an enjoyable chat. He was an officer acutely conscious of his responsibilities, and all too aware of his own authority. If he took the trouble to come and meet him, he must really have something to talk about.


                        Was he going to come pressing another demand?


                        Naturally, it was legally acceptable to ignore those demands. There was absolutely no need for the Administrator of this world, who held total responsibility, to worry about the demands of a mere system commander. No need, but... Behind the patrol were the Federation Forces, and regardless of the reason, it would be awkward to get in the way of the Forces.


                        That commander hadn’t forgotten that all colonial worlds had been under military rule. He didn’t think very much of this strange new breed of “Administrators” that had stolen all of the rights of government... That wasn’t quite accurate. The Administrators had been cultivated under Federation policy, and represented only a change in authority; but to the Forces, that seemed to mean theft.


                        And also – Kurobe shrugged his shoulders in the cramped elevator and gave a laugh – wasn’t that commander forgetting that even if Sarulunin was put under military rule again, he wasn’t likely to be the person with the authority? Leaving aside such things as environment, the presence or absence of native inhabitants, colonial conditions and whatever natural resources might be available, the number of planets still under Forces control, as before, was much greater than the few that had been transferred to the Administrators... In any case, the person at the top, or the person who had been at the top, was the Sector Administrator, or another of the same rank. Here on Sarulunin, Kalgeist had been in command before Kurobe took over, the same Kalgeist who was so famous for his merciless conquest of new systems. That was the standard, and it wasn’t likely that a mere commander-class officer with maybe a dozen ships would ever get his chance. In spite of that, for the commander to brazenly come here and make demands in the guise of opinion made Kurobe think that he just had too much faith in his own position as commander... Or, maybe, had he been installed as the successor to Kalgeist?


                        The elevator door opened.


                        A metallic clink. With that, the defense of the Administrator shifted over from LQ3’s command to LQ4’s.


                        A section of the floor rose to become a seat, and he sat down. The corridor began to move him towards his room.


                        There seemed to be no irregularity in the construction of the robots. Even when there was, it was fixed before he even noticed, 99.99% of the time – fixed for the Administrator.


                        No, not just the Administrator. For the supreme authority of this world, whoever it might be. Before he had come, all this had been for Kalgeist.


                        Kalgeist.


                        Kurobe recalled the last night he had talked with Kalgeist.


                        “No doubt about it: the worlds – or rather, the very essence of the Federation – is changing,” muttered Kalgeist, taking a sip from his glass.


                        Yet there was almost no dissatisfaction or anger in his voice as he said it. That was probably because Kalgeist himself could retire before it damaged his glorious reputation, and because he could claim, truthfully, that the cause of his withdrawal was the passage of time, not a cowardly urge for self-preservation. In that sense, to Kurobe, he looked like not Cortez or Patton, but rather an old acclaimed lion, or a noble wolf... Still, sometimes he growled unexpectedly, surprising Kurobe, baring his fangs through the fabric of age. “Well, I guess it’s only reasonable it should change.”


                        The liquor undoubtedly helped, but Kalgeist’s eyes were looking at something very far away.


                        “The Federation has expanded and expanded for a hundred years. There was no choice but to continue. The Federation tried to destroy its internal contradictions and congestion by turning them to the outside. It evolved always thinking: ‘What new planet will be discovered? How can we make it valuable to us? Can we expect a colony there?’ It was the roughest, fastest way; but people such as myself understand that there was no better way.”


                        He took a breath.


                        “But that’s reached its limit now. New generations succeed old, and that rash expansionist policy has at last come to an end. Terrans have come to think that they are always the nobility on new planets, and then they lose their surprise, their self-consciousness. Mm... the third, the fourth colonial worlds still had their uniqueness when the thirtieth and fortieth were added, but now we don’t want that. Not now, when the settlers have come to be vocal about the system citizenship they claim.”


                        Unusually talkative. The drink must have loosened his tongue, and the talking made him more drunk.


                        “The total is zero.”


                        Kalgeist nodded deeply two or three times. “The effect of the limitation on the conquest of new worlds is zero, no, even negative. When the age of starflight technology reached the point where it changed from revolutionary principles to minor improvements, the expansion fell a notch – and the age when the center of the sphere was more important than the periphery arrived. Humanity is now shut in a greenhouse. The policy of the Federation has undergone a massive reversal.”


                        Kalgeist fell silent.


                        Kurobe waited patiently. He had heard all this before, and he didn’t want to listen to it again. Still, it would be against etiquette, even a little arrogant, to show he was not listening (especially to someone like Kalgeist). It was a ritual to him.


                        “Human-ruled space is changing in character.”


                        He said exactly what Kurobe had expected.


                        “Like the entrance on the scene of you Administrators. They say you’re the political rulers for single worlds. I guess since the Federation raised you for that purpose it’s not just a joke, but... People like me can’t help but think the Administrator system is a little suspicious.”


                        “I think I understand what you want to say.”


                        “Understand? Listen to you! This isn’t something you understand! You either feel it or you don’t. It’s not anything you can understand.” Kalgeist grew angry for an instant, then it cleared away.


                        “You people say governing is a science. Maybe it’s just parroting hollow-headed Federation thinking, but anyway, you believe it. Governing is a finely-calculated technique, you say. But if you give us our say, it’s different. Government, at the very basic level, is what marks the relationship between the killers and the killed, the rulers and the ruled. It’s no comedy. It’s something that was born on a tightrope between overcome and be overcome. Bluntly, what the person at the top needs is not compromise or intelligence. It’s the ability to decide, and the authority to enforce the decision. Understand?! Hell, you’re not likely to understand, are you?”


                        “...” Kurobe only smiled, slightly.


                        “I’ve killed a goodly number of natives on a good many worlds.” Maybe Kurobe’s lack of response added heat to the fire, but Kalgeist raised his voice a notch.


                        “I felt it was a pity about the dead. No, maybe I didn’t. To us, they are always the enemy. Well, in any case, you people who castigate our actions are indulgent, lukewarm over-conceited idiots. War and conquest are that way. Looking on those who have to do the dirty work as heretics, saying you didn’t dirty your hands, isn’t that a little vain? Right? And even those actions, if you take the long view, were for the peace and well-being of the majority of those natives. Without conquest, how can you hope to guide those lesser than us? Eventually, you have to admit we did what we had to do.”


                        Kurobe thought that it was the same one-sided theory as always.


                        Kurobe could certainly have put up a serious attempt at a counter-theory to Kalgeist’s; but even if he did, Kalgeist would certainly not change his thinking, and Kurobe had too much awareness of his own duty to violate this ritual. It was better to listen silently now, and then put his own ideas into effect when he became Administrator. Of course, Kalgeist was a hero of the past. It was polite and formal to bury him now, without getting involved.


                        “Still, that philosophy is no longer accepted in the Federation, it seems,” said Kalgeist, gazing into space. “They’re all good people who don’t even stop to consider what it is that supports them. Those oh-so-good souls at the Federation have forgotten, and now solve nothing by force, saying that military rule causes more damage to our own side. And they say it seriously. That this is an era when things will be taken over by a consummately trained elite.”


                        He trained his eyes on Kurobe and continued.


                        “Under special circumstances, I guess even this is possible. In nice stable lukewarm water, I guess they can govern through you. Reduce the story down to just planetary government, and maybe the era has come where you can handle it with the power of your robots. But what’ll you do when things get dangerous? And I’ll tell you now, rebellions have always cropped up in human history, and leaders always emerge. You are just a filler, a link, until that happens. Mm... You are only useful if order, the present order, is maintained. For example, if a race as advanced as humans appeared and came attacking, you would be useless. Just because it hasn’t happened yet, you can’t say it won’t happen. And what’ll you do then? All of your government by rules, your techniques, will disappear. You will vanish from history, yielding your seats to people with real government, real power. Not that it matters a damn to me whether you vanish or whatever... But if the transfer of power doesn’t go smoothly, then what? Maybe humanity will vanish. Have you considered that? And if you haven’t, isn’t that gambling with the fate of humanity without insurance? You intelligentsia should have thought of it, I know. But you are the systematized elite, and the systematized elite can never forget that it is impossible to overcome your own era.”


                        That’s true, though Kurobe. And as he thought it, he realized that the Administrator was needed at this point in time. Even as a temporary relief measure, Administrators could help the Federation.


                        “Well,” said Kalgeist, getting up unsteadily, “Sorry to get it all off my chest like that. Me, I’ve seen many worlds where there’s never been a human footprint before. I’ve met animals, beings, totally different from humanity in their thinking processes. That’s why I can imagine a hell of a lot more ‘what ifs’ than you cloistered Administrators.”


                        He gave a low laugh.


                        “Also, one of my grandsons is studying to be your junior – he’s learning ‘Administratoring’. When he told me, I was furious and ordered him to stop, but of course he didn’t listen, and entered the Academy anyway. It looks like I told you what I wanted to tell him. Anyway... Think of it that way, will you?”


                        Kalgeist raised a hand vaguely, and left the room. Kurobe thought he was just a little too drunk for a man who had to attend another party that night.


                        Trying to suppress and erase that scene reborn in memory, he slid into his private room. Wryly, he thought to himself that military men were like that... The patrol commander, too, was the same – no, the same breed but on a lower level.


                        But that recollection held such a true-to-life quality he was stunned. Probably, the reality of meals without company, of taking over all that solitary investigation and probing, of sleeping alone – again, repeated again and again – had made it feel so. Directing machines, surrounded by machines, wouldn’t he become as stale and old as the machines themselves? Exactly because he was an Administrator, supported by all those techniques, didn’t he lack the ability to adapt? Weren’t the Administrators, in other words, nothing more than an evanescent elite? Maybe Kalgeist had been right... He couldn’t help but feel that way.


                        And, within it all, what was he? What did he possess? When his precious techniques couldn’t cope, when the effect of his manipulations vanished, what could he be?


                        Wasn’t he nothing?


                        Something... Was there at least something he whole-heartedly pursued?


                        Nothing.


                        Suddenly, he thought he wanted something. He thought he wanted something to drive him that would bubble up from inside himself, not orders and skills imparted to the Administrator from the outside. And if it was possible, to meld it with his sense of purpose as an Administrator. It had to exist somewhere...


                        He was asking for the impossible. It couldn’t be.


                        He pressed his lips together, and reached his arm out to press the switch for dinner.


                        Had it started then? Had his inclination towards that something started then, in that instant?


                        When he looked up, the sky was past sunset. The countless flowers drifted across the heavens in a flow of colored phosphorescence.


                        He looked away from the flowers and gave a heavy sigh.


                        Or, maybe...










                                         – 3 –


                         “Will you be going out?” asked LQ3’s wall-mount contact, after he pushed the button.


                        “Mmm. Regular observation,” he answered, but of course the door didn’t open immediately. The restless robots were communicating. LQ3 would report to SQ1, which would, after verifying the situation, pass an order down to the attendant chief, SQ2, which would, in turn, order SQQ4 and SQQ5 to make preparations while ordering LQ2’s group to take over protection of the Administrator. After all of these preparations were finished, and SQ1 had checked with all sections, including observation, and received acknowledgement, it would finally order SQ3 to open to door.


                        In less than a minute, the door opened, and Kurobe slid down the chute to the ground.


                        The car was waiting.


                        Not just one. In all, there were eight cars, but only three of them were usable by humans: the Administrator’s car, which also carried SQ2, and the two spares. The others were attendants.


                        In the lead was the LQQ7 combat tank, then the LQQ8 protective screen unit, and the communications/scout LQQ9 unit. The light assault types LQX3 and LQX4 surrounded his vehicle. Even this was a small-scale force, as this was a regularly scheduled observation. For a trip to the main centers of Sarulunin, over forty ground and air vehicles were fielded, under the direct control of SQ1.


                        When he settled down in his seat in the central car, he gave the order.


                        “Pass between the east cluster of colonies, to the First Research Station, and then return. However, immediately after my discussion at the research station, we must return by a roundabout route.”


                        The order was verified by SQ2, and then transferred to LQ2, and to the entire fleet. Immediately the armored column began to advance over the rough rocky terrain at forty kilometers per hour.


                        In all probability, people like Kalgeist never thought in detail about the formation of these robots. To Kalgeist and his ilk, if robots were merely useful, that was enough. They would say that even though robots, which were capable of communicating by means impossible for humans, were useful, they had no inherent meaning. But Kurobe, as a trained professional, knew their capabilities, and knew how they would react to particular commands. It seemed like a minor thing, but it was a highly important difference.


                        When he met the patrol commander, it was always that way.


                        He recalled the times they had spoken together, and a deprecating smile came to his lips.


                        Kurobe already knew well that the patrol commander for System 925 was stubborn behind all hope.


                        He wasn’t entirely happy about him – Thompson – coming here when the system was classified as Class III, Type B, and seeing if that amateur (yes, he used that word) Administrator was loyally following the instructions of the Federation.


                        Thompson had been here twice before this seasonal wind. And three times before that... And before that... And Kurobe knew what he would say, and he always repeated the same things.


                        Administrator, what are you doing? Is this what you call government? Leaving this planet wild and uncontrolled is totally irresponsible. Isn’t this a colony world for the use of humanity? Why doesn’t the Federation say something? Anything?... The only planet in this system with a breathable atmosphere is Sarulunin. Why should we have to squeeze air and water out of rocks for our patrol base? And leave this planet to those vegetable monsters? How about if you gave us a nice big area here to patrol? We like hunting here. Shooting vegetables is good for our psychological hygiene. You should be able to give us at least that. After all, the military took this planet in the first place... And so on. And so on.


                        He never ended, just on and on. In response, Kurobe merely refused: sometimes politely, and sometimes as a hard-and-fast rule. Thompson would grow exasperated, and show only his desire to take what he wanted. The men and robots he brought with him learned from that. If there was ever trouble on this frontier world from the outside, it was probable he would be in deep trouble because of military pressure.


                        The only thing guaranteeing Kurobe’s safety was the robots – or rather, his knowledge of robots. He knew exactly what situations the robots would judge as dangerous, exactly how to make them activate their recording devices, exactly what orders to give to avoid being falsely accused of something or killed, and would always take the appropriate counter-measures in advance.


                        At some point in time, that patrol commander would notice Kurobe’s weak point, his distrust of Administrators would flare up, and he would light a fire under Kurobe by filing a complaint with his superiors. Still, until now Kurobe had showed no gap in his defenses, and he didn’t plan to show any. He wasn’t such a fool as to be tripped up by anyone like Thompson. He had the knowledge and the training to avoid it.


                        ...He frowned.


                        That’s strange, he thought.


                        That I should be telling myself how superior I am... I must have some serious doubts, he thought to himself. Am I so scared of something that I use self-intoxication to avoid looking it in the face?


                        The car caravan passed over the rocky belt where the Administration Complex was located, and continued to the level plain.


                        There was no ocean – at least, not as he thought of the word. Although Sarulunin had shallow lakes, it didn’t have anything that could be called an ocean – and, as a result, except for the scattered low outcrops, the entire planet was a giant marsh. The work of erosion had almost finished, and the next mountain-building movement wouldn’t start for some time. Though there would be one in the future, the result of the past and present stress investigation showed that this was a much more tranquil planet than Terra.


                        Which was certainly not to say that this was a silent, sleeping world. Even though it was marshy, under its sun’s fierce rays it could become parched, and as Sarulunin’s axial tilt was almost thirty degrees, the seasonal changes were violent. The ground released all its moisture around the tropics, and for the first few days of autumn the seasonal winds blew.


                        Another thing that gave a special character to this world was its incredibly fecund vegetation. Maybe because it was so close to a K-type star and received more radiation than Terra, there were many strange varieties of plants, all locked in a fierce competition for survival. No animals were here, but the explanation did not lie in the fact that there was no ocean to spawn them. Rather, it seemed that they had been rendered extinct by the plants, which had developed in remarkable forms and could move like animals themselves.


                        Kurobe’s car moved forward on caterpillar tracks, crushing the grass, spraying water and mud. That grass wasn’t sentient, and would only become the food of higher organisms, so there was no problem here at all.


                        If a brownish or yellowish growth appeared, though, the caravan would carefully steer around it. Those were the low-level Sarulunia: individuals separated from their home-trees, meandering about to gather grass as fodder and to defend their home-tree’s territory. They didn’t have all that much intelligence, but some of them were unbelievably ferocious, and when they saw something moving they would rustle their tendrils like a centipede and come rushing to the attack.


                        That wasn’t all they had to be careful of. The column led by SQ2 also avoided the muddy pools in the marsh that were visible here and there. One meter of water or mud was no problem for the physical capabilities of the cars, but living in that muddy water were the larvae of the low- and high-level Sarulunia, and if they accidentally trod on one, they would be instantly attacked.


                        Still, this was slightly north of the sub-tropic zone, so the cars could at least move. In the tropical rain forests it was pandemonium, never knowing what monsters would appear; of course, unarmored humans were helpless, and even carefully designed robots sometimes failed to return.


                        After about two hours of traveling through the continuous rain, they reached an area where the vegetation became increasingly ordered, and grouped together by type.


                        Large dark-green hemispheres began to be visible here and there. The area around each dome was bare earth. Pink, bumpy, drum-shaped beings one hundred to one hundred fifty centimeters in height were working around or entering and leaving the dwelling, on their dozen or so roots that served as tentacles. This was a colony of true Sarulunia.


                        “It’s a little tough, because it’s only been a little over ten years since the planet was discovered. Well, I guess it’s a good chance to show off your ability as an Administrator... In any case, the local researchers will tell you the details about the Sarulunia. I’ll just cover the basic facts now.”


                        The upper-grade information officer of the Ministry of Space Development sat down in front of Kurobe, who was looking at the 3D photographs, and began his explanation. “I think you’ve already noticed, but the name ‘Sarulunia’ was freely adapted by us from the name of the planet. It’s not what they call themselves. They have their own names... It’s just not possible for us to duplicate their pronunciation, as it’s made by releasing water vapor. Plus which, since we’ve got the translator machine, it’s enough to merely call them Sarulunia.”


                        “Please continue,” pressed Kurobe.


                        “Mm. Well, anyway, these Sarulunia are now almost definitely the highest form of intelligent life on Sarulunin. The low-level Sarulunin are at about level two or three.”


                        “About the same as dogs or horses. And how about the level of the higher types – the true Sarulunia?”


                        “That’s very unclear,” said the information officer, shrugging his shoulders. “The researchers say it varies. Whether that’s caused by lack of co-operation from the true Sarulunia, or by large differences between individuals, is unclear... In any case, they are not the livestock-class animals that Kalgeist and his underlings thought. Kalgeist made that assessment offhand, just from the structure of their domes. At the same time, though, there is the example of the jellyfish of Ross 780 II, the main inhabitants of Kirielin, which were found to have a high capacity for thought and communication even without any material culture... Well, our methods of evaluating different cultures aren’t very developed yet, so it should be left to the Administrator on the spot.”


                        “... I see.”


                        “I thought you would. Anyway, to continue, reproduction on Sarulunin is a little different than ours.” The officer took out some material. “If you look at this illustration, you’ll understand in general, but I’ll go over it. Usually, the spermatozoa larvae, looking something like an insect, fertilizes the flower by crawling in. Of course, the flowers are different depending on the type of Sarulunia. The true Sarulunia are very odd, and actually fly on the seasonal winds, but the basic pattern is the same.”


                        “Mmm...”


                        “This fertilization is undoubtedly for the protection of the species. Before birth, it is common to divide many times. In other words: one egg, many offspring; so that over one hundred individuals can be born with the same genetic pattern. These burrow into the wet ground, and after they grow and develop locomotive tendrils, they set off on their journey, devouring low-level plants as they go.”


                        “Journey?”


                        “Journey. The details aren’t understood very well yet, but they have the urge to return to the home colony that spawned them, even when young, on an instinctual level. Of course, they have many natural enemies, so over half of them are eaten on the way. Even so, they keep trying. At the same time, they strive to replace their numbers through sexless reproduction. Really, a heart-rending tale.”


                        “And then?”


                        “The young ones have very little time. They must reach their colony before the onset of the next dry season. If they don’t make it, their skin loses its moisture, changes substance, and their tendrils become articulated. They become, in other words, spermatozoa larvae. Failed young Sarulunia become larva, and produce sperm, and are fated to find a flower the next mating season, or the one after that.”


                        He tapped the photograph Kurobe was holding. “Most of them become larvae. Only the most fortunate make the trip in time.”


                        “...”


                        “Among the ones that can’t return in time, there are some that try to enter other colonies by force. With the low-level Sarulunia, there is no problem, but not so with the true Sarulunia. The colony’s individuals make decisions about whether to admit a young one or not based on the arrival rate and the genetic pattern of that particular young.”


                        He breathed out heavily.


                        “The ones that are allowed in, and the ones that are admitted naturally because they started there, connect their tendrils to the home-tree, and grow for two or three seasons as a part of it. That’s when they become true Sarulunia.”


                        “...”


                        “While they are developing as parts of the home-tree, they are endowed with intelligence, knowledge, and senses by it. At the proper time, they separate, and move on their own... as motile Sarulunia.”


                        The information officer leaned back in his chair, and laced his hands together. “As for the Sarulunia motiles – well, maybe they shouldn’t be called plants. They come and go as they like, and eat lesser vegetation. They receive their water from the home-tree, but other than that, they live by plunder. They live off other vegetation. They can assimilate the material they collect, and have very well developed sense organs. And, because they have no chlorophyll for photosynthesis, they breathe – and very powerfully.”


                        “A highly distinctive life form.”


                        “Exactly. If you go by previous experience. To us, it’s easier to understand silicon-based life forms. Still, there are scholars who say it’s much easier if you just think of the motile Sarulunia as an alternate bud form.”


                        “A bud.”


                        “Yes. Most of those motiles flower after one year – in other words, after four Terran months. Only the true Sarulunia are different. The true Sarulunia can willfully control their flowering, put it off until the next season. And not just the next season. They can keep putting it off, from season to season. They can remain motiles as long as they will it. In this way, they have succeeded in co-operatively raising the intelligence level of their colonies. Just as the reason we humans first used both hands and made fire is unclear, it’s not clear why they did this, but it is the decisive difference between low-level and true Sarulunia. To the latter, return to the home-tree and abandonment of all movement rapidly leads to loss of intelligence. You could say that the true Sarulunia emerged as this world’s prime contender by extending their intelligent period.”


                        “Wait a minute,” Kurobe broke in. “Doesn’t that mean that the true Sarulunia are gradually becoming extinct? The number of motiles increases while the number of flowers decreases.”


                        The information officer smiled. “No. No, not quite... It’s not that way. The reason is that all of the motiles opt to become flowers after a number of seasons.”


                        He stared into space, and spoke in a murmur. “Of course, I’ve never seen the real thing... The flowers floating on the seasonal winds. I’ve seen a 3D movie of it, once... It had grandeur. A glorious, splendid sight...”


                        He had seen that flight now three times.


                        He understood what the information officer couldn’t, and had experienced here what he could never have experienced back on Terra.


                        For example, although the true Sarulunia were the representative intelligent life form on this world, they were also very weak in the higher latitudes, and their territory was continuously invaded by the ferocious plants from the tropical rain forests... He knew now that they weren’t just collections of home-trees, but rather that they were divided into central and branch home-trees, and that each domain was determined by the number of motiles and their power and so on, and that at times there was intense war... Since he had come here, he had been taught by the researchers, had seen with his own eyes, and had finally understood.


                        And he had also had the strange experience of exchanging thoughts with the true Sarulunia through the translator every time he came. To express the thoughts of Terrans to the native inhabitants, to protect human living areas and their spheres of action, to build a firm system of inter-cooperation by supplying services to each other, it was necessary. But... He couldn’t say that communication was an unequivocal success, as there were many obstacles.


                        One obstacle was the attitude of the robots. One of the orders hammered into the robots long ago was that they should be the ones to talk to the native inhabitants. When Kurobe talked to the true Sarulunia directly, they interfered. Even when he did talk, it was always with a robot-selected “educated colony”. The robots believed it was totally unacceptable for him to converse with wild native inhabitants. Of course Kurobe, knowing the robots as well as he did, outwitted them several times and had spoken to wild native inhabitants, but each time he did the robots came running after him in a frenzy, and complained to him afterwards interminably. They believed that the “wild” ones were extremely dangerous.


                        The robots thought that way because of Kalgeist and his troops. To those who swore allegiance to the uniform, it was a standard conqueror’s procedure to continue trying to injure those that maintained resistance, disguising their aggression as protection. Just as the Federation had used the same method elsewhere, so it was used here. In other words, some were called “educated”, while the others were hunted by the soldiers. They tried to justify their position by claiming that since it was impossible to tell where young educated Sarulunia would emerge, they had to use force to prevent them from being eaten by the “wild” ones, and went so far as to enlist the aid of the robots and to control the landing zones of the flowers that danced up into the sky. The robots, programmed to believe human input, easily believed that the “wild” native inhabitants held some deep grudge against their human conquerors. He wondered how the true Sarulunia, faced with this, felt about humans, and he wasn’t sure. To him – the Administrator trying to build a new inter-relationship of trust on this world – it was a major failure, an obstacle standing in his way.


                        The thing that bothered Kurobe the most was that communication itself was so difficult. Even with the translator device utilizing the highest human technology, and the help of the researchers, he could still only express the roughest of ideas. And, for exactly that reason, the researchers all too quickly adopted Kalgeist’s bias, and came to look down on the native inhabitants. Still, the plan he was hoping to complete, even if he had the total support of the research community, was still a dream beyond a dream of mutual understanding.


                        Of course, he couldn’t stop trying. He was in the position of having to prove the superiority of the Administrator system to them all. He had to embody the new system of planetary government, the new order that was absolutely impossible under military rule.


                        He was the Administrator.


                        He knew without having to repeat those facts again in his head, he already knew. He knew in his heart exactly what he must do.


                        But... Why was he so tired? What was this heaviness that was dragging him down? What was this forlornness that held him, like he was wandering through space?


                        The rain, as ever, continued to fall, yellow-green. The caravan of Kurobe and his robots proceeded ahead, colonies of true Sarulunia hidden in the rain to all sides. The flight of the flowers had just ended, so there were no flowers visible, and there were motiles standing in a line on the cleared ground. They were there to indicate respect for the Administrator. No mistake, the robots posted in this area had announced his visit in defiance of his command.


                        Silly – he chided himself. This was the most “educated” area, which was why the First Research Station had been established here; but he couldn’t help but feel a sense of revulsion at seeing the slavishness of those motiles every time he came.


                        Where the colonies began to thin out, they came to the research station.


                        “Thank you for coming; it must have been a terrible trip. We’ve been waiting for you. In fact, we have something we’d like you to see. Come in, come in.”


                        Station Chief Spencer, who had come out to meet him with his colleagues, greeted him ebulliently. Spencer had the same habit of putting his own research before everything else, as did all researchers who had put in years and years on strange worlds. They were all single, of course... Or at least, they had no legal mates under the laws of their home worlds. Despite his jovial exterior, deep in his heart he resented people who could cast even a little influence over his research. When it came time to justify his capacity and achievements, he was prepared to do almost anything – ever since Kurobe had noticed the real character of the white-haired Station Chief, he had cautioned himself not to respond too strongly to the other’s jollity.


                        “Well, this ends the scheduled tour.” After the usual whirlwind tour and some research reports, Spencer began talking animatedly. “As I mentioned before, I have an interesting scene I’d like you to see. I’ve made the preparations, if you’d care to go?”


                        “Go? Where to?”


                        “To Amilla Sector...” Spencer started to say, then corrected himself. “Excuse me, to be precise Sector 8-13. As you know, we’ve fallen into the habit of giving these areas the names of things we love... Amilla is the largest city of the world where I was born. Well, in any case, let’s go to the north: it’s only about two kilometers.”


                        “And what will we see?”


                        “An arbitration,” nodded Spencer. “There’s a fight between two colonies, and we’ve been asked to arbitrate. I’m not totally unaware of modern governing policy... There’ve been similar things up until now, and we have to respond to their request. Anyway, I accepted, and I figured that since the Administrator hadn’t seen such a thing yet, it’d be better to invite you along when you came today.”


                        An arbitration.


                        Kurobe narrowed his eyes slightly. That was something outsiders shouldn’t touch. Still, in response to a request from the native inhabitants, they couldn’t help but go. Still... He felt a fierce anger at those true Sarulunia that had created this problem, which should have dealt with it themselves. He couldn’t stand those who borrowed the hand of authority to solve problems they should have solved on their own.


                        Even so, it was a very attractive invitation to him – never having seen anything like it before. He decided to go with Spencer.


                        Spencer had ordered his own car to stand by, but SQ2 opposed that. SQ2 had judged that any car designed for the Station Chief’s use couldn’t guarantee the safety of the Administrator. Spencer yielded the car to SQ2’s order, but insisted on riding with the Administrator, so as a result he and the Administrator rode with SQ2, while the other two researchers followed in the Station Chief’s car. SQ7 came behind them, installed in a roving LQQY-type scout car. It was a strange lineup, but depending on the destination and the co-ordinates, the sphere of the robots’ responsibilities overlapped, yielding this kind of half-baked job.


                        “Only two days ago, a representative of one of the colonies came to ask for assistance,” said Spencer as the car began to move. “When I talked to them in the past, I told them to come by any time they had something to talk about. It was a real pain getting across the location of the research station, too. Still, the educated ones seem to understand somehow, and come every so often.”


                        The rain had stopped. The cars, bouncing wildly, continued on.


                        “This is Amilla Sector.”


                        It wasn’t a very ordered place, and had thick woods. After asking Kurobe’s permission, Spencer ordered the car to stop. “Well, let’s get out.”


                        Of course, SQ2 had a warning for them. “Be careful. This location is the border between educated and wild native inhabitants.”


                        The two of them got down into the mud. The two other researchers, equipment in hand, were approaching quickly.


                        “It’s over there,” called one of them.


                        They left the line of cars, and walked forty or fifty meters through the trees and grass. SQ2, who couldn’t move unsupported over the mud, was still warning something, but neither SQ7 nor one of the robot cars was dispatched to provide cover for him, perhaps because Kurobe and the others were wearing complete outside-use protective clothing.


                        The personnel in front stopped, and everyone else followed suit.


                        It was a very large colony, with a huge open space around it, and much vegetation, but the vegetation was spaced regularly every fifteen or sixteen meters.


                        There were three motiles moving around the colony, and, as if noticing the humans, many more came from the hemisphere, emerging headfirst. In all, about ten. The one advancing towards them was a slightly dark-colored motile, about one hundred eighty centimeters tall, its cluster of legs about as thick as a human arm, and its jelly-like vision organs looking every which way.


                        “That’s the representative that came two days ago,” whispered Spencer.


                        The motile stopped about a meter from the humans, and stood there hissing. They communicated by releasing water vapor through a hole in the top of their heads, controlling the expansion and contraction of the outlet.


                        By that time, one of the researchers had set down the translating device, and had finished adjusting it.


                        The device immediately began translating the motile’s speech.


                        “Arrival happy. Under blessing of weather... Every day’s water... The dawn that leads to flowers: true Sarulunia... Humans have come...”


                        From experience, it seemed that only the fixed phrases of greeting remained unclear, but still it seemed to be a very formal greeting.


                        “We troubled. We are educated XXXX [meaning unclear] number one clan... Very settled, big colony... We... Very close to us... Wild ones... Humans exterminate wild ones... Want humans to exterminate... XXXX is strong... Repayments are many.”


                        “It seems to be saying about the same as what it said before,” said Spencer, cutting the microphone. “They are enlightened, and very powerful. However, they can’t expand because of the adjacent colony. If we exterminate it for them, they’ll help us... And they said the adjacent colony is wild.”


                        Kurobe nodded, but he didn’t quite see the point. According to what he had heard from Spencer, the usual battles of the true Sarulunia consisted of destroying each others’ orchards and gardens, making the enemy motiles unable to ensure their own food supply, and forcing the others’ home-tree to begin stretching towards other areas. Eventually, the original home tree would separate from the living areas, and rot, and the land would change hands. In more violent cases, the motiles would clash directly, ripping each other’s skins, whipping their tendrils, kicking with their legs... In any case, the usual winner was the bigger, stronger colony.


                        But this... Wasn’t this just the opposite?


                        “I wonder why?” Kurobe murmured unconsciously. “Why did they ask for our help?”


                        To Spencer, though, who had seen many similar things here, it was not such a major question.


                        “The bigger colony doesn’t always win, you know. Maybe there aren’t many cases of that happening, but there are at least a few examples. How about asking for yourself?” he said, handing over the microphone.


                        Kurobe took it automatically, and spoke after thinking a moment.


                        “Why did you request our judgment?”


                        When that had been translated and spoken by the translating device, the motiles stirred a little. There was an immediate answer.


                        The gist of it was that humans had conquered this world, so it was obvious that they should judge. It was their responsibility to abide by human decisions. They had been educated, so they knew the truth. They wanted to see how the humans would judge a fight between an educated colony and a wild one.


                        Kurobe grew tense. In that answer was a clear suggestion. The suggestion that humans should judge what was clearly in their own interest... This motile was much more cunning than he had expected.


                        Q: Why don’t you take care of it by yourselves?


                        A: It is for the conquerors to punish. It is not for us to punish those who disobey by ourselves. We must leave it to your judgment.


                        Kurobe groaned. He was becoming progressively less and less happy. They were trying to use humans. By following the rules closely, they were trying to take the prize. Spencer, who now felt like a real ruler, didn’t notice.


                        He tried to call out the inhabitants of the adjacent, apparently deserted, colony. However much he called through the translator, though, there was no response.


                        He asked the motiles near him to bring out the others.


                        They refused. They said the other colony was wild, and therefore had no reason to respond.


                        “Well then, it’s simple. We just judge them in absentia. In any case, since this side is communicating with us...”


                        Kurobe cut off what Spencer what trying to say.


                        “That’s not possible. We must hear both sides.”


                        Spencer fell silent, with a twisted smile on his lips.


                        Kurobe told the motiles to call out the others, by whatever means necessary. Without that, he said, this judgment may not go as you desire.


                        They reacted again, agitated. They looked like they wanted to say something, but at last moved off in a group.


                        They advanced on the smaller colony. Whipping their tendrils, trampling the vegetation, shredding the leaves...


                        They were attacking.


                        They were taking his words literally and beginning to attack. Having received permission to call out the enemy, they were using the chance to batter their way in.


                        I have to make them stop, thought Kurobe, when something came bounding out of the empty colony. In the blink of an eye, one, then two, of the attacking motiles were hit and fell.


                        It was – an inhabitant of the smaller colony. It moved so fast it almost didn’t seem to be a true Sarulunia, but it was clearly a motile.


                        The group from the larger colony fell back awkwardly. When the other confirmed that they had returned to their own property, it turned, and made to re-enter the smaller colony.


                        “Wait,” called Kurobe, agitated.


                        The motile stopped, and turned its vision organs his way.


                        Kurobe felt his breathing stop for a second or two. He had never felt a true Sarulunia to be beautiful before, but if it were possible for one of them to be beautiful, then the one standing in front of him was truly so. The skin was a faint pink, looking almost semi-transparent, and the vision organs were clear. It was a figure produced by a master sculptor... It was different from human ideals of beauty, but he had to admit it was stunning. Even though he had seen many motiles, he had never felt this way before.


                        Well, it was what it was. He fired off his question.


                        “I want to hear your side of this.”


                        The pale pink motile said nothing in reply.


                        “We were requested to pass judgment by these motiles. They want us to remove you.”


                        The other gave its first response. “You are not true Sarulunia.”


                        “I am the Administrator. I am the person entrusted with governing this world. When requested, I must pass judgment.”


                        “This is how all the wild ones are,” interjected the representative from the larger colony.


                        “Do not interfere,” said the pale-pink motile. “This is a problem of the true Sarulunia.”


                        “But you should be able to let us hear your defense. We wish to solve this problem.”


                        “You are human.”


                        “Yes.”


                        “Here is our place. We were here before. Humans came and hurt us. Our home-tree, eliminated. Our branch trees, eliminated, but for this single one. I am the only motile. Afterwards, XXXX clan came,” the pink being said. “Human interference not needed. We will solve this with XXXX clan alone.”


                        “...”


                        “XXXX clan is strong. And numerous. Our garden was destroyed. I collect food from the surrounding XXXX [meaning unclear – untended areas?]. I will not surrender. I will not move, even if destroyed by XXXX clan. Do not interfere.”


                        “...” Kurobe fell silent. He was moved. To Kurobe, who had seen many motiles trying to use human power, or trying to prove their slavishness, this was a fresh surprise. True, he had only met wild native inhabitants twice. Still, he hadn’t thought they were very much different from the educated ones. Compared to them, this motile was...


                        Or maybe this was the standard for the wild ones. Maybe this was the true spirit of all the Sarulunia. Weren’t all the true Sarulunia proud like this before being spoiled? As he thought that, he felt his anger towards those stationed here boil up.


                        And it might turn out all right, he said to himself. Maybe it would be possible to fulfill his command – to have humans and native inhabitants living together in true sympathy – by learning to understand the real spirit of these true Sarulunia they called “wild”.


                        “Both sides have come out; it looks like you’ll finally have to give some sort of a judgment,” said Spencer, watching Kurobe’s expression.


                        “Wait,” said Kurobe. Before he himself knew it, he had assumed the position of this world’s supreme authority, and it showed in his attitude. “There will be no judgment. It is cancelled.”


                        “Cancelled? But... “


                        “There will be no such things as judgments from now on. We must strictly obey the established governmental policy. Native quarrels shall be handled by the native inhabitants – that is the heart of the Federation’s Class III, Type B directive.”


                        “What the hell...?” shouted Spencer. “Do you govern by whim? Is that what an Administrator is? Are you...”


                        He shut his mouth. Spencer knew that to go any further wouldn’t help.


                        When he saw the Station Chief’s reaction, Kurobe felt as if he had been dashed with cold water.


                        What are you doing? This isn’t what you learned. Is this what an Administrator is? Isn’t this just like being a dictator?


                        Reflecting, he softened his voice, and clapped Spencer on the shoulder.


                        “Well, let’s do it this way. I’m only the representative of Federation policy... I can only do as they say.”


                        Spencer didn’t even try to smile. “I understand. Will you tell that to the natives there?”


                        Kurobe knew he had made a new enemy. He knew it, but there was nothing he could do about it right away. After some time passed, he would have to soften that enmity. Later.


                        Expressionless, he lifted the microphone, and made his pronouncement.


                        “There will be no judgment. There will be no more judgments from today. This will be formally announced later, but from now on all problems between true Sarulunia shall be decided by the true Sarulunia themselves.”


                        The translator sounded, and the motiles from the big colony seemed stupefied. They probably wanted to complain, but couldn’t find the courage.


                        The pale pink motile from the small colony stood there, rigid. It said nothing.


                        Watching it, Kurobe felt all the pent-up self-reproach come rising at once from his heart. What have we humans done to these native inhabitants? Though it wasn’t he that had spoiled them, killed them, he must bear responsibility for it as a human... That was what he felt, and, unconsciously, he gave voice to his thoughts.


                        “We will not hunt your kind a second time. We will not discriminate between wild and educated. I promise this as an Administrator.”


                        While that was being translated, he felt a warmth spread throughout his mind. It wasn’t his own feeling. It was being sent from the outside.


                        What? What was it?


                        He lifted his eyes, and saw that the pale-pink motile had all its vision sensors pointed at him.


                        Was that...? Was it...?


                        Was it coming from that motile?


                        He stared at the other.


                        Again, the vision organs... But this time, a warmth with a bit of humor diffused throughout his being. It was an image of gratitude, and a smile.


                        Was this real?


                        Was that motile really sending it?


                        He felt the other confirm it. Without movement, or sound, or any expression, he knew the other’s feeling. It was like the silent communication that two close friends use to understand each other without words.


                        “Well, let’s go on back. What are you doing, just standing there?”


                        Urged by Spencer, he returned to himself.


                        Right.


                        The cross-flow he had felt just now had only been between the pale-pink motile and himself. Spencer and the others had felt nothing.


                        He couldn’t believe it. The fact that the true Sarulunia should have that ability... No, not that. It was harder to believe that he himself had come to feel what he had. He hadn’t felt this type of heart-to-heart communication for years. He could only remember it from long ago, before he underwent training as an Administrator – no, even before that, back in his childhood. Something he had forgotten, had lost, had given up as never to be returned to again: that was what he couldn’t believe.


                        Was it then?


                        Was that when his inclination towards something had obtained real substance? Did he catch what he had been chasing, then?


                        Yes.


                        Watching the flowers flowing across the light-blue phosphorescent sky, he smiled a tired smile.


                        He couldn’t deny it.


                        But... As a result, what had happened in his heart? Where was he running? Intending to be an Administrator, where had he become lost?


                        He knew.


                        He turned his face away from the window of the Administrator’s Office. Now... Now that he was watching his eighth flight since he had been installed as Administrator... Those flowers were too gorgeous, too empty, too heavy on his heart. It still fascinated him, as it always did: that was a fact. It was an addictive view that he couldn’t run away from however much he tried.


                        Naturally, his impression of that stupendous view changed each time he saw it. The time he had just been assigned here... The second time... And then...


                        Didn’t that in itself mean that he had come to change?


                        What had happened?


                        How was he decaying?


                        I know... he repeated the words again, deep inside.


                        Then, hadn’t he once again grasped the hopes he had discarded years ago?


                        He believed that he had seen the real Sarulunia in that motile – the motile he had come to call Amilla, borrowing the name of the sector – and he thought to search out the character of the true Sarulunia through contact with that motile.


                        What he had come to remember, though, was not Amilla as a true Sarulunia, but the individual who was Amilla.


                        And as a result, he was shaking. Hadn’t he come to doubt his worthiness for the title of Administrator?


                        He lifted his face again, and looked at the flowers filling the night sky. More than five minutes later, he pressed the “opaque” button, and left.










                                         – 4 –


                        It was already time to sleep, but he didn’t feel like activating the sleep device. He wanted to think some more.


                        He had found opportunities, and had gone to see that motile, Amilla. He explained to Spencer, and to SQ2, who always came along, that he wanted to see the outcome of the fight; but he really wanted to know the character of the true Sarulunia through Amilla, and search out the future paths for government.


                        No.


                        It wasn’t that, really. Wasn’t he really searching for that contact of two minds – by what means he didn’t know – that communion? He was that uneasy, that hungry. He had gradually come to realize that, but his stubbornness kept insisting No, it’s not that, that’s not your goal.


                        That’s why he never tried to tell Spencer about the experience of that flow. If he did, Spencer would try to repeat the experiment again, with no regard for Amilla at all. He couldn’t stand that, and most of all he couldn’t bear having the shame in his heart exposed.


                        That was when his infidelity to the post of Administrator really began. Amilla fought well against the XXXX clan’s colony. It was hard to believe that a colony with only a single inhabitant could do so much, but it was a fact. Amilla covered its lack in numbers with unflagging effort and incredible speed, not allowing the neighboring larger colony’s strategies to succeed. Not only that, but it even struck back, finally forcing them to withdraw from their home-tree. When that happened, Spencer’s attention shifted to other events at other colonies, and Kurobe had to go to Amilla’s colony alone. He quibbled with the robots, outwitted them, sometimes gave them direct orders, and managed to visit Amilla regularly.


                        He continued to see Amilla to fulfill his duty as Administrator. At any rate, that was the reason he started... He thought so, sitting on his bed.


                        When had he been forced to accept that it wasn’t true any more? At the time of the fourth flight? The fifth flight? He couldn’t say with confidence. What he could say was that, even now, what he had been searching for was that flow of hearts. The feeling that he had experienced during that first flow just couldn’t be duplicated. He found out much later that it never occurred when Spencer was present. Subsequently, he only felt a slight touch when he was exhausted from using the translator to manage their tortuous communications, and he had to be content with that for the day. It was a help that Amilla almost always came out when he called, regardless of the time.


                        Still...


                        Since he had started going alone, the frequency of his visits had increased dramatically. No matter how poorly the translator worked, if he received some emotion, then their mutual understanding became much easier. If that became easier, then they could converse with even more smoothness.


                        And so, like peeling back the layers of an onion, many things became clearer to him.


                        He came to understand that the true Sarulunia were intelligent beings – at least equal to humans, occasionally superior. That function awakened and began to develop in the young ones that returned to their colonies and became part of their home-trees. The home-tree itself had no intelligence, but seemed to act as a sort of data bank for the entire colony, and the young ones were raised there, learning the basics until they could safely become motiles. Once they became motiles, the home tree was no longer a school, but more like a home, which provided a supply of water.


                        Amilla revealed that the motiles of a single colony could communicate among themselves by telepathy. Their method of communicating by releasing water vapor, which had been thought to be their usual method of conversation, was in fact analogous to human gesturing, and was used to communicate with motiles from other colonies.


                        These kinds of facts, which humans were probably learning for the first time, and which would probably make Spencer’s eyes bulge if he heard them, Kurobe disclosed to no-one. Since he had first felt that flow, and kept it a secret, there had been no choice but to continue to hide it, keeping that knowledge within himself. If he spoke, someone would sniff out his sense of solitude, of alienation, and it would result in a condemnation of all Administrators. If that happened, the special privilege he enjoyed in talking to Amilla would vanish as well.


                        He was talking about many things with Amilla, exchanging opinions about many concepts.


                        “You’re not sleeping yet?” LQ4’s contact suddenly interrupted.


                        “Not yet... A little longer.”


                        “If you stay up too long, you will suffer from lack of sleep, and it will result in ill health. When do you intend to sleep?”


                        “Later. Won’t you leave me alone, please?”


                        “Yes, sir. In that case, I will activate the sleep inducer in thirty minutes. Is that acceptable?”


                        “Mm.”


                        What was he hungering for? Was it only the hope that something sweet would become his? He thought he wanted to extricate himself from this. At any rate, he believed that he had rid himself of these desires through his harsh training. Still... Human beings always had hopes at the bottom of their hearts, and those hopes would rise at the slightest opportunity, tormenting.


                        Well, that was how it was.


                        But why didn’t Amilla feel the same?


                        “Even though I understand what you say, I can’t feel the same way,” said Amilla. “You have given many reasons for why you humans interfere with us, but I still can’t comprehend it.”


                        “I have come to protect this world, to return it as much as possible to its original state. I would like to build trust between our two races.”


                        “If that’s true, then why don’t you just leave us alone? If nobody came, wouldn’t that be enough? Your expansion of power is different from ours. We only fight to protect our source of life. If you don’t need to do anything here, then there should be no need to conquer.”


                         “...”


                         “And is mutual trust really possible? Between us it truly exists, but it happened by accident – because when I thanked you for your decision, I unwittingly used telepathy. If other motiles had been present at my colony, it would have been impossible. And you were in a state where you could receive it... That’s why. Our relationship is not based on the exchange of material things, but is a spiritual one. Can this be fostered between groups of humans and groups of true Sarulunia?”


                        “It’s different. That’s...” but he couldn’t complete it. By Amilla’s way of thinking, it was just impossible to comprehend.


                        “You mentioned supplying human weaponry, but that’s meaningless,” said Amilla. “Why should I need weapons? To fight, we have legs and tendrils. It would be no victory to win by using something other than your own self. And to think of destroying entire colonies... The variety of the colonies can change from the genetic pattern of a single flower. If a colony vanishes, then doesn’t that much potential vanish from the race?”


                        “Why do you flower?” he asked. “If you stay as motiles, you can have a long life as intelligent beings... Why do you throw that away, and become a wind-blown flower?”


                        “Desire,” Amilla answered. “Your sleep? Or death? It’s probably close to that. When you feel your usefulness to the colony has ended, then you choose to flower.”


                        Amilla indicated its elders, which had returned to the home tree after many seasons as motiles, and begun to grow as soft flowers.


                        “These flowers are not really my colony. As the last of my colony, I had to let in young ones from other colonies. They end their cycles as motiles, fly as flowers, again return as young ones, and will be raised here as members of this colony. Until I see that happen, I have a purpose in living. If I lose my purpose...”


                        “You will flower?”


                        “Yes. I will rest.”


                        “If you flower, your consciousness will vanish, correct?”


                        “The I of now will vanish.”


                        “And you don’t feel anything about vanishing?” asked Kurobe, trying to understand.


                        “Nothing,” answered Amilla, with a satisfied expression.


                        At some point, LQ4 must have activated the sleep inducer. He noticed himself drifting off to sleep. Amilla... he thought. In another one or two seasons... Sometime, Amilla would flower. When that happened, he would lose the one he talked to.


                        Where would Amilla fly? Where would Amilla land? ...and what kind of spermatozoa larva would enter...? He bit his lip. He mustn’t think about that disgusting, instinct-driven larva crawling into Amilla’s flowered body. When he thought of that, he felt he would go crazy.


                        Jealousy? Maybe it was jealousy.


                        When had he begun to think of Amilla as a human woman?


                        Amilla was not a woman. Amilla was a plant.


                        He groaned, thinking of that plant.


                        Was what he was trying to do really possible? Was the government by mutual understanding that he and his fellow Administrators were trying to create really obtainable?


                        No. Could a real interrelationship grow between two different species? Could plants with different ways of thinking, different living environments, really grow together with humans?


                        Or... Kurobe suddenly thought: wasn’t this Administrator system, this system that tried to create the ideal government by giving consideration to other races, wasn’t it merely another decision made solely by humans? Wasn’t such a thing impossible, thinking only of government? Or... Maybe Kalgeist and that patrol chief, and the others... Don’t they all rule for many different reasons?


                        He grew too sleepy, and couldn’t think anymore.


                        Tomorrow, I’ll think.


                        Tomorrow would be a heavy day.


                        And the next day...


                        He slept. The flight of the flowers continued in his dreams, and Amilla was among those flowers. He was merely watching. He could never become a flower, and Amilla could never, ever, become a human being...


                        LQ4 turned out the lights – for the Administrator.