AFTERWORD: ON TAINARON
                          MATTHEW CHENEY


Q: Since Tainaron is one of your only books to be translated into English,
English-language readers can’t really know how it fits in to your work as a
whole. Is Tainaron typical of your writing in its style and subject matter, or
is it different from your other work?


A: In some respects Tainaron is typical, in others unique. For instance I
always build my novels from short chapters (the letters in Tainaron), which
often can be read as independent short prose. And I have written about the
life of insects and animals (artificial life, too) both before and after
Tainaron.


Yet, Tainaron is perhaps the work nearest to me. My whole philosophy of
life is in there. But as I have grown older, my voice is no longer so gentle
and lyrical. Tainaron is at the same time allegorical and realistic (in its
entomological details). My later works like Pereat Mundus: A Sort-Of
Novel, and Unelmakuolema (“Dreamdeath”) are satires about our own
shattering, absurd world.
                                                               —Leena Krohn,
                                        in an interview with Matthew Cheney,
                                                        SF Site, February 2005


Great tomes have been written by writers whose single, impossible
ambition was to capture all of life. And then there are writers of short
stories like Anton Chekhov or Jorge Luis Borges or Grace Paley, writers
who capture the essence of life with only a few pages, a few perfect details,
a few words that sink deeper into our imaginations than hundreds of pages
by other writers—and we discover that literature does not need to be
voluminous to catch the substance of life’s infinity. The great babbling blurt
of a doorstopping novel may miss more life than the intense whisper of a
fable.


More and more, I find myself attracted to innovative writing that isn’t afraid
to leave great gaps within itself, that doesn’t try to stick the world onto a
postage stamp, but rather puts a postage stamp in the middle of the world’s
unfathomable complexities. Leena Krohn’s short “sort-of novel” Tainaron
is a book that I prefer to various massive novels of erudition and insight, a
book that feels like it expands within my consciousness rather than a book I
have to squeeze into the cluttered space of my cranium.


All of which is just to say that Leena Krohn has, with a slim volume of
thirty letters written from an imaginary city of insects, given us a lens of
words through which to consider reality, a microscope to reveal yearning
and wonder, a telescope to look for what it means to be human, a window
and a mirror and an eye other than our own. Sometimes it is best to use
fantasy to imagine our way back to where we actually are.


Here, let me read to you:


  Some of [the citizens of Tainaron] carry their innermost apartment, a
  one-roomed flat which fits their dimensions like a glove, with them
  everywhere. But this has the drawback that one cannot always make
  sense of what they say, for it echoes and reverberates from the walls of
  their private apartments. It is also vexing to me that I cannot always
  tell where the dwelling ends and its inhabitant begins.
      Poor things, who never come among people without this innermost
  shield. It reflects the terrible vulnerability of their lives. Their little
  home may be made of the most diverse ingredients: grains of sand,
  bark, straw, clay, leaves . . . . But it protects them better than others are
  protected by armour, from every direction, and it is a direct
  continuation of themselves, much more so than clothes are to you or
  me. But if it is taken away from them, they die—perhaps simply of
  shame, perhaps because their skins are too soft for the outside air, or
  because they do not have skin at all.


   It’s a beautiful, sad image, is it not? People who carry home so close to
themselves that their voices are muffled and they can die from exposure,
from having the armor of where they live torn away so that they are nakedly
alienated from the place where they belong. But Krohn doesn’t stop there,
no, she continues and lets the imagery expand beyond any simple metaphor:


  Who would be so cruel as to tear from them this last shield! Oh, I have
  heard that such things, too, happen here in Tainaron; I have been
  startled by the moans of death-throes in the deeps of the night.
     But I have my own theory concerning why this happens. For, you
  see, those who constantly drag their houses with them remain
  unknown to other people. One can gain only a brief glimpse of them, if
  that; they are always in hiding.


    The idea grows roots and tentacles, particularly if you remember that the
narrator, the writer of the letters, is a human who has come to visit the city,
that the letters are written to the human home far across the sea, and so far
there has been no response.
    We learn through this fantasy as much about the narrator as about the
city, and the two entities entwine, they grow and reflect from each other,
until the city is an extension of the narrator’s psyche and the narrator is one
piece of the city’s mysterious mind.


But we’re not done yet, because there is one more paragraph to this
particular letter, and it adds depth to something already so deep as to be
nearly unfathomable:


  And then there are those who cannot bear such a situation, those who
  wish to see everything face to face and to reveal, open, show the whole
  world the nakedness of things . . . . Now and then the temptation
  becomes overwhelming to them, and they split open the house of some
  poor unfortunate. I awake to shrieking, sigh and turn over—and soon
  fall asleep again.


   If I were in an even more grandiloquent mood than I already am, I would
say that that paragraph contains all the contradictions, glories, and evils of
humanity. Instead, I will simply say that all I have quoted here is but one
example of what makes Leena Krohn such a truly great writer. She uses
fantastic events, situations, and images, yes, but not merely for the
pleasures inherent in oddity. Tainaron resonates because its words fuse
imagination with many possible meanings, allowing the book a weight far
beyond its few pages, its thirty short tales.
   In one of the letters, the narrator tells of a trip with a guide named
Longhorn to an observation tower on a hill above Tainaron. As they look
out over the whole of the city, Longhorn says, "Tainaron is not a place, as
you perhaps think. It is an event which no one measures. It is no use anyone
trying to make maps. It would be a waste of time and effort. Do you
understand now?"
   Tainaron the book cannot be mapped any more than Tainaron the city
could be, because with each reading it changes, and with each reader. It is
not a single story, but rather a conglomeration of stories whose borders
blend into each other, whose words echo other words, until the book
becomes a harmony in the reader’s mind, a suggestion of even more stories
than the ones told on the pages.
   Tainaron ends with impending hibernation, a stasis that promises
regeneration. The reader who can resist returning to the first page and
starting all over again is stronger than I, because within the words that
create Leena Krohn’s imaginary city, rereading is its own rebirth.


Q: You said that your whole philosophy of life is in Tainaron. The
philosophy that I most noticed while reading was that of the cyclical nature
of life—the continuing cycles of birth, death, and regeneration. Is that what
you meant, or were you thinking of something else as your philosophy?


A: I wrote in Tribar that logically impossible constructions lie at the bottom
of our society. They consist of material and immaterial things, true and not
true, rational and irrational. I call them “tribars” (the term is physicist Roger
Penrose’s). I talk about “false” connections, where realities of different
levels join into some kind of hybrid phenomena.
    Fiction and so-called reality live in an odd symbiosis. Our civilization is
not based on any rational fundament. Let’s think about money, for instance.
We think it as something material, but alas! —what else is as speculative, as
illusionistic, as liable to metamorphoses as money? What is “real” money?
Not banknotes or coins, which are only images of money, not even digital
conditions. Money is a phantom phenomenon; it’s about our speculations of
the future, our dreams of security. They are real, or “real” (you choose).
    Tainaron is a distant place that reminds us of every place in the world in
its plasticity, strangeness, frightfulness. But its properties are the properties
of our own heart.


This essay has been adapted and revised from a review of Tainaron originally published by SF Site in
2005: www.sfsite.com/03b/ta196.htm and an interview with Leena Krohn at SF Site in February
2005: www.sfsite.com/03b/lk196.htm


                                        OceanofPDF.com
                ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Leena Krohn (1947–) is one of the most respected Finnish writers of her
generation. In her large body of work for adults and children, which
includes novels, short stories, poems, essays and radio plays, Krohn deals
with issues related to the boundary between reality and illusion, artificial
intelligence, and issues of morality and conscience. She has been awarded
the prestigious Finlandia Award for her novel Matemaattisia olioita tai
jaettuja unia(Mathematical Beings, or Shared Dreams), the Young Aleksis
Kivi Prize for Pereat Mundus and her short novel Tainaron: Mail From
Another City was nominated for a World Fantasy Award, an International
Horror Guild Award and the Finlandia Award. In addition to English, her
work has been translated into Estonian, Hungarian, Swedish, Russian,
Japanese, Latvian, French and Norwegian. In 2013, Cheeky Frawg will
publish Dona Quixote: The Leena Krohn Omnibus, featuring newly
translated stories, novels, essays on Krohn’s work, and a complete
bibliography. More information on Krohn is available on her author
website, www.kaapeli.fi/krohn




                       Other Books by the Author


English
  Dona Quixote and Other Writing (Carcanet, 1995)
  Pereat Mundus (Gazelle Distribution Trade, 2009)


Finnish
   Vihreä vallankumous (1970)
   Tyttö joka kasvoi ja muita kertomuksia (1973)
   Viimeinen kesävieras. Kertomuksia ihmisten ilmoilta (1974)
   Ihmisen vaatteissa. Kertomus kaupungilta (1976)
Kertomuksia (1976)
Suomalainen Mignon. Runoja ja lauluja vuosilta 1965-1977 (1977)
Näkki. Kertomus vesirajasta (1979)
Metsänpeitto. Kertomus kadonneista (1980)
Galleria (1982)
Donna Quijote ja muita kaupunkilaisia. Muotokuva (1983)
Sydänpuu (1984)
Tainaron. Postia toisesta kaupungista (1985)
Oofirin kultaa (1987)
Rapina ja muita papereita (1989)
Umbra. Silmäys paradoksien arkistoon (1990)
Matemaattisia olioita tai jaettuja unia (1992)
Todistajan katse (1992)
Salaisuuksia (1992)
Tribar (1993)
Älä lue tätä kirjaa (1994)
Ettei etäisyys ikävöisi (1995)
Kynä ja kone (1996)
Pereat mundus, Romaani, eräänlainen (, 1998)
Sfinksi vai robotti. Filosofinen kuvakirja kaikenikäisille (1999)
Mitä puut tekevät elokuussa (2000)
Datura tai harha jonka jokainen näkee (,2001)
3 sokeaa miestä ja 1 näkevä (2003)
Unelmakuolema (2004)
Mehiläispaviljonki (2006)
Kotini on Riioraa (2008)
                          OceanofPDF.com
OceanofPDF.com