THE TWENTY-THIRD LETTER


I really must say that many of the inhabitants of Tainaron have the most
extraordinary habits, at least to the eyes of one who has come from so far
away. Quite close to here, in the same block, lives a gentleman, tall and
thin, who is in the habit of hanging upside-down from his balcony for a
number of hours every day. This strange position does not seem to interest
passers-by in the least, but when I passed under him for the first time I was
so startled that I immediately thought of running for help. I thought, you
see, that there had been an accident and that the man was clinging to the
wrought-iron decorations of the balcony with his feet. Longhorn, who was
beside me, remarked coolly that he had selected his pose through his own
free choice and that I would be wise not to interfere so eagerly in other
people’s lives. I admit that I was offended by his remark, but recently I have
begun meekly to take his advice.
    I see the man most days, and whenever I walk under his balcony I greet
him, even though he never responds. In fact, I think he is either asleep or
meditating. In his chosen state he is so limp and floating that he recalls a
garment that a washerwoman has hung out to dry. With incomparable calm
he suspends his head above the busy street without stirring, even when the
fire brigade drives under him, sirens wailing. He always looks the same: a
bright, even gaudy, green, so that one can make him out from the broad
steps of the bank at the end of the state like a living leaf against a red brick
wall . . .
    Does he dream as he hangs there, sometimes suspended from just one
limb, but nevertheless apparently completely relaxed? I believe that is
exactly how it is. I know from my own experience the difference between
the immobility of fear and the immobility of the hunter, but this is neither. I
believe he dreams, dreams swiftly, passionately and incessantly, dreams
with death-defying intensity without sacrificing even a jot of consciousness
to the struggles of everyday waking life. I believe he must have long ago
become convinced that all action is unnecessary, or even dangerous.
    There are days when I think that this gentleman is admirable and his way
of spending moments of his life most enviable. On such days I, too, would
like to concentrate on sweet communion with my private visions as
headlong and with the same kind of mental calm as he. But do not imagine
that it would be possible. In the evenings, even if I shut my window tightly,
turn out my lamp and fill my ears with cotton-wool, this city teems before
me, still more restless and colourful than in full daylight. Then I should like
to get up and got to see whether the green gentleman is still hanging head-
first from his balcony. I should like to climb up there myself and position
my limbs just like his. Then, with my blood flooding my head, all of
Tainaron would begin to dissolve into the mists and I, too, should begin a
dream, endless and leaf-green . . .
    But if, in the morning, my nocturnal experiences return to mind, if I have
idled through agonising labyrinths, I know that I would not wish to spend
my life in the city of dreams. If, on such a morning, I pass under the
Dangler’s balcony, I am more inclined to pity him than to admire him.
    Then I know that in my dreams I can never capture the same sun-glow
and that the air that I breathe can never, there, flow as freshly in my cells,
and I can never see so sharply or so far; and I believe once more that what
is true can be seen by everyone, everyone.
                               OceanofPDF.com
             THE GUARDIAN OF THE
                 ODDFELLOWS