THE SIXTH LETTER


In Tainaron, many things are different from at home. The first things that
occur to me are eyes. For with many of the people here, you see, they grow
so large that they take up as much as one third of their faces. Whether that
makes their sight more accurate, I do not know, but I presume they see their
surroundings to some extent differently from us. And, moreover, their
organs of sight are made up of countless cones, and in the sunlight their
lens-surfaces glitter like rainbows. At first I was troubled when I had to
converse with such a person, for I could never be sure whether he was
looking at me or past me. It no longer worries me. It is true that there are
also people whose eyes are as small as points, but then there are many of
them, in the forehead, at the ends of the antennae, even on the back.
    Like their eyes, Tainaronians may have a number of pairs of hands and
feet, too, but it does not seem to me that they run any faster than we do, or
get more done in their lives. Some of them, it is true, have a jumping fork
under their bellies, which they can, whenever necessary, release like a lever
and thus hurl themselves forward, sometimes by dozens of metres.
    The hustling forest of antennae and pedipalpi in the streets at rush-hour
is certainly an extraordinary sight for people like us, but most difficult of all
is to accustom oneself to a certain other phenomenon that marks the life of
the majority of the inhabitants here in the city. This phenomenon is
metamorphosis; and for me, at least, it is so strange, to my very marrow,
that even to think about it makes me feel uncomfortable. For, you see, the
people here live two or many consecutive lives, which may have nothing in
common, although one follows from the last in a way that is
incomprehensible to me.
    We, too, change, but gradually. We are used to a certain continuity, and
most of us have a character that remains more or less constant. It is different
here. It remains a mystery to me what the real connection is between two
consecutive lives. How can a person who changes so completely still say he
is in any sense the same as before? How can he continue? How can he
remember?
    Here you can bump into a stranger, and he will come up to you like an
old acquaintance and begin to remember some past amusing coincidence
that you apparently experienced together. When you ask, ‘When?’, he
laughs and answers: ‘When I was someone else.’
    But perhaps you will never discover with whom you have the honour of
conversing, for they often change comprehensively and completely, both
their appearance and their way of life.
    There are also those who withdraw into total seclusion for as much as
seventeen years. They live in tiny rooms, no more than boxes; they do not
see anyone, do not go anywhere, and hardly eat. But whether they sleep or
wake there, they are continually changing and forsaking the form they had
before.
    Seventeen years! And when, finally, the seventeenth spring arrives, they
stop out of their hermit caves into full sunlight. And there begins their only
summer, for in the autumn they die; but all summer long they celebrate all
the more. What a life! Do you understand it?
    But sometimes I feel a little envious: to be able to curl up in a pupal cell
without hoping for dreams, knowing that one spring one will step before the
eyes of the world, new, refreshed, free from the past . . .
    Farewell once more; my head is heavy and I believe a thunderstorm is
brewing. I ponder the reasons why you do not reply, and there are many.
Are you dead? Have you moved? The city where you lived has perhaps
disappeared from the face of the earth? And can I trust the mail of Tainaron;
who knows on what back-garden compost-heap my letters are languishing?
Or you stand on your doormat turning my letter over in your hands; turning
it over and then putting it aside unopened, on top of the pile of newspapers
and advertisements that grows and grows in the dusty corner.
                                OceanofPDF.com
       BURNING ON THE MOUNTAIN