THE EIGHTEENTH LETTER


Today I have looked through my window at the work of the City Surveyor. I
have already watched him in another part of the city, fulfilling his
professional responsibilities, and now, this morning, he has reached our
street. He measures the lengths and widths of streets, the diameters of
squares and the heights of buildings. I do not know why he measures them,
but I suppose the information he produces is stored in an archive
somewhere and that interested parties can consult them there.
    His territory is rather large and he is very hard-working, but he has only
one measuring device: his own body. It is a long, green body, and he uses it
extremely skilfully; I have previously had the opportunity to admire such
agility only in the performances of acrobats. Sometimes his body forms a
large loop; the next moment it has stretched out again to a long, straight
stretch and he has covered quite a distance along the street. He also has no
trouble in climbing vertical brick walls, right up to the eaves, and he does
not seem to suffer from vertigo of any kind.
    As I came from the shop and took a short cut through the park, I saw the
Surveyor eating his lunch on a bench. On his head was the white cap worn
by city officials, decorated with spiral patterns. I asked if I might sit with
him for a moment, and he willingly made space.
    ‘Would you like some?’ he asked, opening his lunch box. But I had
already eaten, and refused, with thanks. There was something I wished to
ask him.
    ‘Do you find your work interesting?’ I asked, for something to say.
    ‘Extremely,’ he replied, munching his sandwich. Behind us, in the
playground, the children of Tainaron, screaming, were playing the games
played by all the children in the world: running away, being had, and then
exchanging prisoner for persecutor.
    ‘Have you been doing it for long?’
    ‘Ever since I reached my full height,’ the Surveyor replied, pouring a
steaming, sweet-smelling drink from his thermos flask into his cup.
    Bells rang out from the cathedral, the children left the playground and
disappeared into the shade of the trees. It was already almost noon, and the
siesta was beginning. I could not see any movement anywhere, and heard
only the booming of the bells. It felt as if life were standing still, resting and
reviving like the Surveyor.
    Through the incessant ringing, I heard his even voice: ‘My father did the
same work, and his father and his grandfather and his grandfather’s father.
A new City Surveyor is chosen from each generation; now it is I.’
    And he added something which I did not hear, for the power of the bells
swelled to numb the ears.
    I bent over toward him and his flat face neared my mouth. Now I could
hear what he said: ‘I am the measure of all things.’
    But he did not say it haughtily, merely stated it, brushing the crumbs
from his chest.
    ‘But this part of the city is old,’ I thought aloud. ‘Was it not surveyed
many generations ago? What could there be to measure here?’
    He looked at me in disbelief. ‘What is there to measure?’ he asked. ‘It
was a different time then. A different time, and different measuring devices.
I and my grandfather are not at all the same size, as you may have thought.’
    He took a large piece of fruit from his bag, sinking his many rows of
healthy teeth into it. I no longer knew what to say, and felt a fool.
    When the Surveyor had sucked the stem clean and dropped it into a
rubbish bin decorated with the city arms, he rose decisively and felt it his
duty to remark: ‘Back to work!’
    He, the measure of all things, hurried energetically to fulfil the demands
of his job, growing smaller and smaller on the park path, and a straight,
clear furrow was left in its raked sand. He went as official representatives of
the people go, or as those who know that everything has its measure, and
more—what and who he himself is.
    And, following the Surveyor’s example, time too moved on; a dry leaf
fell before me on to the dust and it was the first leaf of autumn. The season
had changed.
    The bells had stopped echoing, but the city radiated its own sound, like a
busy bumble-bee. The brightly coloured Ferris wheel of the Tainaron
funfair, which was motionless for a moment at midday, started to spin once
more. I saw it from the bench on which I was sitting, alone; it can be seen
down in the harbour and in all the squares and markets, so high has it been
set up, in the constant wind.
                              OceanofPDF.com
                     THE BYSTANDER