THE SEVENTH LETTER


Behind the hillock where the amusement park of Tainaron is built rises
another hillock, dim with distance. From time to time, at midnight
moments, I have seen a fire blazing on its highest peak, small but very
bright.
    How I loved to look at it once. I thought about campfires and guitars,
shared meals and hikers resting and telling stories after the exertions of the
road. But later I began to suspect that it was perhaps not, after all, a
campfire, but some kind of beacon, for it always lit so high up and it can be
seen so far away in every direction; particularly, however, down in the city
of Tainaron.
    Some days ago I happened to mention the fire on the mountain to
Longhorn, and I immediately felt embarrassed, for my question made his
face grow harsh and severe. I had hardly ever seen such an expression on
his calm face.
    ‘Do not look at it; it is not for you,’ he enjoined me quickly. ‘When the
time of the new moon comes, draw the curtains and go to sleep.’
    The time of the new moon . . . Longhorn was right. I had last seen the
fire about a month earlier, and that night there had been a new moon. The
earth had cast a long shadow, and perhaps it was for that reason that the fire
blazed so large and solitary. And had not two cycles of the moon passed
since the earlier blaze?
    Even though Longhorn had grown so uncommunicative-looking, I made
so bold as to ask: ‘Tell me: who lights those bonfires?’
    ‘They are no bonfires,’ he said, and his voice did not grow any milder.
‘They are not intended to delight the eye, and their ashes are not used for
baking root vegetables.’
    ‘What are they, then?’ I asked, and I realised my voice had dropped to a
whisper.
    ‘Burnt offerings, sacrifices. They are sacrifices,’ he replied.
    I felt I had known before I asked.
    ‘Who is sacrificed?’ I asked. In admiring the blaze, had I not noted a
light smell hovering over the city?
    ‘Why do you keep asking?’ Longhorn cried, growing angry. ‘They set
fire to themselves.’
    But I could not stop; I went on, stubbornly: ‘But who are they? What do
they want?’
    Longhorn had turned his back to me and was pretending to examine my
books. The conversation seemed repugnant in the extreme to him, and I was
ashamed of my own tactlessness. Nevertheless, I felt that if I could solve
the mystery of the fire I would also understand why some people chose
destruction as if it were a privilege.
    But Longhorn shrugged his back-armour wearily.
    ‘What do they want, you ask. They are sectarian delusions. To redeem
Tainaron, I suppose that is what they want. That the Tainaronians should
live differently from how they do. That they should wake up from their
sleep; that is what they say. Mad!’
    And he shook his fists at the mist-clad mountain that bowed over the
city. ‘How many innocent souls will they yet take with them to the pyre?’
    Yesterday it was new moon once more. Early in the evening, I had done
exactly as Longhorn had instructed me: I had drawn the curtains across my
windows. But after I had gone to bed I could not sleep, and it seemed to me
that a red colour was shining through the curtains.
    Then I got up, went on to the balcony and immediately saw the balefire,
high on the mountain in the darkness of the new moon. None of the lights
of Tainaron—not its neon colours, not the lights of its Ferris wheel—burned
as brightly as the fire on the mountain. There it blazed, attracting the gazes
of the city-dwellers as a lamp attracts moths. Even from miles away it was
dazzling, and made my face glow.
    Last night was calm, and the sacrifice burned evenly. It was a candle on
the table, the night’s focus and its terrible purifier. Who was he who was
burning with such a high and unwavering flame? What did he believe he
knew that no one in the valley of Tainaron knew, which was more than life,
more than his own boiling tears and his scalding eyes? Was it as clearly
visible to him as the fire on the mountain was to me? To me, lingering on
the balcony; to me, who could not take my eyes off the fire, was no
justification to him, no expiation, no comfort.
   And I had gazed on the blaze as if it were a midnight flower, rejoicing!
   No, as long as the sacrifice burned, I could not go to sleep, could not
concentrate on anything. I stood on the balcony until he, whoever he was,
had turned from fire into embers and from embers into ashes.
   Will there ever be a new moon when there is no need to light a fire high
on the hill?
                              OceanofPDF.com
THEIR INNUMERABLE DWELLINGS