THE NINETEENTH LETTER


This morning as I woke up, in bed, I was overcome by a prurient
restlessness whose reasons I could not immediately divine. For a long time I
sat on my bed and listened. Although it was already late in the morning, the
city was silent, as if not a single citizen had yet woken up, although it was a
weekday and an ordinary working week.
    I dressed myself in yesterday’s clothes and, without eating my breakfast,
went down to the street, seeking Longhorn’s company.
    But before I could open the front door a surprising sight opened up
through the round window of the stairwell: the pavement in front of the
building was full of backs, side by side, broad and narrow, long and sturdy;
but all were united by stillness, the same direction and position.
    All at once I thought of a picture which I had once seen, perhaps in a
book, perhaps in a museum; I cannot remember. Perhaps you too have seen
it? The crowd in the picture had a common object of interest, which was not
visible; it was outside the edge of the picture, perhaps in reality too. But
more than the invisible event and its observers, my attention was drawn to a
man in the background of the picture who was looking in the opposite
direction to all the others. Do you remember him too?
    When I then stepped out on to the outside step—and I can tell you that I
did it hesitantly, almost unwillingly—I can confirm that a fair number of
people were standing in front of the opposite block, too, but that there too
silence prevailed. I do not think I have yet mentioned that the boulevard on
which I now live runs from east to west. When, this morning, I eyed it from
my front door, it looked as if the entire city had gathered along this long,
wide street and had been standing there silently—that was my impression—
perhaps from the middle of the night onward. The din that, with such
numbers of people, generally rises like puffs of smoke, is impressive, but
the rage or joy of the crowd could not have dumbfounded me as completely
as its silence.
    Since autumn is already approaching here, the sun was hanging, at this
time in the morning, fairly low at the eastern end of the street, but as far as I
could see every single citizen was staring in the opposite direction, at the
point in the distance where the boulevard shrinks to a small yellow flower:
where the linden trees stand in their autumn glory.
    The street was empty. I have often examined its surface, skilfully
patterned in stone, but now, as it spread, deserted, before me, when not a
single walker was crossing it and no vehicle was rolling along it, I hardly
noticed its unique beauty. In the pure dawn of the new day the tramway
rails sparkled as if they were made of silver.
    Then it occurred to me that perhaps some national day was being
celebrated in the city, and that the boulevard was closed to traffic for a great
festival parade. It might be that we should soon see the prince himself—if
he is still alive—driving past us, perhaps acknowledging us with a slender
hand . . . Or were we expecting a state visit to the city? Would a procession
of closed carriages glide past us, taking noble guests to a luncheon
reception at the city hall?
    But I was soon forced to abandon such thoughts. For nothing about the
appearance of the Tainaronians suggested great festivities. There were no
bunches of flowers, no balloons or masks. Not a single child was blowing
the kind of whistle which, whining shrilly, unwinds from a roll to a long
staff, and no one was flying a miniature Tainaron flag, a white pennant
printed with a spiral (or perhaps a nautilus; I have never been quite sure
which).
    Yes, they went on standing silently, and the eastern sun infused the
strong heat of copper into their back-armour.
    Despite the disapproving glances which were cast at me, I pushed right
through to the front row and found myself balancing on a narrow kerbstone
of the pavement.
    Beside me stood a gleaming black shape that reminded me of a diver. I
knocked echoingly on his polished surface and said: ‘Excuse me, but please
would you tell me what day today is?’
    He glanced at me, disturbed, and after making the rapid and sullen reply,
‘The nineteenth,’ he turned back at once toward the west.
    I was none the wiser, but I had only myself to blame—the timing and
phrasing of my question had been badly chosen.
    Then, my dear, there was a sudden gust of wind, and the Tainaronians
suddenly began to crowd around me, so that I had to stand with one foot in
the gutter. That did not matter, since I had managed to secure a lookout spot
for myself. For something was now happening at the point where the
boulevard dived into a dusky tunnel under the linden trees. From that
direction, some kind of procession was approaching, something very long
and pale; but however much I screwed up my eyes I could not make out any
details.
    It progressed slowly, and our moments stretched with it, but inch by inch
it approached our building; and the better I could make it out, the more
astonished I was.
    What a parade it was! I could see no glittering carriages or brass bands.
Quite the reverse: as it approached, the silence deepened still further, for on
the broad boulevard of Tainaron silence combined with silence; the silence
of the procession merged with the stillness of the crowd. No flags or
streamers, no songs, shots or slogans. But neither did this procession have
any of the solemn brilliance of a funeral cortège; not a single flower or
wreath gave it colour, and there were no candle flames to flutter and smoke.
    When the head of the endlessly long ribbon, which took up almost the
entire width of the street, reached us, new battalions rolled forth far away
from under the trees. Battalions, I call them, but even today I still do not
know whether these were in any sense military. I shall now try to describe
to you what I saw before me this morning.
    The procession was so uniform that it recalled a snake, but in fact it was
made up of countless individuals. Its speed was leisurely, so that I had
plenty of time to examine the beginning, which broadened like a reptile’s
head and which—apparently like the entire procession—was covered by a
transparent, slightly shiny membrane, like an elastic cellophane bag. Inside
this membrane, in rows and fronts, marched small creatures; as far as I
could see from where I stood they were like grubs, almost colourless and
about as thick as my middle finger, but a little longer. I shuddered slightly
as I watched them as one shivers when one comes inside from the cold.
    The procession was made up of two or even three layers: those below
carried the surface layer, which moved more slowly than the lower layer
along a living carpet. I think what happened was that when those on top
reached the head of the procession, they joined the bottom layer and, in
turn, carried the others. It was impossible to estimate the number of
members of the procession, but I should imagine that it was a question of
millions rather than hundreds of thousands of individuals.
    As I gazed at the torrent that surged before me, I remembered that a few
nights previously I had dreamed a dream in which this same street had
become a river. Now I was, of course, tempted to see it as a prophetic
dream, although I do not habitually do that.
    I tell you, I would like to understand the nature of the silence with which
the city greeted the march-past of this mass. Was it respect? fear? menace?
Now, when I remember our morning, I am inclined to think that it included
all those emotions, plus something else, which I shall never understand, for
I am in the end a stranger here.
    I—like the others who stood around me—saw at the same time that a
small figure had appeared in the middle of the roadway, some kind of
weevil, which stared dispiritedly at the approaching flattish serpent’s head.
There was nothing that was open to interpretation about its motionlessness:
it was pure terror and catalepsy. The great head, which glistened unctuously
in the sun, by now shining from high above, and which was made up—as I
have already said—of hundreds of smaller heads, drew ineluctably nearer to
the point on the cobblestones where the poor creature stood. At that
petrified moment it did not even occur to me that I could have dashed into
the roadway and dragged the creature to safety. For my part, I was
convinced that the weevil would become food for that living rope; or, if not,
that it would at least be an unwilling part of that strange procession.
    But what happened was this: when the slowly undulating river reached
the creature—which looked as if it was benumbed into a hypnosis-like state
—its head split in two and left a space for the weevil without even brushing
its unbudging form.
    There was a sigh—it was unanimous—and the front part of the snake
merged once more, but in the middle of the broad flow the little creature
stood like an island, while the masses that seethed around it flowed,
glistening, onward.
    I do not know whether you will find this description strange. Have you
ever, on your travels, encountered anything comparable? You have told me
so little about the time when we did not yet know each other . . .
    For my part, I am still bewildered by my morning experience. I do not
know how long I stood on the spot, one foot on the pavement, the other in
the gutter, as new battalions, divisions, regiments, rolled past us. I should
like to say, too, that (with the exception of the case of the weevil) nothing
about the procession suggested that anyone in it might have seen or noticed
us, that we, the citizens of Tainaron (I am, after all, in a sense one of them)
existed in any way for them, let alone that this great march was organised
with us in mind.
    If you were to ask, I would answer that I do not know. No, I really have
not been able to find out what it was and why it went through Tainaron,
where it came from and whether it had a destination. It could be that it was
searching for something; it could be that it was fleeing something. If the
others know something, if you receive any information about this matter,
then tell me; do not hide anything!
    When the tail of the procession, so thin that its tip was formed of just a
few individuals—and they themselves were unusually slender and
transparent—had finally slipped out of sight beyond the square where the
boulevard terminates to the east, the crowds dispersed incredibly quickly. I
looked around me and stood there, alone on the kerbstone, and the sun was
at its highest. Everything bustled around me as before; the shops opened
again and vehicles rolled both eastward and westward. Some dashed to
banks and offices and secret assignations and others to meetings or to
prepare the day’s dinner. But in the middle of the street—as far as the eye
could see, in either direction—ran a moist, slimy trail.
    This afternoon, when I walked across the boulevard, I could no longer
see it. It had dried up and as covered in the same sand and dust that dances
before winter in each of the streets of Tainaron.
                                OceanofPDF.com
         KING MILINDA’S QUESTION