THE FIFTH LETTER


I have not told you that I am already living at my second address here in
Tainaron. There were some difficulties with my first apartment, so vague
that I have not written about them earlier, but at the same time serious
enough to force me to move.
    For my first week I lived in a northern suburb, in a building which must
once have been plastered in pale green, but had since fallen badly into
decay. The plaster had split off in great flakes, and the spaces they left
behind them brought to mind faces and patterns seen long ago. At first,
nevertheless, I liked both the house and the apartment a great deal: a room
and small kitchen on the first floor, with a window opening on to a short,
peaceful street.
    Then, one night, I woke up. It was perhaps my third or fourth night. My
upstairs neighbours were making a noise, and it was this which had woken
me. Someone was moving a heavy piece of furniture—that is what it
sounded like, at least—dragging it back and forth across the floor above my
ceiling. I looked at the clock: it was a little past one. For some time I lay
awake, waiting for the noise to end, but when the din went on I got up,
angry and tired, to look for something with which to knock on the ceiling. I
could not find anything; I had not yet bought even a broom for the
apartment.
    I opened the door that led to the stairway and listened: it seemed to me
that the whole house must have woken up. But the noise was much fainter
in the stairwell, and no one else had got up to wonder what it was. The calm
light of the street-lamp drew a beautiful ornament in the cracked marble of
the wall of the stairway.
    I lay down once more and stared at the ceiling. It looked to me as if it
were shaking under the heavy thumps that went on, one after another. I
thought I had lain there for a long time, I thought it was already morning,
when the noise suddenly ceased and it was as if everything was abruptly
interrupted. When I glanced at the clock, I realised that it had all lasted for
less than an hour.
    The following night as I went to bed, I had already forgotten the matter.
But my sleep was interrupted again by precisely the same kind of sound as
on the previous night, and at exactly the same time. I tried to remain calm,
and took up a book. I even leafed through it (it was the flora you gave me
long ago), but the incessant knocking prevented me from understanding
anything. The hands of the clock moved as if some nocturnal force were
hindering them, but when they finally reached two, peace returned as
suddenly as it had been broken.
    The next day, I saw the upstairs resident in a small neighbourhood shop
opposite our house. She was a fragile old spinster with astonishingly thin
limbs, who supported herself with a slender stick with an elegantly turned
head—it represented a creature with a beak and horns. The lady was known
well in the shop and was served with respect. In the midst of her purchases
she turned to me and asked, in a surprisingly strong, trumpet-like voice,
‘Well, how do you find us?’
    I had not in the least expected that she would know who I was. My
landlord had only once pointed her out to me, through the window, when I
was signing the rental agreement.
    ‘That old lady lives above you,’ was all he had said, and I had glanced at
my neighbour in passing from my first-floor perspective.
    ‘I am Pumilio,’ the old lady said now, and now it was my turn to
introduce myself; but I am sure that I was unable entirely to banish the
quiver of suspicion from my face as she continued, immediately: ‘Have you
settled in to your new apartment?’
    As she asked the question, quickly and animatedly, I thought her gaze
held real curiosity, quite out of proportion to the formality of the question.
    I hesitated, but managed to say: ‘Thank you, it is a comfortable
apartment. But at night I find it difficult to sleep.’
    I took fright at my own boldness, and watched her closely.
    ‘Really? Just fancy, and you are still so young. I am already quite old, as
you see, but I sleep well. Quite well!’ she repeated, examining me through
her wide, motionless pupils.
    I did not know what to think. She left the shop before me, leaning on her
beautiful stick, and proceeding with some difficulty. But on the threshold
she turned: ‘Tonight I am sure you will be able to sleep.’
    And she smiled, her mouth closed.
    I hoped it was some kind of promise. I fell asleep quickly and, it may be
said, in good faith, but my sleep was interrupted again in the same way and
at the same time as on the previous two nights. Exhaustion and rage
pounded at my forehead, but now I listened to the sounds from the floor
above more closely than before. In particular, I tried to make out the tapping
of Miss Pumilio’s stick on the floor, for it seemed to me that it would be
very difficult, if not impossible, for her to move without support. But all I
could hear was heavy thumps and dragging sounds, and in addition I could
see clearly in the light of the reading-lamp that the ceiling-lamp, a glass
ball, was rocking slowly in its mount.
    It began to seem incredible to me that Miss Pumilio, who was old, frail
and, what is more, an invalid, could be capable, night after night, of the
kinds of trials of strength that the noisy events upstairs would seem to
presuppose. But above all I asked myself: why would she do anything like
that? What reasons could force her to move furniture around in the middle
of the night?
    I could think of only two reasons, and both of them were linked with
fear. First: Miss Pumilio feared something so strongly that, every night, she
built a barricade in front of her door, using her heaviest furniture. Did that
seem likely? Not really, because things were dragged above my head in a
number of different directions—remember this—and besides, the mornings,
when she would have had to have taken down her fortifications, were silent.
Second: Miss Pumilio wanted me to be afraid, perhaps because, for one
reason or another, she wanted me to move out.
    On the fourth night, as soon as I awoke—and it happened a few dozen
seconds before the noise began (and this time I was absolutely certain it
would happen again)—I was extraordinarily afraid. It was as if the
consuming fear that I had imagined Miss Pumilio felt (or that she wished
me to feel) had, that night, been transferred to me. Most repugnant of all to
me was that the noises always began at the very same stroke of the clock. I
remember saying to myself, many times: ‘But it is unnatural! It is
unnatural!’
    This time, however, I did not get out of bed, and the most difficult thing
of all for me would have been to try to do anything to stop the noise. I
would not have gone upstairs for any price, or rung Miss Pumilio’s doorbell
and enquired what the matter was and whether she could not do whatever
she was doing at some more civilised hour.
    Why was it is so impossible for me? I will tell you at once: because my
mind was afflicted by a suspicion that was difficult to dismiss. You see, I
suspected that if I really did go upstairs, if I really did ring Miss Pumilio’s
doorbell and say the words I intended to say to her, she would look at me
with the dim eyes of a sleeper who has just been wakened from slumber and
would not understand at all, at all, what I was talking about and what had
given me the right to dare deprive her of her much-needed sleep.
    And in fact this was the ultimate reason that cast me into despair and
why I never examined the origin of the noise any more closely.
    From time to time I saw Miss Pumilio in our street or in the little
neighbourhood shop. She always greeted me amicably, but no longer made
conversation with me. But sometimes when I had passed her on the street, it
seemed to me as if she turned to look after me, and as if her bluish mosaic
eyes glowed with a feeling or thought that I did not understand. But it could
also be the case that she was looking through me, and was not even thinking
about me.
    At night, I stayed awake. And to keep up my courage. I repeated to
myself: ‘It’s nothing! Nothing! I just don’t happen to understand what is
behind this, but I am sure it is something quite insignificant and ordinary. I
am sure I would laugh if I found out what it is, and laugh heartily.’
    But above my head the rumbling continued like a very localised storm,
and along the creaking floorboards was pushed and pulled something that
was heavy and recalcitrant and immense, something so formless that it
resembled human life. At last came night and, staring at the shaking ceiling,
I felt the foundations and the cellar of the house respond to the thundering
sound from above. I fled those two sledge-hammers, of which one was the
earth itself, to the open air, and have never returned to that address.
                               OceanofPDF.com
         THE SEVENTEENTH SPRING