THE TWENTY-SECOND LETTER


Yesterday I wished to try, for my morning drink, the Tainaronians’ favourite
sweet, foaming dayma or daime, which is drunk through a straw. They like
it so much that they drink it at every possible opportunity, cold or hot, and
in addition to dayma they have dozens of other names for it. I have heard it
said that in large quantities it has curious effects and that some may see
strange and even improper things after drinking it.
    For my part, I did not notice any such effects. But everything I see here
is strange, even without drinking a drop of dayma.
    I remembered a particularly pleasant little cake shop on the side of a
canal where Longhorn took me soon after I arrived in Tainaron for the first
time. I also wanted to try those particularly crisp herb pastries, as light as
wafers, which smell of smoke and which I believe are not made anywhere
else but in that bakery. My desire was so strong that my mouth watered and
I had to swallow when the memory of the little pastries spread on to my
tongue.
    To my disappointment, I could no longer find the cross-street of the ring
boulevard on which the café was located. I thought I was following the
correct route; I turned at the same street corner as before, and carried on
along the side of the canal, but soon I found myself in quite unknown
quarters. There were unfinished buildings and enormous industrial shells
from which the sound of turbines and the fumes of combustion engines rose
into the air. The people there also looked completely different, poorer and
smaller than the Tainaronians who had sat on the terrace of my favourite
café. At last I found a glum coffee bar where badly foamed dayma was
served in thick handleless cups and where the bread was dense and heavy.
    ‘I should like to have a map of Tainaron,’ I said yesterday to Longhorn.
‘It would be much easier to wander here alone, and you would not always
have the bother of being my guide. I could not find a single map in the
department store. Could you perhaps find a map somewhere? Would it be
possible?’
   ‘Unfortunately it is impossible,’ he answered.
   ‘Why impossible? Have all the maps sold out?’
   ‘That is not why,’ he said. ‘No comprehensive map of Tainaron has ever
been made.’
   ‘What? No proper map has been made? But that is very strange,’ I said,
dissatisfied and astonished.
   ‘It is not at all strange,’ Longhorn said abruptly. ‘It would be sheer
impossibility to draw up such a map, a completely senseless project.’
   ‘Why so?’ I asked, increasingly irritated. ‘To me a kingdom which has
no map is not a real kingdom but barbary, chaos, mere confusion.’
   ‘You still know very little about Tainaron,’ he said quietly. ‘We too have
our laws, but they are different from yours.’
   I felt a little abashed, but that did not wipe away all my irritability.
   ‘A map cannot be made,’ he continued, ‘because Tainaron is constantly
changing.’
   ‘All cities change,’ I said.
   ‘None as fast as Tainaron,’ Longhorn replied. ‘For what Tainaron was
yesterday it is no longer today. No one can have a grasp of Tainaron as a
whole. Every map would lead its user astray.’
   ‘All cities must have maps, at least of some kind,’ I continued to argue.
   Longhorn sighed and looked at me kindly, but a little wearily.
   ‘Come!’ he said, and took me gently by the arm. ‘Let’s go!’
   ‘Where to?’ I asked.
   ‘We are going to the observation tower,’ Longhorn said. ‘To make you
understand.’
   The observation tower was built on the same hill as the funfair. I had not
noticed it until now, for the movement of the Ferris wheel had taken up all
my attention. We had to climb for an agonisingly long time up the narrow
wooden stairs which circled the outer wall of the tower like a creeper. I do
not like such high places, and I felt as if the wind were rocking the frail
construction. We climbed and climbed. As we circled the steps, the Ferris
wheel, too, kept returning before my eyes; its carriages, now empty, shook
and swayed, and its movement made my dizzy. We climbed, and I regretted
that I had taken up Longhorn’s offer.
   Midway, I said to Longhorn: ‘Now I cannot climb any farther. Let us
stay here. We can see enough from here.’
   But Longhorn’s ears were deaf, and he continued his astonishingly agile
clambering. At times he seemed to glide upward—but of course he did have
more pairs of legs than I. He did not even glance behind him, and I had to
follow him. I went on climbing.
   At last! We were standing on the upper platform, but I had grown dizzy
and did not immediately go right up to the rail. My eyes were sore from the
wind and sunshine which, up here, seemed blindingly bright. I tried to
breathe slowly; I swallowed and fastened my eyes on the fibres of the
platform’s planks. I had decided that I would not complain any more; for I
suspected that Longhorn now considered me spoilt and bad company and
by no means did I wish him to tire of acting as my guide.
   But I could not help hoping that Longhorn would put one of his narrow,
long upper limbs around my shoulders. He appeared not to have noticed my
uncertain state, but was gazing absorbedly and—so it seemed to me—with
eyes moist with pride the panorama that opened up before us. He began to
hum a wordless song which I had never heard before, and its monotonous
melody and the peaceful wave-forms of the timber fibres restored my
balance.
   I gathered my courage and looked downwards. We had been climbing
for a long time, but I was still astonished that we were so excessively high
up. I shaded my eyes and saw, in the dizzying depths, the plain of Tainaron,
patterned with the shadows of frantically scurrying clouds. I also realised
that the tower must be a little skew, for the horizon was clearly slanted.
Directly below us was the little funfair, today deserted, with its gaudily
coloured tents. Even the highest carriages of the Ferris wheel were far
below us. Far away glass and steel glittered, bronze and gold glimmered,
when a shimmering ray lit up the windows of a skyscraper or the cupolas of
churches. This was Tainaron, his city, theirs—never mine.
   But it was an astonishing city! Longhorn’s pride was understandable. I
had never understood how enormous Tainaron was. I saw the cone-like
areas which I had once visited, only to be dampened by the queen’s tears, I
saw the prince’s palace park with its paths and pagodas, and in the east the
endless, muddled skeins of the slums.
   We were so high up that from below all that could be heard was the
occasional shriek, isolated, a shriller cry than the rest, and mysterious
clinking sounds which I had also heard at night and whose origin I had
never been able to trace. It sounded as if someone were tapping a glass with
a silver spoon in order to make a speech. A little farther up, and everything
would have been completely silent.
    ‘Here is everything I have,’ Longhorn said. ‘You, too.’
    The shining belt of Oceanos with its stripes of foam encircled us on all
sides. A haze hid the horizon to the south, but to the north a high, silver-
glowing cloud formation was visible, so motionless, in contrast to the
clouds that slipped over Tainaron, that it looked like a metal sculpture. Its
shape was like that of a human torso.
    ‘Is there a storm brewing?’ I asked.
    ‘It is not a storm,’ he said. ‘Worse. It is winter. Although it will be a long
time before it reaches us. But when it is here, I pity those who have not
already gone to sleep!’
    I already felt cold now, in full sunlight. We looked in silence at the
majestic shape of snow and ice. To me it still did not look as if it were
changing shape or approaching Tainaron.
    ‘Perhaps it will not come this time, after all,’ I said to Longhorn, half in
earnest, and hopeful. ‘Perhaps it will stay up there in the north.’
    ‘What a child it is,’ Longhorn said in an aside, as if there had been a
third person with us on the platform. Then he continued, turning to me once
more: ‘I did not bring you here only to look at the coming of winter. Do you
see?’
    Longhorn gestured toward the northern edge of the city, below the
winter, where there swelled a cluster of dwellings of different heights and
shapes. It must have been because of my sore eyes that their outlines looked
so indefinite. As we looked, it seemed strangely as if some of them were in
motion.
    ‘What is happening there?’ I asked.
    ‘Changes,’ he said.
    That was indeed how it looked. Clouds of dust spread on the plain—and
in a moment all that could be seen where the crenellations of towers and
blocks had meandered were mere ruins. But there had been no sound of any
explosion.
    ‘That part of the city no longer exists,’ he said calmly.
    ‘Not an earthquake, surely?’ I asked fearfully, although I could not yet
feel any tremors.
   ‘No, they are merely demolishing the former Tainaron,’ Longhorn said.
   Longhorn raised his finger and pointed westward. And there, too, I saw
demolition work, destruction, collapse, landslides. But almost at the same
time, in place of the former constructions, new forms began to appear,
softly curving mall complexes, flights of stairs that still ended in air,
solitary spiral towers and colonnades which progressed meanderingly
toward the empty shore.
   ‘But . . . ’ I began.
   ‘Shh,’ Longhorn said. ‘Look over there.’
   I looked. There, where a straight boulevard had run a moment ago,
narrow paths now wandered. Their network branched over a larger and
larger area before my very eyes.
   ‘And this goes on all the time, incessantly,’ he said. ‘Tainaron is not a
place, as you perhaps think. It is an event which no one measures. It is no
use anyone trying to make maps. It would be a waste of time and effort. Do
you understand now?’
   I could not deny that I understood that Tainaron lived in the same way as
many of its inhabitants; it too was a creature that was shaped by irresistible
forces. Now I also understood that I should never again taste those smoke-
scented wafers which I had wanted so much this morning. And yet I
understood very little.
   ‘I am thirsty,’ I said to Longhorn, longing once more for the foam of
dayma.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                       THE DANGLER