THE SEVENTEENTH LETTER


It was evening once, and I was a child, out in the street. All the lights were
on, street lamps, shop windows, car headlights; and I was standing in front
of a toy shop. You know the shop; it is still there, in the centre of town, and
you must have passed it many times, or perhaps you have even been inside
it in the days before Christmas.
    That window! It was lit with prodigal brightness, and along the glass
flowed glistening drops; a rainstorm had just passed over the city and
everything was clean, never before seen. In front of the dolls, cars, balls and
games, immediately behind the glass, a large selection of marbles had been
set out in the shape of the petals of a flower. Some of them were
transparent, others brightly coloured, others as white as milk.
    I had never owned any marbles, and their glow captivated me; I admired
them for a long time, but all of a sudden, from far away and without
warning, the terrible knowledge slid between them and me—that one day
my mother would die.
    When this pain hit me, I was looking at a particularly beautiful
shimmering blue marble, and something happened: it changed. Its colour
did not vary, its size was the same as before, and it remained steady in its
place; but all the same it was quite different from before. Something had
fallen away from it, something which only a moment ago had made it
desirable, the most important thing of all. The marble was no longer of
value; it was merely junk, and there was no longer anything in the entire
shop window to interest me. It was as if stage spotlights had been
extinguished in the middle of a performance and a curtain had been drawn
from earth to heavens in front of all the magnificence, a curtain whose
name was VOID.
    Even the street in which I stood was now a strange street in a strange
city; but I went on standing in the same place. A vague desire for
knowledge forced me to make an experiment. I wanted to see whether I
could make the marble change back to what it was before. Gazing at it
unwaveringly, I began to struggle to disperse the thickness of night which,
unseen, dominated everything I looked at.
    I did not believe the darkness, I said, it is not true; and soon it was
indeed not true; it paled and lifted like a night-mist. And the marble glowed
before me, lovely as ever.
    But then I understood that the plenty of the shop window, all the jewels
of its treasure trove, were only a tiny foretaste of what life would bring me
with both hands—no, a hundred hands! a thousand!
    And I have never left that shop window. I stand and stand, I look and
look at how it shines, and goes dark, and shines again. There is night and
there is day, and I see both hell and heaven through the same window.
                               OceanofPDF.com
      THE WORK OF THE SURVEYOR