THE TWENTY-FOURTH LETTER


I admire her; I call her the Queen Bee. But Longhorn has another name for
her, the name of an already forgotten saint: The Guardian of the
Oddfellows. And indeed that is the nature of the Queen Bee: she cares
tenderly for those whom many here in Tainaron consider strange and to be
avoided: street singers, beggars and ladies of joy, people who are cracked in
various ways or lost in their own drug-worlds.
    All sorts of people visit the Queen Bee, both by day and by night. The
light is always on in her house and the door is always swinging—to and fro,
for it is a double-hinged door of the kind that one sometimes finds in
obscure cafés. There is no threshold or latch, and the hubbub and singing
from the Queen Bee’s house can be heard distinctly a couple of blocks off.
    There is room for everyone, although her house is not large. No, it is
very, very medium in size and as modest in its external appearance as
countless other houses outskirts of the city.
    But sometimes, although the house is full of people, it is very quiet, and
then the neighbours say that the Guardian of the Oddfellows is holding a
Great Day of Remembrance once again.
    ‘Whose memory are they celebrating?’ I asked Longhorn, and it became
clear that it was not a question of any particular dead person. The matter is
as follows: the Queen Bee gathers memories; she lives off memories, and it
is perhaps only on account of memories that she receives so many people of
so many different kinds. But she is not satisfied with any old memory; no,
she can use only happy, sweet memories that sparkle with happiness, and if
anyone were to try to offer her something cold and gloomy I think she
would drive them mercilessly from her house.
    Longhorn said that everyone who needs it receives both a meal and a bed
for the night at the Queen Bee’s house, but on certain days of the month
everyone must bring her at least one happy memory in payment. That is the
rent she demands, and there is no haggling.
    On that day the Queen Bee spreads a white cloth on the table and lights
dozens of candles so that it looks as if Christmas has come. But the table is
not set, for on the Great Day of Remembrance no food is offered, only
memories.
    ‘But they really do satisfy your appetite,’ says the Queen Bee, and all her
drunks and madmen and beggars agree, as they must in order to be able
next day to partake of a proper meal.
    ‘Can I, too, participate in the Great Day of Remembrance some time?’ I
asked Longhorn.
    ‘Everyone can,’ he said, ‘but not everyone wants to. And remember to
take a really happy memory with you.’
    ‘Oh, I have plenty of them,’ I said light-heartedly, and when the next
Great Day of Remembrance dawned I was sitting in the Queen Bee’s house
side by side with her Oddfellows.
    I had already heard a few things about my table companions, so I sat a
fair distance away from the Pickpocket (as if I had something valuable with
me!) and even farther (although I felt ashamed of myself) from a black and
spotted creature whom all the people of Tainaron dreaded, and who was
called the Disease Carrier. But as I glanced around me, the Queen Bee’s
Oddfellows did not look to me any stranger than the people of Tainaron in
general, and it was my turn to feel embarrassed when I realised what
curious and even suspicious glances were being directed at my own person.
I, too, was now one of the Oddfellows, perhaps the most obvious of the
entire company in my foreignness. I, who have always believed I can merge
into almost any crowd, who have always believed I can examine others
while myself staying in the background, was now experiencing what it was
like to be the object of the Tainaronians’ attention.
    But the Queen Bee was sitting opposite me and, once I had recovered
from the confusion, I could at least gaze at her as much as I liked, her
motherly form and her tight, tiger-striped dress, and her tousled, dark face,
lit by the hazy glow of her seeing tubes.
    ‘Let us begin!’ shouted the Queen Bee in her resonant bass, which
brought to mind the buzzing of a sunny meadow. ‘Psammotettix, you are
the first.’
    I turned and saw that with this handsomely reverberant name she was
addressing a greying, modest and clumsy-looking gentleman who had, since
the beginning of the session, been mumbling incessantly to himself. I
suppose he was repeating the memory he had chosen so that he would not
forget it at the decisive moment.
    With extraordinary speed, Psammotettix began a long story of which I
understood scarcely a word, for it was interrupted—perhaps for effect—by
a remarkable smacking and croaking noise which, at points of emphasis—
so I supposed—became a rough croaking. The few words I could
understand, because Psammotettix repeated them a number of times, were
‘foam’ and ‘bubble’; but that was all.
    On the other hand, the other participants in the Remembrance Festival
followed Psammotettix’s performance with interest, and when it was over
they showed their approval in an extraordinarily wide range of ways: by
clicking the chitin plates of their backs together, drumming, glowing,
changing their colour or clapping their limbs together.
    The Queen Bee raised a little hammer or club which gleamed gold in the
candlelight, knocked it on the table and said: ‘Accepted!’, at the same time
turning toward the Pickpocket, motioning him to start with a gesture of her
hand.
    ‘Once I went abroad,’ the Pickpocket began hurriedly in a small voice,
obviously nervous. The other Oddfellows interrupted him, howling:
    ‘Not true! Not true!’
    Then the hammer fell again, the others fell silent, and the Pickpocket
began: ‘Once in a foreign country, in a big city, my job took me to a certain
department store. It was the eve of a great festival, and the people were
swarming about, announcements and music flooded from the loudspeakers
and the shoppers’ attention was taken up with the brilliant displays and the
shouts of the product demonstrators. The conditions were perfect, one could
say, and for that reason that day was perhaps the most productive of my
entire career.’
    At this point the Pickpocket paused; grumbling began to be heard around
the table and I saw the Queen Bee purse her lips.
    ‘I cannot accept this,’ she was beginning, but the Pickpocket shouted
hurriedly, ‘I have not finished, that is not all. You see, just as the department
store was closing and I was already leaving with my swag, a fine lady swept
past me with a bag on her shoulder, decorated with pearls. My practised eye
noticed immediately that its silver lock only seemed to be closed and in a
second I had caught up with the lady. I did this (and he waved a sharp nail
in the air), the bag opened soundlessly, and in my own pocket there was—
so I thought—a fine wad of the country’s currency. But (and the Pickpocket
raised a limp, demanding silence, for the guests had begun to babble once
more) what did I see when I examined my trophy more closely? The notes
were merely thin piles of paper, quite empty all except one. On it was
written, on it was written . . . ’
    And here the Pickpocket’s voice fell and he began to writhe on his chair,
looking beseechingly at the Queen Bee.
    ‘Carry on,’ she said, nodding approvingly, but this did not seem to calm
the Pickpocket.
    ‘No, I can’t, not with all these people listening,’ he managed to mutter,
gesturing at the other guests.
    ‘He has forgotten his memory!’ came a shout, and another: ‘That’s not a
happy memory at all!’
    ‘Come here,’ ordered the Queen Bee. ‘Whisper it in my ear. I shall
consider the matter.’
    And the Pickpocket went up to the Queen Bee and whispered a couple of
words into her ear.
    I tried to prick up my ears, but I was far too far away, and I regretted my
choice of place, for I desperately wanted to know what could have been
written on the paper that could turn the Pickpocket’s disappointment into a
happy memory.
    ‘Accepted!’ acceded the Queen Bee, and to my horror she turned to look
at me, and the lenses of her seeing tubes glittered with strange colours.
    Then something unexpected happened to me: my past disappeared. It
sank among millions of other pasts, so that I could no longer distinguish a
single one of my own memories, happy or sad, from among the swarm of
countless memories.
    It was as if walls and fences had fallen, as if dams—very necessary—
had burst, and in the floodwater there floated long-forgotten fragments of
conversations that I had happened to overhear, remarks from novels and
films and a vortex of human faces and destinies which sped past me like
bubbles in a surging wake.
   Through it I could, however, see the unwavering face of the Queen Bee,
which was still waiting in front of me, majestic and demanding, a trace of
dissatisfaction already apparent in her expression. Desperately I grabbed
one of the memories that spun around me and, extraordinarily enough, I
knew its origin: it was a survey from a weekly magazine whose readers
were asked to remember star moments from their lives. Praying mentally
that it would be good enough for the Queen Bee and that my deception
would not be noticed, I began:
   ‘This happened ten years ago. My lover was massaging my face. Then,
suddenly, I was seized by a sensation of lightness. Before my eyes a door
opened, and behind it was a lighted room. Such a light room I have never
seen, before or since. I went into the room. I have never felt as good as I did
then.’
   That was all. But as I set the sentences of the little interview one after
another, from memory, which now worked with the accuracy of a
photograph, I realised that it was no deception. What had happened had
happened, all of it, to me, and I remembered the smell of my lover’s fingers
and the fact that it had been the first cool, high day after a long summer.
   And, dumbfounded by the superabundance of my life, I fell silent, and
waited for the rap of the golden gavel.
   ‘Accepted,’ the bass of the Queen Bee rang out, and I saw a veiled smile
spread over her face as if something inexpressibly sweet had just dripped on
to her palate. In such a way my memory, too, although stolen, was added to
her collection, to the great store of honey which was the basis of her
economy, to the honeycombs from which she drew her happiness and her
hospitality and which no thief would ever empty.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                THE CLOAKED MOTH