THE TWELFTH LETTER


I do not know why I pick up my pen again. No longer because I might
expect return mail. But I would like to tell someone that something strange
has happened, some curious, unpleasant changes, and I have no idea what
has caused them. Perhaps it is temporary, and my life will return to how it
was before. Perhaps, too, the days that were like prizes, long ago, will
return.
   I have not travelled anywhere, but this city is now different. The change
does not please me. When I look out, I see that it is as if it has been
unclothed. The most important thing is absent; the thing that once, just a
moment ago, made me strong and happy. I look at the ground, I look at the
sky, and everywhere is the same absence, in the eyes that crowd the streets
and the department stores as if they were seeking their lost pupils in the
windows and sales counters. If I were to send you photographs of Tainaron
before and Tainaron now, you would say no difference is visible, and
perhaps it is so; but nevertheless I know that everything is decisively
different.
   If the sounds of the city were to be muted for a moment, I could hear a
secretly crumbling sound as if a trickle of sand were falling from the side of
a sandpit. And the vital force, which I believed to be inexhaustible, runs and
runs somewhere where no one can use it.
   Is this what is known as growing old? Do I see it everywhere, although it
exists only inside myself? And what once was happiness around me, was it
too a mere reflection? But in that case how can I know anything of what
Tainaron is, what it is like?
   Today the book I open describes the great mogul Aurangzeb, who was a
cruel tyrant. Fifteen of his elephants fell into a cleft on a mountain road, and
on the back of one of them was his favourite wife.
    ‘Remarkable,’ writes the great mogul, ‘empty-handed I came into this
world, and now, as I leave it, I drag with me an enormous caravan of
sins . . . My sorrow mortifies me. Farewell, farewell, farewell.’
    I force myself to get up and open the door and step out into the street. I
have decided to eat, but from the window table of the café the passers-by
look as if they are dragging burdens which are invisible but nevertheless
heavy. The liquid glimmers in my cup, and soon I shall have to swallow it. I
look at it as if it were the goblet of today.
    Under the marble table my legs wait, motionless, symmetrical, side by
side. I do not know whether I have ever sensed their existence as such.
They are alive, and all at once I am scorched by hot pity. My legs, my poor
legs! Modest, sturdy and resilient, my own pillars, you too will wither!
    Small days, small days. The woman who, in the tramcar, takes a comb
from her handbag and, pulling it through her stiff hair, complains: ‘The
comb doesn’t work, no. The concrete eats the hair so.’
    A friend who sways toward me, his coat open, shaking his fingers. There
was a time when he ran from table to table, his face flushed, to proclaim
that his dogma was the youth of the world. What he says now is something
quite different, quite different,
    but I do not listen; I mourn. The youth of the world!
    How we secrete words around us, so that the eye of reality may not see
us! In vain! So hopelessly thin and tattered a veil does not hide anything,
and we writhe in the brightness of destiny. No shield, no armour, and
neither will flesh ever return to the word.
    And when I pass by the statue of the Great Sleeper, around it billows a
tired song:


   Sweet is my sleep, but more to be mere stone,
   so long as ruin and dishonour reign;
   to bear nought, to feel nought, is my great gain;
   then wake me not, speak in an undertone!


My poor friend! I saw his finger fall and he wavered across the frosty
wasteland and shut himself up in the fortress of the telephone kiosk in the
square.
   It happened there, not here in Tainaron, for these are different statues,
but the days are as small everywhere and their shape is that of a funnel.
   I wonder if you too have noticed: there are moments when you do not
wish to wish and then you look inward and what is it that you see? An
endless sequence of wishes, infinitely many yous, and all of the yous are
threaded on to the tough thread of memory, and in the end you yourself are
no more than that thinnest of thin threads, and it quivers, tensed . . .
   But today I walked past a chirping flock of sparrows and it fell silent as a
wave of nausea swept across me and suddenly the earth gave way beneath
my feet and I remembered once more that beneath Tainaron is nothing but a
crust, as insubstantial as one night’s ice.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                        PROOF COPY