THE FOURTEENTH LETTER


The new day dawned low and cloudy. In my melancholy, I set out for a
walk—alone—for Longhorn, after all, has his work, of which I know
almost nothing; but I assume it is some kind of business activity.
    I wanted to see something I had not seen before, and for that reason I set
out toward the eastern part of the city, although I well remembered that
Longhorn had urged me to stay away from those parts. When I asked why,
he merely said that it was not safe to go there alone.
    But it was midday, after all, and I was walking along a broad esplanade
bordered on both sides by high poplars which were still green. Looked at
from a distance, they recall the crowns of some other tree, standing on their
bases. I walked past the theatre, on whose eaves snouty caryatids slumber;
that building has a particular charm. I came to a cross-street full of
expensive specialist shops and pretty little cafés. I myself have often sat at
their clean tables, but now I did not stop. I was in a hurry, as if on my way
to some agreed meeting.
    Now I came to streets which were unfamiliar. I could no longer see
business plaques or inventively decorated shop windows. The buildings
became more closed, dilapidated and lower. I sank into melancholy, and for
a while I went on hardly glancing around me, but the unevenness of the
gravel under my heels startled me. Now I realised that the streets in this part
of the city were not paved, or even asphalted. They were deeply rutted, in
an almost unpassable condition, but neither did there seem to be any kind of
traffic any longer in these parts. Pavements, too, had been left unbuilt, and
between the buildings there meandered indistinct lanes. After a few steps I
was forced to ask myself: were they buildings? For is it not the case that the
buildings in which we live and our friends live have straight and solid
walls? Are their roofs not covered in slates or tin and are their windows not
made of glass?
    As I walked, I remembered entrances and heavy front doors whose
handles were of brass, gutters that drummed in the rain, and chimneys and
chimney-pipes which, seen from an attic window, looked like solitary
people. And behind the window panes? There should have been the
glimmer of white curtains, eyes, cats and the dim perspectives of the life of
strange rooms . . .
    But there was nothing of the sort to be seen. The habitations past which I
walked were lacking in all the characteristics of proper dwellings. First of
all, there were no straight lines. Everything curved and twisted, meandered
without direction, without clear corners. The dwellings rose from the earth,
earth-coloured, made of clay and loam. They had indefinitely shaped
openings in place of windows and doors. Where were the columns and
capitals which one could admire in almost every square in the centre of the
city? Where was the rosy golden glow of the cupolas, and the window
recesses with their rich mosaic patterns? The wall-niche and the sandstone
shapes that beckoned to them? The slender roof-groins and the pointed
arches? The pilastered galleries and the atriums with their flowering trees?
    I realised that there were two Tainarons, or perhaps even more, who
knows . . . This was a Tainaron lacking in everything that is called culture,
everything which joy and hope, prosperity and ambition, can build and
embellish on Earth.
    I cannot say I liked it.
    I walked faster than before. My intention was now to traverse this
obscure and peripheral part of the city as quickly as possible and spend a
moment at the sandy beach of which I had heard. After that I decided to
return to the centre of the city via the northern causeway, although it is long
and dull.
    The light increased, and from somewhere the shimmer of water was
reflected over the nests, cells and systems of caves that were hollowed out
of the sand and the rock. From in front of me I heard an incessant rustling
and scouring, as if the earth were being swept with a large brush; but there
was nothing to be seen. A couple of times I heard, from behind a stony
hillock, the sound of dragging and something buzzing; I was certain that a
lizard or reptile was hiding among the stones. I saw a couple of passers-by;
they were small and fragile, dragonfly-like creatures. The last dwellings I
passed were just low mounds and holes. They would offer shelter only to
the most insignificant and modest beings, and they soon sank and merged
into the fine, golden sand, which was certainly beautiful to look at, although
it made my steps heavy and insinuated its way into my shoes and even into
my mouth, making me thirsty.
    Nevertheless, I decided to walk a few steps further, although I had
already admitted to myself that my trip was not exactly fun. The sand
spread before me in gently swelling dunes. I could no longer see any signs
of the city around me. The sand radiated the same simple severity as the
snowfields at home, the allure of inviolability, dreams and emptiness.
    As I gazed at one particular sandbank, its shape reminded me of a
sledging slope which, long ago, rose in the courtyard of my childhood
home. I began to be very tired, and I felt like sprawling for a moment in its
softness. Suddenly I was so sleepy that my thoughts became confused: what
if I freeze?
    I took a couple of steps toward the ridge, and at the same time my
attention fastened on some insignificant protuberances that were at first
hardly distinguishable from the surrounding sandy plain. When I went
nearer, I saw earthworks of various sizes, all of them in the form of circles,
forming concentric rings. At their centre was a conical pit, symmetrical and
apparently purpose built, for wind or water could not possibly have built
such exact forms. Those hollows reminded me of something . . . Long ago, I
must have seen something similar; but it was quite painful that I could not
bring to mind where it had happened.
    Behind the sandbank I saw yet another earthwork, larger than all the
others. I climbed up to its ridge and the sand immediately began to move
under my feet. Small avalanches fell down the walls of the pit here and
there, soundless falls and swifter torrents, making a rustling sound as if a
woman in evening dress were rushing, complete with train, through a
thicket.
    It was not until a moment later that I noticed that there was a hole deeper
in the pit. At first it looked infinitesimally small, but that could not be the
case, for in fact I was still so far from it that it could well be wider than the
circumference of my head. It looked immeasurably deep. The grains of sand
that were displaced by the heels of my shoes as soon as I moved in the
slightest fell over its fragile edges. I stood where I was—insofar as there
was a definite place to stand, for something was continually happening on
the ridge of the earthworks, so I did not have a firm foothold—yes, I stood
where I was, and I could not take my eyes off that round hole. At first I felt
that the movement I thought I noticed came from the shadow of my
eyelashes, for my eyelids were fluttering. Then I saw it quite clearly,
without any doubt: something was moving in the hole, very deep beneath
the sand; and then the walls of the pit, too, began to undulate.
    At that moment I believe I executed a very strange and, in relation to my
strength, supernatural leap, for my foothold was finally giving way and I
felt myself slipping with the sand toward the grave-dark hole.
    On no account did I climb; I made a half-vault backward, for the next
moment I found myself behind the earthwork, looking at the panicles of a
tussock of grass, which moved lightly at the level of my eyes. I turned my
head so that I now saw nothing but sand: dim quartz granules, deep red
grains of granite, crushed snail shells. The clouds had dispersed; the sun
shone on the shadowless sand. I felt as if I had never looked at anything so
closely, because the gold of a particular vein of mica shone into my pupil,
red as the embers of a fire.
    I had thrown myself on the sand through the sheer weakness of fear, for I
had been able to glimpse how some kind of point, a claw covered in fur or
prickles, or perhaps a tooth, had flitted past the edge of the hole, but had
immediately disappeared back into the darkness.
    Later I got up and my feet took me back, but I do not remember the road;
and it is of no importance. I have not yet met Longhorn, and I have no
intention of telling him what happened today.
    At this moment I could be hollow, as empty as the ants from which ant-
lion grubs suck the innards and vital fluids. In writing this, I am a little
ashamed, as if I wanted to disturb you by telling you this; but it is true, after
all.
    I examine my nails and the skin on the backs of my hands closely,
knowing that they could be among the fragile and dry skins that are thrown
over the ridge of the earthworks and which crumble to dust and disappear
among the sand.
    But the wind! It rises and distributes both dust and sand over the towers
of Tainaron, and the dunes shift once more some distance toward the
interior. From a high hillock a grating sound is heard, and I see the Ferris
wheel spinning in the wind, but guess that its cogwheels, too, are now
grinding sand from the shore. When I think about the buzzing, the sea of air
that undulates around the antennae and the towers and which sets the papers
in the gutter dancing, I am no longer at all afraid. Its reinvigorating breath
passes through personal happiness and unhappiness, and they are no more
than a couple of steps in the great dance.
   But have I not just returned from a beach where I have no memory of
water? Was it really the case that I did not even glance northward, across
the expanse of Oceanos, but that the waves and details of the sand
swallowed all my attention, just as they will one day cover the city of
Tainaron? The skuas must have shrieked then, too, and the waves roared,
but I, absent-minded, saw nothing but the sand and the claw . . .
                              OceanofPDF.com
                         WHITE NOISE