THE FOURTH LETTER


There are strange houses in one of the suburbs. They are like goblets, very
narrow and high, and to a certain extent they recall piles of ashes; but their
reddish walls are as strong as concrete. In them live a countless mass of
inhabitants, small but very industrious folk, who are in constant motion.
They all resemble each other so closely that I should never learn to
recognise any of them. One, however, is an exception.
    It is already a long time since I asked Longhorn whether, one day, he
would take me to one of those houses. ‘Why do they interest you?’ he
asked. ‘Their architecture is so extraordinary,’ I said. ‘Perhaps you know
someone there? Perhaps I could go there with you sometime?’
    ‘If you wish,’ said Longhorn; but he did not look particularly keen.
    Yesterday, at last, Longhorn took me to one of those dwellings. At the
entrance was a doorman with whom he exchanged a few words and who set
off to accompany me. ‘We shall meet this evening,’ shouted Longhorn, and
disappeared into the gaudy bustle of Tainaron.
    I was led along dim and intricate corridors that opened on halls,
warehouses and living spaces of different sizes. Past me rushed large
numbers of people; all of them seemed to be in a hurry and in the midst of
important tasks. But I was taken to the innermost room of the house, at
whose door stood more guards. There was no window in the room, but it
was nevertheless almost unbearably bright, although I could not see the
source of the light.
    I certainly realised that there were other people in the room, but I could
see only one. She was immeasurably larger than all the others, monumental,
all the more so because she stayed in one place, unmoving. Her dimensions
were enormous: her egg-shaped head grazed the roof of the vault and, in its
half recumbent position, her breadth extended from the doorway to the back
of the room. As I stepped inside and stood by the wall (there was hardly
room anywhere else), there came from her mouth a creaking sound which I
interpreted as a welcome.
     ‘Show respect for the queen,’ hissed my guide, and knelt down.
Unaccustomed to such gestures, I felt embarrassed, but I followed his
example.
     Some time passed before any attention was paid to me. By the walls of
the room, around the queen, rushed creatures whose task was evidently to
satisfy all her needs. I soon realised that they were necessary, for the queen
was so formless that she herself could hardly take a step. And I concluded
that she could not possibly have gone out through the door; she must live
and die within these walls, without ever seeing even a flicker of sun. Her
plight horrified me, and I wanted to leave the glowing cave quickly.
     At that moment the creaking voice startled me. I realised that the queen
had turned her head a little so that she was now staring at me languidly, at
the same time sipping a milky fluid from a goblet held under her
infinitesimal jaw.
     The straw fell from her lip, and new croaks followed. With difficulty, I
made out the following words: ‘I know what you’re thinking, you little
smidgeon.’
     ‘I’m sorry,’ I stammered, and vexation made me flushed.
     ‘You think, don’t you, that I am some kind of individual, a person, admit
it!’
     As she went on speaking, her voice grew deeper, and it was as if it began
to buzz. It was a most extraordinary voice, for it seemed to be made up of
the murmur of hundreds of voices.
     ‘Yes, indeed, I mean . . . ’ I grew completely confused for a moment and
sat down on my heels, as kneeling on the hard floor was too tiring.
     ‘Quite so, of course,’ I said rapidly, completely puzzled.
     ‘Didn’t I guess?’ she said, and burst into laughter, which sometimes
boomed, sometimes tinkled in the corridors so infectiously that in the end
all the inhabitants of the building seemed to be joining in, and the entire
house was laughing at my simplicity.
     Suddenly complete silence followed, and she said, pointing at me with
her long proboscis, ‘So tell me, who am I?’
     Before I could even think of an answer to this question, I realised at last
what was happening in the back part of the room, which was filled with the
queen’s great rear body. I had, in fact, been aware all the while that
something was being done incessantly, but the nature of that activity hit me
like a thunderbolt. Bundles had been carried past me, but it was only at the
third or fourth that I looked more closely and saw: they were new-born
babies.
     The queen was giving birth! She was giving birth incessantly. And just
as I realised that, I seemed to hear from all around me the din of a hammer,
commands, the chirrup of a saw, and everywhere there hovered the stench
of building mortar. I realised that more and more storeys were being added
to the house, and that it was reaching ever higher into the serenity of the sea
of air. The sounds of construction reached me even from deep under the
ground, and in my mind’s eye I could see corridors branching beneath the
paving stones like roots, greedily growing from day to day. The tribe was
increasing; the house was being extended. The city was growing.
     ‘You are the mother of them all, your majesty,’ I replied, humbly.
     ‘But what is a mother?’ she squealed, and suddenly her voice rose to a
piercing height, as one of her antennae lashed through the air above my
head like a whip.
     I retreated and pressed myself to the wall, although I understood that she
would not be able to come any nearer.
     ‘She from whom everything flows is not a someone,’ the queen hissed
through her wide jaws, like a snake. I gazed at her, bewitched.
     ‘You came to see me, admit it!’ she growled, more deeply than I dared
think. ‘But you will be disappointed! You are already disappointed! Admit
it!’
     ‘No, not in the least,’ I protested, anxiously.
     ‘But there is no me here; look around you and understand that! And
here, here in particular, there is less of me than anywhere. You think I fill
this room. Wrong! Quite wrong! For I am the great hole out of which the
city grows. I am the road everyone must travel! I am the salty sea from
which everyone emerges, helpless, wet, wrinkled . . . ’
     Her voice chided me warmly, like a great ocean swell. As she spoke, she
glanced languidly behind her, at her formless, mountainous rear, from
whose depths her latest offspring were being helped into the brightness of
the lamps. They were all born silently, as if they were dead.
     But suddenly I saw something gush from her eyes; it splashed on to the
floor and the walls and wetted all my clothes.
   She was no longer looking at me, and I rose and left the room, wet with
the queen’s tears.
                              OceanofPDF.com
                        THE BURDEN