THE THIRTIETH LETTER


How long I searched for a home back then. Before me furnished and cold
rooms opened, broken rental agreements fell, houses with destruction orders
collapsed, and the endless queues of housing offices wound in long roads
without issue.
   Now all that is in the past. In the room in which I now live I have
everything I need, and more: if I step on to my balcony, I see the white
pennants and golden cupolas of Tainaron, the cloud-girt mountains and the
blue heart-waters of Oceanos.
   Nevertheless, I have now started to prepare a new dwelling for myself,
just in case. Yes, it is almost ready for me to move in, my little pupal cell; it
can no longer be unsuccessful. It has the fresh smell of mud and algae and
reeds, for I have gathered almost all the materials myself from the beach
where I once almost found myself in the jaws of death. I have done it all
with my own hands, and when I look inside I am satisfied. It is just my size,
like a well-fitting garment which does not pull anywhere. It is small on the
outside but spacious inside, just as a good dwelling-place should be.
   It is dark there. When I peer in through its only opening which, when the
occasion arises, I shall close from inside, I am overcome by irresistible
sleepiness. I do not believe that the lack of space will trouble me, for once I
reach it it will be as wide as the night.
   The mail will go on being delivered for some time, so I have heard, but
the city now seems dead. More and more people are withdrawing for their
winter rest, some of them—like Longhorn and, before long, I myself too—
will be away for much longer. I spoke of sleeping just now, but of course
we shall not merely be resting, but changing. Will I know how? Will it be
hard work? Will it bring pain or pleasure or will it mean the disappearance,
too, of all regrets?
    Some change imperceptibly, little by little, others quickly and once and
for all, but everyone changes, and for that reason it is in vain to ask whose
fate is the best.
    My entire room stinks like an estuary! There was something I still had to
tell you, but the smell of the sludge dulls my thoughts. I shall remember it
once more when it is spring, and that will come soon, soon, the seventeenth,
and all around will sparkle—droplets! and I shall rise; and we shall see
again . . .
                               OceanofPDF.com