THE SECOND LETTER


At night I awoke to a rattling and a ringing from the kitchenette. I am sure
you know that Tainaron is located in a volcanic zone. Scientists claim that
we have already arrived in a period when a large eruption is to be expected,
so fateful that it may mark the destruction of the entire city.
    So what? Do not suppose that it affects the lives of the Tainaronians. The
shudders of the night are forgotten, and in the dazzle of morning, in the
market-place through which I often take a short cut, a honeyed haze glows
in the fruit baskets, and the paving beneath my feet is eternal once more.
    And in the evening I look at the enormous Ferris wheel, whose
circumference, centre and radii are marked out with thousands of points of
light, like stars. Ferris wheel, wheel of fortune . . .
    Sometimes my gaze fastens itself to its spinning and I seem to hear, until
sleep comes, the constant humming of the wheel, which is the voice of
Tainaron itself.
    I do not believe that I have ever seen so many ages and so many gods at
the same time as in Tainaron. Where else but Tainaron can the eye
encounter, in a single glance, the vanishing spires of cathedrals, the liquid
gold of the cupolas of minarets and the pure capitals of a Doric temple?
Here they rise, side by side and yet incomparable, each of them alone.
    But in many buildings here there is something ill-proportioned,
something that is almost ridiculous and makes one think of theatrical
scenery. Where does that impression come from? The decoration of the
friezes of the palace of supreme justice is ridiculously ornate, while
essential parapets and canopies have been omitted from the chamber of
commerce. And sometimes, when I begin to grow tired on my walks, I feel
dizzy in streets and at crossroads, for the buildings look as if they are
leaning and moving in the wind . . .
    Yesterday I walked through an arcade, airy and light, stepping on paving
laid by a master, and my gaze caressed the resilient columns, the glittering
mosaics of the window recesses. The arcade came to an end, I crossed the
square—and got a slap in the face. Before me there swaggered a concrete
wall raised on elephants’ feet, a featureless, gloomy variation of the
colonnade I had just left, insulting and crushingly heavy. But it, too, is part
of Tainaron, like the piece of ancient stone wall at the eastern edge of the
city, in whose crevices a sand martin nests.
    Do you know, I am sometimes startled when, from amid the throng, a
snout-like face sways toward me, above which nimble antennae, supple as
lashes, or when, in a café, a waiter approaches my table, his mandibles
protruding just like those of a dragonfly-grub. And yesterday in the tram, a
creature sat down next to me, his form recalling that of a leaf; he looked so
light that I could have blown him away into the air like a dry weed.
    I have met someone who supplies a special thread for the needs of the
whole of Tainaron. It is so fine, so durable and so elastic that no industrially
produced thread can bear comparison. He secretes it from the rear of his
body, as much as 150 metres in 24 hours. The glittering filament, finer than
a hair, is far less than a denier in thickness. When a ray of sunlight struck it
at the window at which I was examining it, I saw the thread blaze with all
the colours of the spectrum.
    I should like a dress made only of this thread; a garment lighter, more
festive or more beautiful I could not imagine.
    But it is a childish dream: I shall never have such a dress. For the
filament is so sticky that it would stick to my body like a corrosive glue.
    So what is this thread used for? Do not ask me; I do not know, and I do
not wish to know.
                                OceanofPDF.com
                            SHIMMER