ACT III: JUNE 20, 2024


“LOWER THE ELECTROSTAT field by 50 percent.”


“A gradual reduction would be better. Let’s go with a 20 percent decrease, Molly.” Anastacia adjusted the field.


“Okay. Are you recording this?”


“Maximum res.”


Molly was excited. She made sure to exhale sharply before bringing her face down to the eyepieces. “This batch looks live. It was harder to obtain.”


Up until this point they had extracted samples from areas that were relatively distant from Mercury. On the sixth run they decided to extract ring material that had just been launched from the mass driver on the surface of Mercury. Their working theory was that more recently generated material would allow for a greater range of observations. The first attempt ended in failure. The density of ring material in the area they sampled had been too high, causing minor damage to the sampler.


Their second attempt at collecting fresher ring material was successful. The sample had looked like the previous batch, with no new cell types in the mix. In the way of many discoveries, a serendipitous error had combined with a modicum of insight to generate a monumental find. Molly prepared a slide but failed to remove all of the older sample when introducing the new material. Within the mix of old and new cells, the previously unnoticed fifth particle type jumped out, literally, to take its place in the matrix. Compared to the other cells, this nanomachine was like a tiny flea on a dog. The fifth cell attached to the interior of the other cells in the manner of a parasite.


Molly and Anastacia decreased the electrostatic field containing the ring material and observed the reaction. The nanomachines began to vibrate at a higher frequency.


“The field’s still too strong for them to migrate,” Molly said, the vibrations of her voice jostling the stereographic image slightly.


“You’re right. Fifty percent after all, hotshot.”


“Agreed. Lowering.”


They lost themselves in their work, nearly forgetting the danger of working closely with ring material. After four hours, one of the tiny newly discovered cells merged with a tripod cell. Neither spoke for a moment after the two cells conjoined.


“Whose turn is it to name the cell?” Anastacia asked after a while.


“Haven’t we always shared? Messenger seems obvious,” Molly said.


“Are we sure of its job?”


“Aki predicted a cell that communicated. It’s definitely our missing piece,” Molly said. “My best assessment, barring a full assay, is that once isolated, the messenger cells would be harmless. Their job is transmitting information and replicating through the system to spread the ‘message.’ How daring are you feeling? You ready to take the leap and turn off the electrostat field?”


Anastacia’s eyes met Molly’s. Both women smiled mischievously. “Took the words right from my mouth, boss. Working without the field will speed up our testing. We just need a way to filter out the messengers.”


Over several hours they modified the optical processing machinery aboard the RMRF to create a makeshift filter that could isolate the messenger cells. Their initial tests showed the filter functioned perfectly. They isolated several hundred messenger cells and began observing them without using the destructive electrostatic field in the scanning tunneling microscope. They peeled back the outer atomic layer to analyze the interior. After finalizing their data they prepared to send their findings back to Earth where Aki waited anxiously for their results.