ACT IV: JULY 31, 2041


9:00 PM GMT


“HEY, ALICE, GOOD kitty or snake. Why doesn’t she purr or hiss or something?” Raul asked, reaching out to the closest of four Builders. He had named them Alice, Betty, Catherine, and Diane, even though they had not yet determined whether or not the Builders had genders.


Alice was of average size and was selected because a light brown patch on its back made Alice easy to differentiate from the other Builders. Aki and Joseph guarded Raul as he placed his handheld scanner on Alice’s back. He slid the scanner down the upper part of Alice’s body, and the results were displayed on the helmet monitors. Other than minor twitches, the creature lay still with its eyes closed during the entire process.


“They have spines. That looks like a heart with two ventricles. Three sacks behind the mouth cavity. Stomachs? Pair of lungs. Do you notice anything that might be vocal cords? Wait a minute, is that metal?” Aki spotted a rod about five centimeters long in the spinal cord behind the chest. A muscle fiber extended from one end of the rod. The other end of the rod connected directly to the spinal cord.


“There’s one here, too, in the lower body,” Joseph said. “Another in the head.”


The skull was spherical with two holes for eye sockets. It had a brain similar to a human’s but the structure was not hemispherical. The rod in the head went to the top of the skull, ending just below the skin.


“The two upper ones are connected to the spine and the brain. It must be some kind of bio-integrated neural implant. My guess is that they’re being monitored or controlled—maybe both. Maybe that’s why they’re ignoring us,” Raul said.


“For what purpose?” Joseph asked.


“Probably because they’re being transported. What if they’re just cargo, no more intelligent than a herd of cattle? The rod implants keep them sedated during the journey to ensure that they survive. The ship’s programmed to take care of their environment.”


“Possible, but if the ship’s environmental control system is that advanced, it does not make sense that the ship would allow us to enter and interact with these creatures without intervening to protect them,” Aki said.


“Chalk that up as another unsolved Builder mystery for now. I could scan another one, but we know we’ll see the same result,” Raul said.


Aki wondered what it would take to provoke a response from them. “How long does one of these things live? If the ship was en route for six hundred years, these must be the descendants of the original bunch. It would be easier and safer to just send fertilized eggs that they could incubate just before the arrival. Given what they’re capable of, that would be child’s play,” she said.


“Why not just send the DNA? Since their nanobots can build almost anything, they could grow them from DNA samples once they arrived.” None of the explanations made sense to Aki. There had to be a reason for the live transport of these beings, even if their minds were being controlled by technology. The Builders, Aki was convinced, were rational actors engaging in goal-oriented behaviors. “Their consciousness must serve some purpose during the voyage,” Aki said.


“Then maybe we’re looking at the meat locker. These must not be the Builders,” Raul said.


“If that is true, who eats them? This habitat looks too meticulously designed to be a cattle pen,” Aki said.


“Maybe they taste better when they live in luxury,” Raul said.


“Sprawled in the water like a Roman bath, my guess is that they are intelligent but so deep in thought they do not notice us.” Aki meant to continue her musing but a warning appeared on their monitors.


<DROP IN TRANSMISSION RATE—NODE 00-01 >


“Somebody’s standing on our cable,” Raul said. He was trying a joke, but his fear was evident in his voice once again.


<TRANSMISSION DISABLED—NODE 00-01 >


“The cable was severed at the first segment, back at the airlock,” Raul said.


“How?” Aki asked.


“No idea. That cable can withstand four tons of force.”


Panic shot through Aki’s body. “Let’s get there, see what’s going on.”


Moving quickly, they used their mapping system to retrace their steps through the forest and back to the entrance of the holding pen environment. Climbing the tether, they found the closest end of the first cable. It was still connected to the second cable and showed no abnormalities.


“Must be farther up,” Raul said.


They followed the cable back toward the hexagonal cells. Below the hole Joseph had cut in the hull, they found the severed cable next to a puddle of gray liquid. The hole was no longer there. Where their door had been was a different shade of gray than the surrounding area, but the wall had been regrown.


“It’s like the nanotech fur. It grew back to seal the hole,” Raul said. Aki could not help but notice the horror in his voice.


“Contact Team to Phalanx. Do you read? Igor?” Joseph said into the wireless communication system. After a full two minutes, there was still no reply.


“With the plasma torch outside in the airlock, the only chance for escape will be when the graser hits. Which is going to do a lot more than just cut a hole,” Raul said. He held his hand in front of his helmet. “At least we’re not melting, d-d-despite contact with the outer surface of the hull. It must not possess the same c-c-orrosive property the Vert-Ring ha-has.”


Aki noticed the stammer that had become more and more evident as Raul had kept speaking. “Back to the beach, follow me,” she said. “The only chance we have is explaining our situation to the Builders.”


“W-what if they aren’t the Builders?” Raul asked. Through his glass, his face had gone pale.


“I insist you follow my lead and go with my assumption. Come on.”


Joseph too seemed concerned and a bit lost. Aki glanced up at her own monitor and saw that time was running out. The graser would be fired in less than three hours.