ACT VI: JULY 31, 2041


5:14 AM GMT


THE FIRST BURST of light appeared at a distance of seventeen thousand kilometers from the Builders’ ship. The attack beam pointed in the direction of the closest missile, fired, and transformed the missile into a patch of superheated vapor. The image on the viewscreen filled with a blinding flash.


The observation program was still at work; the laser communication systems still transmitted data to the warheads. The missiles responded with their most recent positional information. One by one, the decoy warheads activated and were picked off, causing the attack beam to stop to recharge for a moment. The window was a brief one—no more than ten seconds. The missiles crossed the ten thousand kilometer mark. Six active warheads remained.


Another flash of light appeared as a warhead carrying a spiderweb was hit. The webbing vaporized into a plasma cloud. The remaining missiles scattered to avoid being hit. Two more flashes followed, both from the destruction of decoy warheads.


While the beam was destroying those decoys, two active warheads reached the five thousand–kilometer mark. Relative to their target, the missiles were traveling at fourteen kilometers per second. At that speed, they had to evade the attack beam for six more minutes to strike effectively.


The attack beam fired again, disintegrating one of the active warheads. Then it took out the last of the decoys. The final active warhead had three thousand kilometers to go and had nothing but its own maneuverability to distract the attack beam from homing in. On its final approach, the missile began to exhaust its fuel to increase its acceleration. Aki could hear the three minutes ticking inside her head.


The missile’s angular speed relative to the alien vessel increased, evading the attack beam twice.


At the two thousand–kilometer mark, Aki could not help but feel conflicted. At that moment, the needs of humanity seemed greater than her desire to finally communicate with the Builders. And then the final warhead was disintegrated by the beam. All that remained were twisted fragments of spiderwebs. After a few moments, even those burned away. The only object in close proximity to the Builders was the Phalanx.


“Igor, get us out,” Aki said.


“Already on it.”


Unlike the missiles, the Phalanx was incapable of flying a highspeed zigzag pattern to avoid being hit. The Phalanx was highly maneuverable but had not been built to evade attacks. Since the ship had been headed toward the Builders, it took a few terrifying moments for the Phalanx to decelerate sufficiently to reverse course. Through a feed from the Phalanx’s telescope, Aki kept a close eye on the attack beam’s base. The base began to move, but Aki realized that the base was not preparing to fire. Instead, the iris opened and the Torus initiated its nuclear drive system. The alien vessel resumed its deceleration as it headed toward Mercury.


“Stop the withdrawal,” Aki commanded. “That looked closer than it was.”


“A bit too close,” Igor responded. “Looks like the UNSDF has one shot left. You think they’ll actually fire the graser at the Builders?”


“We’ll find out tomorrow.”


Taking a long slow breath and bringing her eyes away from the monitors to look at the smooth white walls of her cocoon, Aki was surprised by how casually she had replied and the estrangement she felt from the dire predicament. Until now, the subject of firing the graser had been taboo aboard the Phalanx. Her thoughts were interrupted by a call from Raul.


“There’s something I need but I can’t explain to you. It’s access to one of the communication lasers.”


“There is one we’re not using, but I’d like to know what you’re planning.”


“It would take too long. Just trust me on this puppy, okay? This is our last chance.” The desperation in Raul’s voice was clear, despite his attempt to keep his tone light. As commander, it was her duty to oversee the ship, but she had chosen Raul because she respected his commitment to finding a way to contact the Builders. She also, as much as the memory hurt, remembered how what seemed like a last chance had presented itself to her on the Island so many years ago.


“Fine. I am granting you access now.”


“Hurrah!”


Aki opened the system administration screen to grant Raul access to communication laser number four. After a while, a large portion of the operations system was being monopolized by a program running under Raul’s access code. The name of the program was NATALIA. Aki wondered if it was merely a tribute.


7 AM GMT


EVERYONE EXCEPT RAUL gathered in the crew room for breakfast. Aki could not help but notice how tired they looked. She removed slices of apple pie from the warming unit and handed them out.


“Igor, could you hand me a salt packet?” she asked.


Aki opened the packet of salt water, squeezed it onto her pie, and let the liquid soak into the crust.


“Commander, I’ll never understand your culinary customs.” Igor chuckled after he said it.


“The salt? Pie is too sweet for me first thing in the morning.”


“How does adding salt make food less sweet?”


“I don’t like sweetness as the only flavor. Everyone should try it,” she said, handing the salt packet to Joseph.


“Why not?” Joseph said, letting some of the liquid soak into his pie. His bravery even extended to cuisine.


“How about you, Aida?”


Aida’s face was pointed down at the table. Aida shook her head to indicate she was not interested.


“Would you like something other than apple? There’s cherry too,” Aki said, trying to raise Aida’s spirits, though she knew it would take more than a different flavor of pie to stop her from moping.


“No, thanks. Apple’s fine,” Aida answered with little inflection.


“This isn’t bad,” Joseph said, his mouth full.


“See? In Japan, we also salt our watermelon, sometimes even cantaloupe.”


“I’ll save the salt for French fries, thanks,” Igor said. He washed his salted pie down with coffee, then slid open the blind that covered the ship’s window and asked, “What’s the weather?”


Most of the view was blocked by the ship’s solar shield. A bright point of light was in the lower corner of the window. “Look how close we’re getting to Mercury. Isn’t that amazing? It’s almost as big as a half moon back home.”


The others huddled close to see. Igor adjusted the light filter on the window. The image went from a glaring blur to a clear view of the half-lit planet. They could even see thin filaments of ring material being ejected into space near the planet’s equator. When he increased the magnification of the filter, shadows on Mercury’s surface and along the equatorial belt became visible.


The view was a limited one. Though she could not see the ships, Aki knew that five million kilometers away from the planet the UNSS Thompson and Becquerel were waiting for the Builders to complete their flyby. She could picture the commanders preparing the graser mounted on the Thompson.


“Can you see the earth from there?” Raul interrupted from his cocoon. Aki thought his voice sounded excited.


“The earth? Of course not, idiot. It’s on the other side of the sun,” Igor answered.


“Oh.” There was a click as Raul shut his commlink to the room. Normally the button did not click; he must have slapped it hard.


No one spoke. Aki knew they had come to the inevitable conclusion that there was nothing left to do. The Contact Team had failed.


Igor placed his pie wrapper in the trash dispenser. In a businesslike tone, he said, “After dinner we should enter a course to take us out of orbit and away from the line of fire of the graser. We don’t want to get caught up in that mess.”


Aida placed her face in her hands and let out a sigh. Aki pulled herself next to Aida and placed her hand on Aida’s shoulder.


“We did all we could. We need to keep our chins up and see this through to the end.”


“We haven’t tried everything!” Raul said, leaping out of his cocoon into the crew room so quickly that he bumped Aida’s chair. “Have a look!” He pressed the wall-mounted screen to display laser communication system number four. Several pulsating graphs appeared.


“Are we supposed to know what we’re looking at?” Igor asked.


“What you’re looking at, amigos, is the only chica I’ve ever loved: Natalia,” Raul said. He was excited, even proud.


Aki swallowed hard. She knew where this was headed.


“I never gave up on her. I never did. I’ve been toiling, a little at a time, over the past few years. I accessed my computer at the ETICC and emulated Natalia on the Phalanx’s computer system.”


“Could you say that in a way that lets me understand what you mean?” asked Aida.


“When I was an undergrad, I made this artificial intelligence system. I called her Natalia. The problem was that she wasn’t able to interact with external intelligence. In other words, she couldn’t talk to anybody and she wouldn’t talk to anybody. There was a lot in her electronic head, but I was never able to figure out what she was thinking. Eventually, I gave up on her and quit, but I saved her internal state. I didn’t really give up. She knows I didn’t. I would bring up a virtual copy on my computer at work and fiddle around. You know, to make improvements. I’ve been thinking about her more and more these past few days with a hunch that she might be the answer we needed. I partitioned off some space on the Phalanx’s computer and emulated a virtual copy of her. She’s been online and communicating since late last night.”


“A hunch for what answer?” Aki asked.


“In today’s battle, I was sure the Builders would attack us. But they didn’t. They were deflecting a reasonably massive attack, but they didn’t connect our presence to the combat.”


“Maybe they were too busy vaporizing the missiles to consider why we were there,” Igor said.


“Yesterday and today, the Builders faced an attack from a new enemy. Anyone paying attention would associate an unfamiliar attack in the neighborhood with the new ship that was also lurking in the area. We were just outside their attack zone flying at a velocity that matched theirs exactly. How much more blatantly obvious could we be?” Raul glanced at a moving bar on the graph.


“Natalia was not a part of that,” Aki said.


“She’s communicating with the Builders!” Raul tensed and if not for the zero gravity, Aki thought, may have started dancing. Everyone else started paying a lot more attention to Raul’s graphs.


“I encoded Natalia’s internal state and aimed a communication beam at the Builders’ ship. I nearly lost control of my bladder when she got a response on the same frequency.”


“What was the response?” Igor asked.


“That’s what’s crazy. I have no idea. I have no way of communicating with Natalia. The same goes for the Builders’ reply. It’s gibberish. I queried the Phalanx’s computer, but nada. But what’s important is that we got a reply. Natalia and the Builders are similar, and they’re somehow able to understand each other.”


Raul opened a new window on the monitor. The monitor depicted the laser signal being received from the Builders as fluctuating bands. He toggled to a similar screen that showed communication being sent from Natalia to the Builders.


“The patterns look the same. They’ve found a common language. Aki, do you remember the first time you met Natalia?”


“Of course.”


“Do you remember how Natalia reacted when you threatened to flip her switch?”


“She didn’t react at all,” Aki said, the images of the psychedelic colors flashing on the monitors in Raul’s trailer seventeen years prior coming back to her. “I remember you yelling at me to stop, saying she was unable to interact with humans.”


“That’s right. If you have no self-awareness, you, by default, have no understanding of enemies or threats. The idea of somebody taking your life away is a concept that makes no sense. It’s all so similar.”


“Similar to what?” Aida asked.


“To the Builders not understanding that the Phalanx was a part of what was attempting to destroy them. The Builders are programmed to remove any obstacles. They see all the human actions that have happened so far as nothing more than objects in their way, even though we are life-forms engaging in rational actions. They have no concept of self or other. To them, we’re no different than asteroids, comets, or space debris.”


Aki recalled the conversation about capuchin monkeys with Jill Elsevier from that same day at the ETICC. The Builders lacked a theory of mind. “So they have ignored us but are interested in Natalia. I just wish we knew how they are making sense of those strange thought patterns of hers.”


“That I don’t know. But what’s important here is not how they’re doing it but rather that they’re able to do it at all. It may be that they think she’s part of them since they can’t perceive her as a separate individual intelligence,” Raul said. Then he smiled. “The even bigger question here is if they do think that she’s part of them, would they refrain from firing the attack beam if she approached?”


Aki looked around the room and noticed that everybody was staring at her, waiting for an answer. Their departure was scheduled for 10 pm GMT, which meant that Aki had exactly twelve hours to take action, provided she could decide on what action to take. Trying to first contact the UNSDF and explain the situation would take more time than Aki was willing to waste. “Because of what we have been through, we need to decide together. Let’s vote. Do we sit it out and wait for our departure window or do we follow Raul’s hunch and make an approach?”


“Let’s do it,” Igor said without hesitation.


“I’m in too. That’s why we’re here, right?” said Aida, looking less glum than she had all morning.


“Before I give my vote, I have a question,” Joseph said. “Suppose they let us approach without firing on us. Does that mean we’re back to the original plan of the commander, Raul, and I boarding their ship?”


“That’s the only option. Now that the Remora’s lost, contact requires an EVA,” Aki said. Looking into his eyes, she could see that Joseph had no reservations. He even looked energized by the idea.


“Okay. It’s my job to protect you. I go where you go.”


“Then we’re all in,” Aki said.


“We go knock on their door and see what happens,” Raul said. He had not stopped smiling.


“It’s unanimous. The clock is ticking. Let’s get to work.” Aki had chosen her crew because she knew they were willing to go to any lengths to make contact. She had started mentally composing the note to the UNSDF before she had even began polling them.










CHAPTER 4: MIND TO MIND