PROLOGUE




AT DUSK, THE third day of the third month, in the fifty-seventh year of the Empire of the Great Ming, a farmer entered a teahouse. Every year, on this auspicious day, villagers harvested shepherd’s purse, a weed of the cruciferous order. Setting down his woven bamboo basket, the farmer offered a bundle of the white flowers to Zōngyuan, the teahouse’s proprietor. Drying the grass in the shade and placing the shepherd’s purse next to a lantern distracted moths because the moths would feed on the grass instead of entering the flame. In traditional medicine, the weed was added to formulas to treat blurry vision and spots that floated before the eyes.


The farmer described a new star to Zōngyuan. He stated that the star had appeared next to Shen Xiù, the asterism of three stars that eventually became known to the West as Orion’s belt. Surprised, Zōngyuan followed the farmer out into the street. The stars shined dimly through the sand-filled air, with the last vestiges of sunset glowing crimson along the western horizon. Despite the dusty air, Shēn Xiù was clearly visible in the southern sky.


Where the farmer pointed, next to the three stars, Zōngyuan saw a faint light. The farmer said that he knew the night sky as well as shepherds knew their sheep and insisted that the barely visible star had not been there the previous night. Zōngyuan returned to his house. With his record book and inkstone, he wrote, “1424: Guest star appeared next to Shēn Xiù.” Below his note, he drew a rough map to indicate the location of the celestial body.


Later that season, standing in his garden, Zōngyuan located Shēn Xiù, slightly west of where it had been. The guest star was still next to Orion’s belt. The star remained visible whenever Zōngyuan checked. Eventually, he grew old and his eyes no longer worked.


Fourteen years after the original sighting, the farmer returned to the teahouse and told Zōngyuan that the star had disappeared. Wetting the inkstone, wondering how legible his entry would be, Zōngyuan wrote, “1438: Guest star no longer next to Shēn Xiù.”










PART I




USURPER OF THE SUN