ACT IV: AUGUST 14, 2024


WITH A CLICK, Aki projected an image to the overhead screen. The presentation on her most recent findings had been meticulously prepared for this press conference.


“The nanotechnology used in the ring material is beyond our wildest imaginings,” she explained. “The tiny particles have more in common with biological cells than they do with machines. With a small variety of these cells, the nanomachines combine to create an incredibly diverse, near-infinite number of structures.


“Many of us wondered how a biological organism, even an anaerobe, could function in the vacuum of space. On a microscopic scale, biology cannot live or function without water. Cells are surrounded by membranes. Membranes divide, then fill with liquid to multiply. Cells are not cut off from the outside world. Cells use ingenious and complicated mechanisms to transfer material and information to each other. This is how biological processes occur.


“Space suits are designed to get around easily in space’s weightlessness—it is how we, as biological organisms, have adapted to the environment of space. On Earth, astronauts train underwater to better mimic the qualities of low- and zero-G environments. The same holds true for ring material. It is similar to how crystal minerals deposit vapor—the crystal extends an arm that swims about, moving freely, eventually settling down and linking.”


Aki showed several enlarged pictures of ring material.


“The tripod cells link with these newly discovered messenger cells. The tripod absorbs the messenger, then the three protrusions separate from the tripod and locomote away. The protrusions reconnect with other tripod centers to carry on the message from the original cell. This chain reaction transmits information carried by the messenger cell. The ring material undergoes constant dynamic restructuring. For this reason, we knew there had to be a cell, or some other mechanism, that was transmitting information. The tripods are one of the more numerous types, but we did not understand the mechanism that allowed them to operate. The discovery of the messenger cell supports the model we hypothesized because we had predicted this cell.”


After finishing, Aki opened the floor to questions. The first question was the one she had prepared for most.


“What impact will this discovery of the messenger have on future UNSDF missions, and on a greater scale, the future of humanity?” asked a reporter.


“By utilizing the functionality of the messenger cell,” Aki responded, “we will be able to manipulate the Ring at will. The UNSDF spends billions, if not trillions, to use its fleet to dismantle the Ring as it rebuilds itself. Decoding the information stored in the messenger cells and overwriting that code would instruct the Ring to adopt a new structure. In other words, instead of undoing the damage every time it is built, we could prevent it from ever harming us again. Changing the instructions is the more proactive approach.”


“You’re suggesting that we insert a virus that causes the Ring to destroy itself?” the next reporter in line asked.


“The destruction of the Ring is not necessary,” Aki said. “My personal thoughts on this latest discovery are relevant to this. Many of us lost family members, everything we owned or cared about due to the radical climate change brought on by the Ring’s shadowing of the planet. Much of the earth and its species, which we have fought extremely hard to protect, have been destroyed. I have no idea if we can ever recover from such cataclysmic losses. I understand the antipathy that many of you feel toward the Builders. Those same feelings—the desperation, the rancor, and yes, the hate—brought me to the surface of the Ring itself. Uniquely among humanity, I took physical action against the Builders. However, now I have come to believe that it is not their intention to invade.


“I knew this from the moment I set foot on the Island and saw the defense system. It clearly had been designed to protect the Ring against damage from stray asteroids and comets. The Builders did not anticipate intelligent life that could possibly reach the Ring or sabotage it. Our encounter with the Builders is ultimately an unfortunate unintended consequence of their mode of interstellar travel. They meant no intentional harm. We have to ask ourselves whether we want to let our first encounter with an extraterrestrial intelligence be characterized by anger and hatred. Do we have the right, without knowing anything about their civilization or culture, to banish them to the dark reaches of interstellar space?”


A few voices in the press corps murmured; to Aki the voices sounded positive. Hands shot up and then the shouting began. Aki waved her arms, signaling that she had more to say. “Please, please. I am not saying that we should surrender or leave the Ring intact as it is. Modifying messenger cells gives us the potential to control the Ring’s growth and orientation. As intelligent beings, as a species that has dreamed of contact with another intelligence, we have an obligation to rebuild the Ring, promptly, and allow the Builders to stop their fleet in our solar system. I suggest that we call the second Ring the ‘Vert-Ring.’


“If we alter the messenger cells so that the Vert-Ring regenerates perpendicular to its previous orientation, the detrimental shadowing effect on Earth will become negligible. A number of scientists agree that it would even help alleviate the greenhouse effect. If an unexpected threat to our safety emerges, we have the means to dismantle the new Ring at any time. There is no proof that it is too late to rebuild the Ring in time for their arrival. The most powerful telescope we have launched into orbit has yet to make visual contact with their fleet.


“The automated production facilities they built on Mercury are still in operation. As long as the production facilities continue to run, we will have several chances to perfect our influence over the messenger cells. Most importantly, the act of rebuilding the Vert-Ring would send a clear and unequivocal message that our intentions are not malicious. I believe that a civilization that mastered nanotechnology, nuclear fusion, and perhaps even antimatter could not accomplish such achievements without first overcoming the plague of intraspecies war. Let us not be consumed by suspicion. Let us set aside our fears and imagine the day when we will meet the Builders face to face. Let us see them as the benevolent and intellectually advanced beings that they must certainly be.”


More than a few journalists applauded.






TWENTY MINUTES LATER, a secret meeting was held on a highly secure part of the Worldunity Network. The participants were all representatives of different forces—governmental, economic, scientific—but they did not know one another. Their voices were disguised. There was no visual component to the teleconference. They did not use, nor even know, one another’s names. Two men spoke, as was the tradition at these meetings, while the others simply listened, and these two men knew just what to say without prompting, briefing, or talking points in hand.


“Damn that Shiraishi. I think we underestimated her. Grossly,” said the first voice, a rich baritone.


“No chance of getting rid of her?” responded the second voice, which sounded tired, as if nursing a head cold.


“Not now. Too many questions, too many supporters.”


“That speech will turn the tables. Instant polling shows that 52 percent of North America is in favor of rebuilding the Ring ‘sideways,’ as the survey phrased it. And now only 46 percent support an assertive security posture.”


“That’s not much of a lead. Once the dust settles, we’ll regain ground.” The first voice laughed loudly, though it didn’t fit with the conversation. Something else must have happened in his location at that moment.


“Still, 74 percent are in favor of her messenger cell experiment. Success clinches their plan’s momentum.”


“It won’t be that easy. Decoding the human DNA sequence was touted as being promising, but look at how long it took to actually happen. They will spend years groping in the dark trying to figure out how to manipulate those messenger cells.”


“They have the top nanotech people.”


“Her speech was nothing more than a far-fetched personal pipe dream. What we need is to convince the public of the need for a preemptive strike against the Builders.”


“Is that even possible?” the second voice asked. “Given their technology, what could we bring to bear against them? If the answer is ‘nothing effective,’ then her plan may be the only logical alternative. Trying to rendezvous with an object moving at eighteen thousand kilometers per second is out of the question. Even attacking something moving that fast would be no easy task. The average speed of meteoroids is twenty kilometers per second when the meteoroids hit the atmosphere. The Builders are moving at nearly a thousand times that speed. The aggregate energy released from an Earth impact would be exponential, something like a million times as great. The meteor that wiped out the dinosaurs is estimated to have been ten kilometers across. With the speed the Builders are traveling, they could achieve the same effect with something one hundred meters across.


“With twenty thousand tons of matter, they could take us out by sacrificing a couple of ships in their fleet.”


“If they are planning to smash into us, their trajectory is clear. There’s only one straight line that connects Orion to Earth. We know exactly where they’re coming from. If we place an object in the way for them to collide with, we could forestall impact.”


“How? Gravitational force exists; you can’t just place an object in space and expect it to remain stationary, waiting for them to show up.”


“The best we can do is to locate their actual position and flight path.”


“There won’t be time. Here, have a look at this,” began the first voice. Keys began clacking. The first voice continued, “We will have little time to act if their intentions are adversarial. We have a massive amount of matter headed toward us from Orion. The difficult question is whether it’s going to pass by harmlessly or whether it’s aimed to collide. Unfortunately, their trajectory is close enough to the plane on which Earth orbits. With the earth, the sun and this massive object aligned, it’s impossible to tell whether they’re targeting the sun or us.”


“There are other unknowns. We don’t know the size or reflectance ratio of the approaching object or objects. If this hypothetical Builder cannonball absorbs light instead of reflecting it, observations in the visible-light spectrum will be difficult no matter how close they get. Infrared is a possibility—everything has a heat signature after all—but I hardly need to explain the economic difficulties of such detection. Nearly every observatory and satellite still in operation is oriented toward the Ring. Using the most powerful radar would only allow us to spot this potential catastrophe once the ship is in the inner solar system,” said the nasal voice.


“Assuming the problem of detection requires new technology, what are our options for target destruction?”


“It depends on our ability to detect it. The most optimistic scenario allows detection at eighty astronomical units, roughly eight days before it reaches Earth. Cruise missiles in low orbit can travel at ten kilometers per second. If cruise missiles are launched, contact would be achieved at five minutes and thirty seconds before impact with Earth. If they miss, there’s no time for second chances. Even if they destroy the target successfully, fragments from the explosion would impact the earth, unless we could move them 6,400 kilometers out of the way, essentially half the diameter of the earth, in five and a half minutes. In other words, we would have to accelerate every last fragment to a speed of twenty kilometers per second along a path perpendicular to their original trajectory toward Earth. I don’t think I am being a pessimist to say that it is impossible. To put the scale of such a task into perspective, the electromagnetic railgun developed by the U.S. military accelerates a bullet-sized object that quickly, but the railgun requires a launching device the size of a building.”


Despite the bar on oral participation, some grumbling from third parties could be heard over the network.


“We need not only detect the object at a long range but also begin deflecting it at this distance as well. A missile attack would by no means be fast enough. The best weapon of defense would be some kind of high-strength beam, though human technology isn’t capable of creating such a device.”


“You’re saying that our only choice is to sit tight and hope for the best?”


After a long silence, one of the members, most likely a third voice, interjected. “Going along with Shiraishi’s proposal might be the wisest route.” There was a long moment of silence, due to both the breach of etiquette and the audacity of the suggestion.


“You’re suggesting we give in to her?” the first voice said finally.


“Not quite. How does a judo master bring down an opponent twice his size? He uses his opponent’s strength against him. That’s what we need to do. Shiraishi is calling for this Vert-Ring to be rebuilt. We give her what she wants, then use it to get what we want, and she doesn’t even have to know.”


“I’m afraid I’m not following.”


“You’re saying we need a beam strong enough to deflect them? If we rebuild the Ring and take control of the Island, we’ll have just that.”