ACT II: DECEMBER 2006










MERCURY GROWS AN IMPOSSIBLE ANTENNA


INCONCEIVABLE STRUCTURE DISCOVERED ON MERCURY






AT FIRST, MOST scoffed at the reports. Sensational headlines made their way around the globe and phones at observatories rang off the hook, but the landmark discovery was dismissed as conspiracy theories and hype for the first few days. Then, the general public’s apathy toward space vanished. Astronomy turned into the latest craze. So many people visited observatories and planetariums that there were waiting lists and lines around the block.


Aki had been elected president of her astronomy club in a special midterm election. Before her discovery, she had been called a bright underachiever, still seeking internal drive and motivation for learning. Now, she had found it in astronomy. As the first witness of the Mercurial event—and a media-friendly one as a poised and well-spoken female student—she was bombarded with questions from reporters, classmates, and teachers. Aki had to stay on top of the issues because people asked her opinions day and night. She even carried a laminated sketch drawn from memory, diagrams, and graphs in order to describe what she had witnessed and what the strange phenomenon meant to the world.


“It was built by aliens?” a podcaster had asked.


“No one knows for sure yet,” Aki answered. She felt it was her job to present the facts and not get swayed by the media speculation.


“Do you think aliens are taking over Earth sometime within the next few weeks?” she was asked in an online chat.


“We are not even sure that the object was built by intelligent life. We need to make more detailed observations and not go willy-nilly with spacey ideas,” she had responded. She regretted the phrasing when a small-town paper ran the headline EXPERT SAYS DO NOT GO WILLY-NILLY WITH SPACEY IDEAS! but she got over it. The experience was a lesson to be more careful in choosing how she expressed the concepts she was studying.


“If you could see it with just the little telescope on the roof, wouldn’t it be awesome to look at it again with an even bigger telescope?” an interviewer who giggled behind her hand after each question had asked on an hour-long talk show special devoted exclusively to Aki.


Aki explained that it was not possible, saying that, “Transits of Mercury, when we can watch Mercury pass between the earth and the sun, are somewhat rare, though more common than those of Venus. Otherwise, Mercury is always too near the sun to be seen well with even the best telescopes in the world—except for just before sunrise or just after sunset. Even viewed along the horizon, the angle distorts observations because of fluctuations in the atmosphere. State-of-the-art equipment, like active optics, cancels out some of the distortion, but my astronomy club would only get what, at best, could be called a rough approximation of the appendage’s shape. With slightly better equipment, we would also get peeks at Mercury during the day when it was high in the sky, but the sun is bright enough that it is hard to see with enough detail because of the severity of the contrast.”


It got to where classmates who had never listened to a word Aki Shiraishi said would revere her as a newly famous authority on astronomy. Before her discovery, Aki was shy and unpopular. Now, she had to turn kids down when they invited her to go shopping or attend concerts because she was too busy giving interviews and reading scientific journals.


She spoke at a science convention and mentioned that her astronomy club wanted better digital video cameras; donations poured in and the new equipment was delivered by the end of the week. Becoming a voice in the astronomy revolution and the theories people were calling “cultural exobiology” made her even more committed to her studies. Students and teachers from all over the world asked every kind of question, putting her on the spot. She had to become a reliable expert. Her knowledge started with Mercury’s physical properties but quickly moved to more obscure topics like Mercury’s orbital resonance and tidal force. Eventually, she gave lectures on the history of humankind’s belief in life on other planets and related how people got half their ideas about aliens from books and TV—but that even U.S. president Jimmy Carter had claimed to have seen a UFO. While some of her public appearances were less formal than others, she was committed to understanding the cutting-edge quantitative research and presenting it objectively.


Aki wished there were more pictures of Mercury, but there was only one good set. The outer planets always got more attention, with tons of photos and other data collected by the Voyager probes, but Mercury only had the ones from Mariner 10 ’s three flybys in the mid-1970s. There were over four thousand photos, but Aki came to the gradual conclusion that Mariner 10 might have overlooked something extremely important.


The diameter of Mercury is about a third of Earth’s. At first glance it looks like the moon but has fewer dark spots. Mariner 10 had taken pictures of almost half the surface, but there was no hint of the tower. Nor had anything unusual been observed in 2003 during the previous transit of Mercury. Thinking about it one night falling asleep and again the next morning while brushing her teeth, it worried Aki that some unknown entity could build such an enormous structure in less than four years.


One month after the phenomenon was discovered, NASA decided to resort to using one of its space telescopes to take a closer look. Although under normal circumstances NASA would never dream of pointing such a costly piece of equipment anywhere near the sun, this case merited an exception. NASA took over the telescope’s time slots, which were normally booked solid months in advance, and after careful preparations, began to collect images of Mercury.


When the photos were released to the public, the world lapsed into speculation again. Aki stuck to peer-reviewed sources and used the best-resolution images available. The strange and gigantic tower looked like Old Faithful, even though the tower dwarfed the famous geyser by six orders of magnitude. Near the surface, a thick rod jutted up before fading into a cloud of countless, blurry particles that got fainter and fainter, eventually dissolving into space.


Since Mercury’s magnetic field is 1 percent as strong as Earth’s, Aki was certain that all seismic activity on the planet had long ago ended. Some experts were clinging to the idea that dirt or dust was being shaken up into space because a similar phenomenon occurs on Io, but most admitted that the tower could not possibly be a naturally occurring phenomenon.


A few days later, newer pictures showed that the surface of Mercury was being covered with ridges and furrows. The flowing material at the root of the tower had lifted and formed a solid line along Mercury’s equator, with branches and veins stemming from the equator like tributaries. A giant red seaweed covered the planet, surging in every direction, obscuring the craters and the mountains. Under the highest magnification, Mercury looked like a monstrous bloodshot eye with pulsing capillary vessels, with areas of land that glowed with grayish red mud, reminiscent of the swampy agar fields of Japan.


Aki kept talking about the facts, but inside her head she knew that the fountain, or tower, or antenna was only the beginning. The equatorial structure, which had kept growing until its line was seventy-five kilometers thick, was somehow feeding and powering the tower construction. With no atmosphere on Mercury, payloads were easy to launch into space. Aki presumed that the constantly flowing material was launched by a series of mass drivers—electromagnetic catapults that launch payloads. As much as it was an impressive engineering feat, a different question remained for her: why is any of this happening?


The material being ejected from Mercury trailed along its elliptical orbit. The laws of orbital dynamics said that the material would flow away from Mercury toward the sun and eventually come to rest between the two.






SURFACE MINING TAKING PLACE ON MERCURY!






HEADLINES ABOUT MERCURY were in the most recent daily newspapers. No one could keep track of all the blogs. The images produced by the space telescope resolved to the square kilometer—not enough detail to show any vehicles, machinery, or even the residences of hypothetical alien engineers. Psychics and abductees made claims of mind-melding or being probed by the supposed Mercurians, but their stories were inconsistent, even lunatic. Aki had no choice but to hear the rumors. That side of the discussion meant little to her investigations.


Most of the experts came to the conclusion that the work was not being done by native inhabitants of Mercury. Even for the most respected scientists, it was considered unlikely that intelligent life from beyond the solar system was behind the mysterious activity, but to Aki Shiraishi, the conclusion that aliens were involved was the only rational explanation.


Was Mercury a good choice for aliens? It had a wealth of metallic minerals and, naturally, a plethora of solar energy for the harnessing. Because it was also close to the sun’s gravity, Mercury had a high concentration of heavier elements, including an iron core just beneath its crust. With solar radiation on Mercury seven times the level on Earth, there was a more-than-sufficient power source for excavation and building.


With the possibility of an extrasolar life-form only a hundred million kilometers away, humanity’s great institutions had to make a show of doing something proactive. The United Nations created rules for interstellar diplomacy based on the Post-Detection Protocol that had been adopted by the International Academy of Astronautics in 1989. PDP was devised by researchers in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project and gave important instructions about what to do when extraterrestrial contact appeared imminent:






Duly confirm the existence of the extraterrestrial civilization.


Inform the relevant organizations and agencies, starting with the U.N., followed by the mass media.


Share observational results.


Protect the communication frequencies being used to make contact.


Do not respond to any incoming messages without the proper authorization.






Replies were to be sent only after thorough discussion among the U.N. Peaceful Use of Space Committee, national governments, and certain non-governmental organizations. Based on the consensus reached, the U.N. would adopt a resolution finalizing the response to the communication. There was doubt that the PDP could pass a vote because the planet had so many political, religious, and personal differences about how to handle communication with other people on Earth that it seemed unlikely they could agree on how to talk to an alien species.


Finally, the U.N. hammered out an addendum to the PDP that said, simply, “Communication will be restricted until there is confirmation that the other party is an intelligent form of life.” In other words, the sanctioned dialogue with the extrasolars was limited to, “Greetings. We are intelligent beings. Are you?”


Nevertheless, scientists began devising means of communication, since there was no point in deciding what to say otherwise. The first message composed at the SETI Institute at the University of California at Berkeley was a pulse that transmitted a series of prime numbers, followed by symbols indicating that the message was coming from the third planet from the sun. Inspired by the message that was included with the Pioneer plaques, the first human-made objects that ever left the solar system, the communiqué also included a schematic of the spin-flip transition of hydrogen. Prime numbers do not occur randomly in nature. A communication composed of them would be prima facie evidence of intelligence. The transmission used the Arecibo radio-telescope observatory and NASA’s global deep-space network. The transmission points were synchronized with the earth’s rotation. The message was always sent from the side of Earth facing Mercury. To avoid interference, global restrictions were placed on using radio waves and the signal was broadcast on every possible frequency. Given the size of the construction project the extrasolars were conducting on Mercury, it seemed logical that the extrasolars would have at least one communications receiver in place. Still, Mercury remained silent.






MATERIAL CONTINUED TO seep from the planet’s surface. Before long it was visible even with consumer telescopes. Scientists observed particles entering a circular orbit around the sun with a radius of forty million kilometers. The behavior of the mass could not be explained by gravity or orbital dynamics. Scientists speculated that the floating particles were acting as planar mirrors, using light pressure to correct their orbit. That would require the production of eighty thousand tons of miniature space machines per second, a preposterous amount to Aki, but she knew that such a level of production was the only possible answer.


Eighty-eight days of head-scratching passed on Earth—and a year passed on Mercury—before the shape became clear: a ring eighty million kilometers in diameter encircled the sun.


News outlets scrambled to explain:


“This light bulb, with a diameter of 16.5 inches, is the sun,” explained one newscaster, the camera following as he walked. Then, panning out, there was a circle twenty-six feet wide with the light bulb at its center, slightly tilted and not quite parallel to the floor.


“This circle represents the enigmatic Ring that extrasolars on Mercury seem to have built, though perhaps this could still simply be a natural phenomenon never before seen by humanity. Our artists have made it thicker so you can see it, but if it were drawn to scale it would be as thin as a piece of dental floss. Magnified observations show that it’s about three kilometers tall and shaped like a ribbon standing on its side and wrapped around the sun like a wall. There are also reports of some kind of gas cloud, or particulate cloud, surrounding the Ring.”


The anchorman jogged past the ring. A table placed near the edge of the large room had a small blue pellet resting on a white china plate.


“I’m fifteen meters from the light bulb; the relative position of Earth. This little ball is our home planet.”


Over time, the Ring became more and more pronounced until it was visible to the naked eye. When the sun set each evening, people gathered on rooftops, hillsides—any spot with a clear view of the horizon—and stared at the western sky, chanting, weeping, and sometimes just sitting in lawn chairs drinking beer or barbecuing. For an hour after sunset and an hour before sunrise, the Ring could be seen in the dim sky, looming diagonally above the horizon like a glowing silk thread.


At first glance, it looked like the fibrous rings of Saturn or Uranus. Closer observation revealed that it had no orbital movement and was stationary relative to the sun. People wondered what kept it from getting sucked into the sun’s gravity well, and the best theory was that the Ring was composed of solar sails, giving it the power to stay in orbit. The inner side of the Ring was black. By absorbing sunlight across the inner vertical face, one square meter of surface could hold 0.7 grams of material in position. By Aki’s calculation, the Ring was as thin as a sheet of aluminum foil.


Then, a newly discovered fact shook the world. The height of the wall formed by the Ring was growing at the rate of fifty kilometers per day.


There was no visible form of construction observed. At the current rate of expansion, most experts calculated that it would take fifty years for the height of the Ring to cause total solar eclipses twice a year in May and November, when the plane of the earth’s orbit intersected the plane of the Ring. Meteorologists and planetologists predicted a crisis; though the total eclipses would only last a day, the eclipses would be preceded and followed by partial eclipses that would last more than two months, thereby blocking 10 percent of the earth’s annual sunlight.


“We don’t need to wait the fifty years,” a famous astrophysicist, Harrison Godwin, explained. “Reducing the amount of sunlight will increase the ice and snow enough to raise the earth’s total reflectance ratio, and we will be robbed of even more sunlight. This will start a chain reaction of cold spells around the world. In three to five years, we will have entered a new ice age.”