ACT III: JULY 31, 2041


8 PM GMT


AKI, RAUL, AND Joseph continued lowering themselves through the jungle of branches until it ended abruptly against the curved interior surface of the Torus. On the inside of the Torus’s outer wall, small sandy beaches were surrounded by dark pools, small dunes with pools of black liquid undulating beneath them. The jungle was ten meters overhead, hanging inverted arches forming a hollow tunnel that curved along the circumference of the Torus in both directions.


“This looks like the bottom,” Aki said, peering down at the beach. “Do you think they will attack us here now that we are out in the open?”


“The giant slugs? Hardly, but it would look cool on video,” Raul said, though the question had been directed at Joseph.


Aki found a branch that dipped close to the surface and climbed toward the beach. She was turned around enough that she had no idea if she was going ecliptic north, ecliptic south, or some other direction. The sandy substance coating the interior of the Torus hull was lightly packed, like diatomaceous earth. Dust like silica scraped away with her steps, soft enough that she left footprints where she walked. The ponds were anywhere from about two to ten meters wide and no more than a meter deep.


Lying in groups of two and three along the shorelines of the two ponds closest to them were about two dozen Builders, each partially submerged in the dark liquid. The Builders were stretched out on their stomachs, resting their upper bodies on their forearms as if they were sphinxes. They made no noises, no movements. The highly sensitive microphones in the team’s helmets were able to pick up intermittent noises that sounded like rasping, labored breaths. Aki could not tell if those faint noises were being made by the Builders.


“The pool deck on a luxury liner. Bet they used a photo of this beach on the brochure when they recruited for the six hundred–year cruise,” Raul said.


Aki looked closely at the builders, trying to discern differences between individuals that might suggest sexual dimorphism or age-related physical development. She could distinguish nothing beyond slight variations in size. The shortest ones were about three meters long. She wondered if they were the youngest, even though she had a hard time imagining the youth of any species being so lethargic. One of the Builders stirred from what Aki thought was sleep, turning around to fully submerse itself into the oily pond. It reappeared on the opposite side, crawled from the liquid—then, stretching toward the branches, slowly pulled itself into the canopy before disappearing into the jungle.


Aki, Raul, and Joseph began walking along the direction of rotation.


“Should we walk the full length and see what we find?” Aki asked. “I wonder if this beach stretches the entire circumference of the Torus.”


“I’m guessing it’s nearly a kilometer loop,” Joseph said.


Facing Joseph, Raul said, “If you can get me home, I’ll bet a plate of roast beef that it’s all ponds and beached Builders the whole way around.”


“I’ll take your bet. Because they are noncommunicative, understanding their space may be the only opportunity to understand them,” Aki said.


“So, how many Builders have we passed so far?” Raul asked his sensor array.


<TOTAL 131>


“Assume, just for kicks, an even distribution of Builders in the liveable areas of the ship. What’s the crew complement?”


<APPROXIMATELY 940 ENTITIES>


After about forty minutes, they noticed their own footprints ahead of them and the fiberoptic cable running down from the branches. Their mapping system also indicated they had returned to their starting point.


Joseph had counted a total of 847 Builders.


“What do we do now? Is there anything more to this ship than a cattle ranch?” Raul asked.


Aki would have reminded him to keep his cool again, but a message arrived from UNSDF Fleet Headquarters.


<PROCEED WITH PHYSICAL CONTACT.


PERFORM ULTRASOUND SCAN.>


The three looked at each other, wondering what would happen when they actually touched a Builder.