ACT XI: FEBRUARY 2, 2022


THE UNSS PHALANX shifted to a battle footing and launched its first attack. It sent a nuclear missile whizzing toward the Island, beyond the horizon of the Ring, some four million kilometers away.


The graser protecting the Island shot down the missile at the line of defense, disintegrating it in a microsecond, which was exactly what the crew had expected. Shortly after, the ship was hit with the massive surge of electricity that was released when the graser fired. Half the electrical systems suffered some sort of damage. After emergency procedures were performed, the ship and her hound made their way toward the Island, but the functional capabilities of both crafts were substantially impaired.


Aki put on a pressurized safety suit and secured herself in place in her cocoon. She kept a close eye on the infrared image being transmitted by the hound as it scouted their route. The Ring appeared on the screen as a plain gray field with subtle variations in color. After some time, the small bump of the Island appeared on the horizon.


“The hound is about to enter graser range. Make sure that all data files are closed,” ordered the commander. The backup electronics had been fried in the surge. If they were hit again, they would be crippled and in serious trouble.


Aki and Per had estimated that the graser would need 147 hours to recharge. It was an estimate based on a few too many assumptions that were based on suppositions that were based on guesses. There was no guarantee that the estimate was even close to correct. They waited in tense silence. After about five minutes, Per dared to speak.


“It is not firing.”


“So it really does shut down while it recharges.”


“Proceed?” asked Per.


“I don’t see any reason not to. What the hell else can we do?” Kindersley said.






FIVE HOURS LATER the Island was within visual range. The graser still had not fired.


Their probehound was floating directly above the Island. Commander Kindersley ordered the hound to make its descent. Aki controlled the telescopic camera. The Island rose up from the surface of the Ring to form a cliff three hundred meters high. The edge had appeared rounded in observations made from Earth, but viewed up close it was a sharp vertical wall. The top of the Island resembled a mirrored plane stretching beyond the horizon. More like a continent than an island, Aki thought to herself.


The opposite end of the Island was out of visual range, over 130,000 kilometers away. According to the readings that the sensors were producing, the Island was a table large enough to hold ten planets the size of Earth and still have room left over.


The telescopic camera revealed a web-like pattern covering the surface. At maximum zoom, it looked like the walls of a honeycomb, a collection of hexagonal-shaped pillars, each about four meters across with their surface covered in a translucent, viscous substance.


“If I did not know any better, I would say we are looking at the wall of a colossal bee hive dripping with honey,” Per said after clearing his throat.


Aki panned the camera to have a better look at the outside edge. The surface had no distinguishing features except for a gray border several meters thick around each cell in its matrix. There were no railings, no catwalks, no emergency exits. Aki had the camera trace a path around the edge of the cliff. A protruding object that resembled a lighthouse slowly came into view.


“Could that be a telescope?” asked Per.


“I bet it is the graser battery,” said Aki.


The commander moved the hound in for a closer look.


It appeared to be a stubby telescope atop an altazimuth mount. Double-checking the scale gauge connected to the distance meter, Aki confirmed that the diameter of the aperture was unbelievably large—about the length of a football field. The muzzle contained a concentric circle that looked like a collimator. The structure was seamless, completely smooth.


As she looked for even a trace of details or distinguishing features, Per noticed a miniature version of the battery on top of the barrel. “That must be the optical telescope—their viewfinder,” said Per.


“You’re probably right. A viewfinder to target incoming objects,” Kindersley said.


Examining the long-range images sent back by the hound in closer detail, the exact same object appeared again nine thousand kilometers in the distance. The structures lined the Island at equal intervals.


“Now’s the moment of truth, crew. Press on or turn back? You know where I stand, but I want to hear you on this one.”


“Continue,” Aki replied immediately.


Per took a bit longer. “I do not see any reason not to. Why wait?”


“The base of that graser battery is our target. Set the ship for final approach. Aki, prepare for an EVA.”


“Of course, sir.” Aki propelled herself out of her cocoon and began donning her space suit.


She and Per had talked about it. The mission would continue. Aki had volunteered to take over Mark’s duties. She would stand on the Island with her own two feet if that was what it took to obtain a sample and send the data to Earth.


The risk of contamination appeared to be low. The Builders seemed content to leave the Ring unguarded, perhaps due to its regenerative abilities. The Island, as it was protected by the graser, was perhaps not capable of self-repair. This was the best working theory the crew had to go on. Although the head of a simple planarian worm will grow back when it is cut off, the same cannot be said of a human. Similarly, it would be much more difficult to outfit the Island—a much more sophisticated construction than the exoskeleton of the Ring—with the capacity to regenerate itself when damaged.


It was likely that the nanomachines responsible for the fabrication and maintenance of the Island were still wandering its surface. Unlike the nanomaterial composing the Ring, the Island’s machines did not go about their work blindly. Aki pictured them emitting and receiving messages for propagation direction control, powered by something beyond human invention and understanding. Perhaps even Maxwell’s Demon had finally been constructed, and the nanobots were harvesting molecular-level power from the minute differences in temperature and energy across the Island’s surface.


“EVA prep completed,” she said.


Before the other two could come to the airlock door to see her off, Aki stepped in, depressurized, and opened the craft’s external door. The stern of the ship was pointed straight at the Ring. A continuous weak blast from the engines of the orbital maneuvering system counteracted the gravitational force of the Ring and the Island, allowing the ship to maintain a constant distance.


Aki was five hundred meters above the surface of the Ring. She held the railing. Her hands would not want to push off. She visualized the process so she would be ready when the moment came. The cliff surrounding the Island soared upward from the surface of the Ring about two kilometers ahead. A graser cannon was perched at the crest of the precipice.


Aki tried to keep from looking in the direction she could not help but think of as “down.” When she finally managed to push off, fear caused her breath to hitch.


“There is a red light on the Ring. It is targeting us.” Aki considered her options, then realized where the mirror-like surface of the Ring was facing. Her red target light was actually a reflection of Alpha Orionis, the red star Betelgeuse. Her sigh of relief echoed inside her helmet. The ship proceeded forward steadily until it was directly above the Island, its floodlight slicing across the top of the graser battery. The Ring’s gray and shiny surface was no longer below her feet. She dangled above what look like the compound eye of an enormous insect. An eye that extended into the distance farther than she could see.


“Starting descent.”


“God bless,” said Commander Kindersley.


Aki pushed herself away from the stationary railing, the jet on the back of her suit allowing her to drift straight back. A blast from one of the five-meter wide NERVA III engines could expel primary coolant from the nuclear reactor with over five tons of force. Aki had no intention of getting in its way. The readout from her suit’s radiation counter was increasing quickly enough to give her cause for concern. She was unsure what to do if it continued to escalate.


In the first minute, she descended 150 meters toward the Island. The graser battery passed by as she continued to drop. Landing on an area that was light gray in color, the boots of her suit touched down against the hard surface of the Island. It felt like polished marble, but Aki did not feel the density she was used to under her feet. Gravity was low; even taking a normal stride could mean reaching escape velocity. She gave a few blasts from her jet to propel her toward one of the hexagonal wells.


“The hole is approximately four meters across. The interior is a perfectly smooth cylinder with a reflective coating along its walls. This is interesting…From what I can see, it is not completely perpendicular compared to the Ring’s exoskeleton. It is somewhat tilted, perhaps aimed toward something.”


Aki peered deeper into the hole.


“There is something down there, about one hundred meters down. I am leaning over…I can see it now. Three arms are securing a disk in place.”


“Your helmet’s transmission gives a good look. It is probably the secondary mirror of a reflecting telescope,” Per said.


“I don’t think so, Per. I know scopes. The inside would be black to absorb any stray light that got trapped inside it. This is not even close. It is white and reflective.”


“It does not absorb light and gives it off instead?”


“Is it some kind of firing device for a diffuse laser?”


That explanation made more sense. This had to be the complex laser’s guidance mechanism. With the Island 130,000 kilometers across, if fired at once, the blasts would produce a bundle of amplified beams the size of Jupiter.


“What could it be for?” Aki asked. “We have already seen the graser. I cannot understand why the Builders would want this much power.”


“Maybe it’s for communication.”


“Too big, Per. It must be a propulsion system for laser sails. But where is the ship?” If it is for a ship, what could be massive enough that someone would need this much power to mine it or carry it away? The solar system did not have any precious resources or rare elements that were not readily available throughout the universe. She tried to visualize what the Builders could want. The Builders were advanced enough that they should appreciate that the solar system had life. She could not understand why they would ignore humanity or the rest of Earth’s species and build a device that could destroy it. The Ring was at a specific angle that reduced the amount of light that could reach Earth. It could not have been coincidental and was not the sort of information that such a meticulous design and construction process would have otherwise overlooked.


“Aki, what if the ships are not being built here because the ships are coming from somewhere else? Somewhere outside the solar system?” Per said.


“You’re not making sense. I was trying to think about how the—”


“What you’re sending back. That is not a propulsion system. It is for braking.”


“I have a pretty good—”


“No. The extrasolars will beam the lasers against sails to slow down, not to speed up. Based on a system capable of directing this much energy, like bomblets, it would be enough power to slow down an armada.”


Aki lifted her head and looked out into the stars. Orion, with Betelgeuse, the blue of Rigel, the Orion Nebula and Barnard’s Loop, all were in the direction the cylinder pointed.


“What would they…?” She was not sure how to finish her sentence or her thought. The Builders had to come from one of this countless mass of stars. One of those infinite pinpricks in the darkness had to be their sun. Aki understood that Per was correct. Somewhere out there, near whatever star was their home, there would be a replica of this structure she was standing on. It would launch the ships, providing acceleration to start their journey, and this would bring that fleet to a stop. With massive yet lightweight sails, ships like theirs would eliminate the need to carry their own engines or propellants. A civilization that could build such a system would have no problem constructing the Ring from such a remote distance.


“It is simple. How do you stop a photon-sail ship? We tossed that concept long ago for lack of an answer,” Per said. “Now you are standing on it.”


“I read that they’ve run tests on the idea.” The commander’s tone showed he did not want to sound as out of his depth as he was.


“The physicist and writer Robert L. Forward proposed light-sails and eventually came up with an idea for braking, reflecting the laser onto the front of the sail to slow the ship. His model had problems too. A laser beam loses strength in proportion to the square of the distance covered. It is hard to project a beam that remains strong enough for when it is time to begin deceleration. It is not applicable to long-distance trips. There are also problems presented by having the enormous sail mounted to the ship throughout the voyage.” Aki stepped back from the hole in the Island.


“I see what you mean,” said Commander Kindersley.


“The solution, as we are seeing here, is using nanotechnology. The Builders launch lightweight nanomachines from the ship once it is on course. By accelerating them to a speed just slightly greater than their ship’s speed, the nanomachines arrive years before the ship does. These nanomachines land on Mercury, use its resources to replicate themselves, and then fabricate everything we see here before their ship has even arrived. It’s quite slick,” said Per.


“Why would they send a fleet of ships, Per?” asked Aki.


“Look around. This is far more massive than one ship would need,” answered Per. “A single sail-ship, or small ones, could just use solar pressure to decelerate. The sun is a fine source of photons.”


“I suppose you are right.”


“Aki,” said the commander. “Measure the optical axis of the laser as accurately as possible. Aki? Come in, Aki,” he repeated.


Aki had been lost in thought, thinking of Per’s solution and considering its ramifications. “Yes, sir. Uh, got it.”


“Relax, Aki. Use the gyro in your handy-cam. As accurately as possible.”


“Yes, sir.”


Aki tried to concentrate. When the ship received the measurements, they cross-referenced them to the star catalog. HD 37605 was a star forty-three parsecs away —a perfect match. It was in the K0V spectrum, one class redder than the earth’s sun, peaking within the visible spectrum, which meant its temperature was somewhere between three thousand and six thousand Kelvin. It was part of a dual system with a red dwarf but in a planetary system that had been previously unknown.


Aki directed the flow of plasma from the nozzle of her torch and extracted several samples of the Island’s material. She placed them into a triple-layered container that had been designed to produce a warning if corrosion was detected. Since the Island was immune to the destructive powers of the Ring’s contaminants, understanding the corrosion process might allow duplication of its properties. Similar shielding could allow them to come into contact with the Ring without consequences.


Making her way around the graser battery, Aki dislodged another sample. She wished she had time to investigate how its gamma-ray laser and convergence mechanism functioned. She inspected the sighting telescope on the cannon. It was not that different from the telescopes found at public observatories. Wondering why it had both a short and a long lens, she hypothesized that one was long range and the other wide angle. Aki found it odd that there were no screws to adjust the optical axis and no actuator. Then she realized that their technology was self-correcting and removed the need for manual adjustments. Builder technology was not incomprehensible, just expressed in scales beyond easy imagining. Uneasy imagining, Aki thought to herself. Aki started to leave but glanced at the telescope. She felt an idea trying to take shape but could not formulate what it was.


“Well done, Aki. Return to ship.”


“Yes, sir.” Aki was about to fire her jet but stayed her hand. The answer to her idea was coming. She wanted to ignore it and get back to the Phalanx, but she could not let go of what was nagging at her. “The aliens are already on their way?” she said.


“The Builders? I am certain,” said Per. “Once this finishes prepping for their arrival, I doubt they would let it gather dust. They are probably closer than anyone thinks.”


Aki knew that without their braking system they would hurtle through the solar system with no means of slowing, speeding like an express train past a local stop. Humanity would be robbing them of their only opportunity to come to rest, damning them to a never-ending, one-way drift past the edge of the visible universe.


I can do this. I am capable of destroying this. The graser, the Island, the Ring…Aki tried to convince herself.


“Aki, pull out of there. The graser could come back online any second.”


This was my dream. I wanted to touch what the Builders created. The Builders are not trying to harm us. They just have different values; they exist on scales both nano and mega. We do not have time to try to set it to a new angle, one that would spare us. The ailing earth cannot wait, but can I just destroy them? Can we find a way to leave it? What choice do I have? Mark was so committed. He would not waver, not when it mattered this much. He would not let his conscience stand between him and the task at hand.


“Aki, can you hear me? Return to ship.”


“I am going to need more time.”


“You’ve done your job. Come back to ship.”


“Just a few minutes. Please. There is something I have to try.”