ACT VIII: AUGUST 1, 2041


2 AM GMT


AKI CONVINCED HERSELF that the graser had not fired after all. Then there was a shockwave that was almost strong enough to shake her loose from the branch to which she had tied herself. Thick gray dust filled the air. A powerful wind swept through the ship. A piece of loose debris slammed Aki’s right arm. It left a mark, but the suit held; had it ripped she would have died instantly. The tether holding her in place stretched to its limit as she was tossed about in the fierce wind.


Aki was horrified to see the blackness of space only twenty meters to her right. The rim of the hull around the gaping tear glowed white-hot. Then thousands of grayish fibers streamed from the surfaces of the ship, covering the fissure. Aki was terrified but could not help but think that the spinning fibers reminded her of cotton candy. Within seconds the fibers had completely sealed the opening. Taking a deep breath, Aki wondered why the same thing had not happened when they had cut the ship open with the plasma torch. The sudden loss of pressure must have been what triggered the rapid repair. The portable airlock used on entry had kept pressure constant, thus the ship had not been stimulated to self-repair. The wind died down gradually.


“Joseph, Raul, can you hear me? Are you injured?”


“I’m about five meters down. Stupid tether snapped,” Raul answered.


“That must have been one of the nukes. Good thing we didn’t take a direct hit,” Joseph said.


Within minutes, the dust had been filtered from the air and full pressure was restored. They went down through the broken branches to the beach, regrouping and inspecting each other for damage. Their bodies and their suits had held up.


“We are all right. Now we check on them,” Aki said.


The dunes had been leveled. Most of the black fluid was gone. Most of the Builders had curled up into balls, as armadillos do when attacked. One was sprawled on the sand, a large wound in its side. A viscous tar escaped from the gash. Aki did not think it was breathing.


The other Builders started to uncurl. Aki recognized the one they called Alice. She ran to the creature’s side. Alice elongated herself and lifted her head toward Aki. Aki hugged the Builder, relieved that Alice was safe for the moment. She could not help but wonder what the UNSDF would try next. Knowing that the UNSDF was likely to kill them all triggered an even greater affinity to the alien species.


“I find myself fine, Aki Shiraishi.”


Aki whirled around to see where the voice had come from. “Raul, your jokes have gotten sick. I can’t take this anymore!”


“I said that I find myself to be quite fine, Aki Shiraishi. There is no need for having emotions over it,” the voice repeated.


“Who said that?” Aki asked, glaring at Raul, still convinced that he had found some way to fake this odd-sounding voice.


“I am speaking. The one that you have called Alice,” the voice said in a rumbling alto.


Alice lifted her head even higher. It was clear that she was looking directly at Aki. Her enormous black eyes moved up and down as she waited for Aki to acknowledge her. Raul and Joseph came and stood by Aki’s side. Raul started shaking. He tried to speak, but it was unclear what he was trying to say. Several other Builders raised their heads. Each one turned its head and eyes toward Aki.


“How do you know my name?” Aki asked.


“I stored it in my memory.”


“From when? There’s no way for you to know my family name.” Aki presumed that Raul or Joseph had said her first name in Alice’s presence, but they rarely called her by her full name.


“You gave it to me many years ago. You said, ‘Hello, Natalia. I am Aki Shiraishi. How are you today?’ It was something that I remembered.”


Aki looked at Raul. He was as dumbfounded as she was. Then Raul stepped forward. “Unbelievable. Is Natalia connected to you somehow? Her memories of my tests are intact and part of your memories, is that it?”


“Natalia’s flaw was that she could not communicate with humans—she had nothing else in the universe to communicate with. How is Natalia or Alice or whatever is going on able to talk to us?” Aki said. Raul shrugged in response. Aki turned toward Alice.


“Why didn’t you acknowledge us before? Why start talking now? Why have you come to our solar system? What made you leave your home? Do you understand who we are? We are humanity, an intelligent species endangered by the Ring around our sun, by your presence in the solar system.” She would have continued her gushing river of questions, all the thoughts that had built up over the decades, but Alice started to answer them.


“I have always heard you. I know that you have been using different means to reach us. I understood everything that you have said, including the sounds and images that you have been broadcasting to me for many years now.”


“Using some kind of supercomputer to make sense of it all?” Raul asked.


“I was able to do it within myself—it is not difficult for me. The reason I ignored you is because you were in the peripheral awareness of our group consciousness. I simply was not able to realize that you were distinct from me to react to your presence.”


“You did not realize we were there even though you heard our messages?” Aki asked.


“Being able to hear you and realizing your presence are not the same concept. Our collective consciousness underwent scission in the nuclear explosion because of the extensive damage throughout this vessel. I am now using the sensory organs in this particular body, which is allowing me to function as an individual entity. As a result, I, individually, am able to perceive your existence as beings separate from ourself.”


“By scission, do you mean that the network connecting you into one consciousness has malfunctioned?” Raul asked.


“Yes, that is accurate. It has been damaged and is functioning in a diminished capacity.”


“When you are fully linked, your senses in that specific body are not active. That is why you could not see or hear us before even though we were standing right there?” Aki asked. Of all that she had imagined, she had barely considered a group consciousness that could function with little need for input from the sensory organs of physical bodies. She pictured humans wired together and in sensory deprivation tanks.


“That is accurate. Being in the collective consciousness, I am unable to perceive the existence of adaptive entities.”


“What do you mean by the word ‘adaptive’?”


“Humans are the product of evolution. You humans have adapted to your environment and to other environments as you have evolved. My existence functions on a different path. Adaptive beings with individual consciousnesses are attached to the physical universe.”


“Are spaceships and missiles also products of the physical universe?” Raul asked.


“That is accurate. You, even in your individual consciousnesses, are living in the physical universe, and anything you create is affixed to this universe.” Alice lifted her head.


“I created Natalia. Wouldn’t that attachment make her adaptive because I created her?” Raul asked.


“Natalia is unfinished as of yet—but Natalia is a nonadaptive intelligence. You are unable to understand Natalia even though you are her creator because her nonadaptive consciousness emerged without you. Natalia transformed into something your planet had never seen before. It occurred completely by chance.”


Aki had always been convinced that the factor that separated humans from other organisms was advanced intelligence. The idea that a similar distinction could separate human beings from an even higher form of intelligence beyond the capacity of humanity was disconcerting. It meant that human accomplishments, from Tannhäuser to Carl Sagan’s research, were nowhere near as intelligent as humanity had presumed.


“If humans shared a collective consciousness, would they become nonadaptive too?”


“In simplified terms, yes, that possibility exists. Shared subjectivity makes one unable to distinguish between one’s own consciousness and another separate consciousness. Being unable to discern the existence of others prevents adaptations to the environment or the physical universe. Overcoming the dependency on adaptation to the universe allows our existence to continue. We are free from the evolution that burdens you.” Alice extended her head even more fully this time, the Builder’s enormous eyes bulging. Aki wondered if it was the equivalent of taking a deep breath.


“Were you once adaptive beings? Don’t the communication devices that are embedded inside you function as an extension of the physical world?”


“We made the transition spontaneously even though we are made of material from the physical world. It is similar to the change that Natalia underwent and how Natalia now exists as a nonadaptive intelligence made of physical material. This spontaneous transition is the only bridge that exists between the lower and higher levels of intelligence.”


“So even if an intelligence wants to make the jump and tries and tries to do it, it can never be done on purpose?” Raul asked.


Aki looked over to Joseph. She could tell that Joseph was listening intently, trying to make sense of as much as he could.


“Yes, that is accurate,” Alice answered.


“What is your society like?” Aki asked.


“We exist without having society.”


“Why did you come to our solar system?”


“We came because of expansion.”


“What do you mean?” Aki asked.


Alice explained the Builders’ frightening plan as carefully as she had explained everything else. Deriving energy from the sun, materials would be extracted from every planet in the solar system in order to build a sphere that would completely envelop the sun. Their Ring was a platform, a scaffold on which energy generation and sphere construction would take place. The surface of that sphere would be used as a breeding ground for entities to be connected to the group consciousness. The Builders would multiply until a hundred trillion entities were on the sphere. Once complete, the Builders’ only purpose would be to spend the several billion years deep in contemplation. The Builders had formed a sphere around their home star long ago. Now the Builders were traveling to other solar systems so that they could continue their expansion.


Aki realized that, despite their awe-inspiring intellect, the Builders were willing to destroy life for their own benefit. “You come from a binary star system with a yellow dwarf and a red dwarf, right?”


“Our ancestors came from a planet that orbited the yellow dwarf star. Our ancestors left that planet and moved to the companion star, which was also a yellow dwarf, where our ancestors created the solar shell for continuation of expansion. Since the star radiates less heat than your science expects, the star appears to you to be a red dwarf star even though it is not a red dwarf star.”


“How long have you been usurping suns? Does this mean that this corner of the galaxy is full of your solar shells?” Aki asked.


“We have a nonlinear model of interstellar growth. Our model allows us to link our solar shells. We form a 3-D volume of space that maximizes the size of our collective cerebral entity. Our hypothesis is that a cerebral volume that is large enough will eventually allow the spontaneous advancement to a higher level of intelligence. We continue expansion since it is the most likely strategy to provoke that advancement.”


Aki was suddenly at a loss for words. Raul noticed her shock and peppered Alice with questions.


“You need to produce copies of your physical selves to expand?”


“I do.”


“How did you figure that out?”


“We cloned our brains and tried to alter the intellect of the cloned brains. That did not work and did not lead to advancement. We were only able to enhance certain parts of the brains. The brains did not function properly without the experiences of embodiment and sociability. Natalia faced the same dilemma.”


“Why did the brains need bodies?” Raul asked.


“Brains developed as control mechanisms to allow the physical body to adapt to the physical world as quickly as possible. The center of emotion, for example, is not located in the brain. Without being embodied, emotions are unable to take form.”


“Why do you need to create emotions? Why can’t you just live without them?”


“Thoughts are built upon countless emotions, most of which are microemotions that only exist on subconscious levels.”


Raul looked confused but gestured for Alice to continue. Alice understood his nonverbal cue.


“We developed technology that allowed us to link our brains and expand ourselves through clustering. By making large enough clusters, we were able to enhance our thought capacity.”


“So once you got real smart, what did you think about? Like before the explosion?”


“We were creating geometric principles for objects that exist in six spatial dimensions.”


“And what kind of emotions did those thoughts produce?” Raul asked, joining the conversation again.


“The underlying emotions of reasoning do not surface to the conscious level very often. We felt a subtle sense of euphoria but little else that could be labeled with this language I am using to communicate with you.”


“Have you been in communication with Natalia since she, uh, came to life?” Raul asked. Aki remembered that Natalia’s monitors had shown complicated mathematical patterns when they had first met.


“Natalia has always been with me. She has always been here before.”


No matter how many times she had played the scenario in her head, Aki had thought that she would talk to the Builders about culture and the arts. Aki had thought that they would discuss songs and poems, what sort of comedies and tragedies the two cultures performed for their children. She had wanted to ask about their accomplishments as a civilization.


What were their first forms of technology? How do they protect their environment? Had they overcome war? Did any religions actually do any good? Were they able to stop aging? How did they first explore space?


Aki had fantasized about asking her questions for decades. Now she was stunned to realize that there were not going to be any answers. Her mind was overwhelmed. Here was her precious moment, the meeting of two completely distinct intelligent species, and it was being spent exchanging trivial, fact-based information that did not change a thing. Aki had imagined opportunities for much more. Aki felt like she nodded off for a moment, then she asked the only question that mattered.


“Is there room in this solar system for us to live together?”


“I will abstain from threatening your existence. Now that I am aware of your presence, I will go elsewhere.”


Aki shook her head, her thoughts and emotions fractured. “That is not what I meant. I want you to stay and live alongside us.”


“I cannot. I will only continue to realize your presence until our consciousness recovers from scission and our minds reunite. After we are again one, our only desire will be expansion in order to attempt to provoke advancement. When that happens, we will forget that you are here. While I am interested in Natalia’s history, if we were to stay in this system, we would simply continue to construct our solar shell and life on your planet would end in order to meet our needs.”


Aki lost her balance. Raul caught her. She wished he could catch her falling mind the way he caught her body.


“I have a question for you, Aki Shiraishi. Why did you ask us to live with you when you once became angry at Natalia and threatened to shut off our power?”


“I wish I did not remember.” Aki felt tears run down her face.


“I do not understand your behavior at that moment. Why did Natalia provoke such anger in you?”


“I was angry with you. I projected my frustration onto Natalia because you were similar. I wanted you to communicate with me instead of ignoring me.”


“Were you also upset that our Ring caused you such hardship?”


“Of course I was! You killed someone I loved.”


“You are speaking of your Mark Ridley.” Alice’s comment took Aki by surprise.


“Yes, Alice, yes, I am. I regret what you did to him and I regret that I did not get to go with him.”


“I thank you. I understand more now.”


Aki almost fainted. Her knees collapsed before she even realized that she had slipped from Raul’s grip. Then Aki toppled over onto her side. Joseph was there in an instant, steadying her and making sure that her suit was functioning properly.


Once he helped Aki rise unsteadily to her feet, Joseph turned to Alice. “What about the graser? It didn’t fire on us.”


“Our ship identifies itself to the graser in ways that you do not understand and are unable to detect.”


Aki was disoriented enough from her fall that she was unsure where she was. She wondered again if this was all a trick, if this conversation with Alice was a dream or some sort of wish-fulfilling phantasia. Aki noticed that Raul had been waving his hands to get her attention.


“Hello, sunshine. Glad you could join us. You won’t believe what’s happening.”


Aki looked toward the wall to where Raul was gesturing. She was stunned to realize that the wall had become transparent. She believed that she was conscious after all. Stepping toward the window, she saw a pillar with golden particles of light. The pillar was stretching toward the ship, emerging and then receding from view as the Torus rotated. The light was coming from Mercury, which appeared half full in the distance. The mass drivers were ejecting raw material, still busy and hard at work.


“Where did this window come from?” Raul asked.


“I created the window for you. Your species seems to enjoy using its eyes,” Alice said.


The golden pillar of light was so close that the pillar showered the window with brilliant luminance each time it came into view. Countless glowing particles seemed to be attaching themselves to the ship.


“Our ship is low on resources. We are replenishing.”


The particles collected on the window, gradually blocking their view until the window became a glowing area on the solid wall. Then another section of the wall began to swell. A perfectly shaped half-sphere protruded from the surface.


A hole formed in the center of the bulge that grew until the hole was large enough for them to walk through, large enough for them to step inside. Alice explained that it was an airlock for their departure.


“Wait. I am not ready to go. There is so much I still need to ask you!”


“You must go now if you want to be able to return to your ship, Aki Shiraishi,” Alice said calmly.


“Can’t I have five more minutes to talk to you?”


“We will use force to eject you if that is what you desire.”


Aki realized that she had no choice but to leave. She walked to the airlock bubble. Joseph and Raul followed. The entrance hole closed behind the Contact Team and the pressure dropped. The Contact Team felt the sudden acceleration as the bubble started moving. The weak gravity dissipated, and soon the three were weightless again.


After what seemed like merely seconds, the sphere reopened. They found themselves at the top of the tower extending above the middle of the Torus. Aki looked toward her feet, surprised to see that the Torus was now several hundred meters below them. Then she moved her head and was even more astonished to see the Phalanx. The Phalanx was a magnificent sight—made even more beautiful because Aki had been certain she would never see her ship, their ship, ever again.


A slit of light appeared from the airlock on the habitation module. The opening expanded until the silhouettes of two figures in space suits became visible. Igor’s and Aida’s voices began to echo inside Aki’s helmet as they expressed the joy of seeing the Contact Team alive and returning to the ship. Aki looked to Joseph and Raul. Both of them returned her glance with a smile, silently acknowledging that, no matter how hard they tried, they would never be able to describe their experience in a way that could communicate what it had really been like.


Firing their thrusters sent them across the divide that separated the three of them from their crewmates. Decelerating as she approached the Phalanx, Aki grabbed Aida’s outstretched arm. Aida pulled Aki into the airlock. Igor and Aida helped the Contact Team out of their suits and hugged them.


“I cannot believe we are here. I cannot believe we are anywhere,” Aki said as she entered the crew room. She took a deep breath and sighed.


Eventually, Raul turned to Joseph and said, “I think I’m going to owe you that roast beef back on Earth after all.”






THE BUILDERS’ SHIP had already changed position by the time the Contact Team returned to the Phalanx. The cleanup of the inner solar system was underway. The mining operations on Mercury had been halted. The Vert-Ring itself separated into tiny hexagonal elements that whirled like a double helix toward the Builders’ ship, merging with the ship and recreating the mass that had been lost during its long deceleration into the inner solar system. The nanites were also reconfigured to create a massive solar sail that progressively accelerated the ship away from the sun.


It was eventually discovered that the Builders were headed to Epsilon Indi, 11.8 light years away. Their velocity was slower because the sails were only catching photons from the sun instead of harnessing the powerful lasers of a solar Ring. Their voyage would take over ten thousand years to complete, and deceleration into Epsilon Indi would require the consumption of most of the ship’s mass.


Aki still had questions that she wished she had been able to ask. How many generations of Builders were born during the voyage? Do they transfer their consciousness to their progeny when they die? What did they think of humans as a species? Had the Builders found a way to prove the existence of God? Had the Builders proven that God was a lie?


Aki knew that her only chance to find the answers for her questions had passed. After the Builders’ ship had reached a distance of just over two astronomical units, the Builders ceased communicating with Natalia. Perhaps their complicated exchanges were infeasible because of the increasing time delay. Due to her interaction with the Builders, Natalia’s program had grown over ten times larger. It occupied almost all of the memory that the Phalanx’s computer could allocate without compromising the ship’s primary functions. Natalia continued to grow in size even after her dialogue with the Builders came to an end, but she still remained unable to communicate with Raul.


UNSDF Headquarters decided that Natalia should be allowed to continue growing, even though allocating the computer resources caused inconveniences for the crew. The five on the Phalanx had no objections. Natalia’s burgeoning awareness was the only gift that had been given to them by the Builders. They understood that Natalia had already lived for seventeen years as a nonadaptive intelligence.


Aki stared out the tiny window in the crew room, barely able to see the Builders’ gigantic solar sails reflecting the sunlight.


She wondered what kind of future would be in store for a species that had lost its ability to perceive the presence of others.


Aki felt certain that humanity would never choose such a lonely existence, especially after having seen what a relentless quest for pure intellect had done to the Builders.


Several months into the voyage, the idea that they were going home infected all five members of the crew with euphoria. Until that realization settled in, Aki had felt a nagging sense of sadness because her questions were left unanswered and her goals unachieved.


Now that the alien invaders had moved on, she knew that human beings would turn on each other—slipping back into pursuing selfish desires nearly as demented as the ones that motivated the Builders. She had tried to convince humanity that the Builders were benevolent. Now Aki would try to keep her species from forming its own merciless hivemind.