ACT IV: MARCH 12, 2024


THE NEXT DAY, Aki found herself in the director’s office again.


“The perpetrator is a student. I had heard his name before,” Director Riggins said.


“He was accessing your computer from somewhere on campus?”


“It’s embarrassing, Aki. He connected from the computer science building.”


“Was it a prank, or was he trying to damage your system?”


“He claimed it was an accidental incursion generated by his artificial intelligence system, which he had quietly introduced into our network. He’s supposedly studying automata-based programming; AIs that can make internal state distinctions. Half his explanation was over our heads and half was lies, but we couldn’t identify which part was which.” Dan wasn’t wearing a tie but looked less distraught than he had yesterday.


“Testing AI? And he needed your resources to do this?”


“That’s what we thought. He insisted he needed the best supercomputer available. He applied for access last month. We do liaison work with the college. He was denied because our mission is to provide for Builders-relevant research only.”


“Is he in custody?” Aki asked.


“We held off, because we’re military and on a campus. Incarcerating him is an option, but Berkeley students like to protest. Tom was right that it’s simple to bait our people, even though we train for alertness. You’re not going to believe this, but he sprinkled a handful of thumb drives with the Golden Bears logo in the parking lot. At least three employees on the news server plugged them in and looked at pictures of somebody on the girl’s lacrosse team in a bikini, triggering a Trojan horse that stole their passwords. I would’ve thought that high security meant not having our staff hack themselves by loading his malware for him—”


“How do I get in touch with him?”


Riggins was confused by Aki’s request. “He’s a screwy nineteen-year-old undergrad. We can certainly make him available to you, but he can’t be useful to the work we do.”


“Black swans. He makes me curious. I want him to tell me what he was looking for. Maybe he resents the UNSDF having a facility on his campus and maybe he wanted to show off, but I am a proponent of pulling on threads to see what we can unravel.”


With a shrug, Riggins scribbled a name and email address onto a Post-it and handed it off to Aki. Raul Sanchez. Aki wondered where he was from. She texted the message: I would love to meet up. Name the place and I will show, making sure to send it from an authorized account so that he would know it was her...or a fake from a hacker skilled enough to be interesting, at least. With a nod and a promise to share any relevant information she uncovered, Aki left the office. She was unsure of where to go but did not need to wait. Raul responded within two minutes, saying to go to a restaurant near Soda Hall. Aki brought up a map on her PDA and walked across campus.


It was a small, self-service cafeteria with a limited menu of sandwiches, coffee, and soft drinks. Aki got two coffees and perched on a stool near a window. Back when she had been in college, it had been all work and no play. She dressed the same then as she did now. Seeing the wild attire of Cal students, from dreadlocks to shaved heads, she thought about how her only change was that a few of her blazers were now form-fitted. Aki felt older than thirty-four.


Raul smiled broadly when he saw her. He needed a shower and was wearing a denim jacket three sizes too big. She handed him the coffee she had known he would want. Watching him take a sip, barely keeping from spilling, she noticed that his hands were trembling.


“Aki Shiraishi in the flesh. I knew it wasn’t a setup because they let me go. Is ‘fan’ the right word?”


“Who knows? Being me is more about getting the work done than caring about who is watching. I need to know what you are up to.”


Raul made a face, a grimace that led into a smirk. “I can’t believe I’ve been summoned by you.”


Aki laughed. “Perhaps summoning you to Director Riggins’s office would have made it easier to believe?”


“Have you noticed how when a person says something is unbelievable it’s because the person is fully aware that what they are describing is actually happening?”


“I guess not.”


“I try to keep that in mind because words and consciousness don’t always mesh. Words surface without regard to circumstance, jumping the rails of a conscious selection process.”


“What do you study? Linguistics?”


“Barely. I’m concerned with thoughts, not words. Words are clunky, inelegant.” He fidgeted restlessly. It looked like he wanted more coffee but was afraid he would spill it. Aki would have only filled his cup halfway if she had known he would be this frenetic.


“What’s your involvement in my case? I don’t know what sort of rap they’re looking to hang on me, but...” He glanced around.


“I stay out of decisions whenever I can. Director Riggins said they are holding off for now. I just get a sense that your motivation for cracking into the ETICC’s system might be interesting. Do you bear a grudge because they denied you access?”


“I needed five minutes of access. No fanfare. I’m not a cracker or a hacker, I’m a user. I filled out their form three times before they even bothered to tell me no.”


“Okay, well according to the ETICC, you, uh, used their supercomputer to analyze the internal state of your AI system. Is that correct?”


Raul nodded. “I hear that it caused a level-eight alarm, and that it produced some huge prime numbers,” he said proudly.


“What is an internal state?” Aki asked. “And what were you trying to analyze?”


Raul picked up his coffee, then nodded. “Gotcha. The coolest ringologist ever wants to know what I wanted with their big bad supercomputer. How much do you know about AI?”


“Enough to track you down and listen. Not much more.”


“Here’s the thing.” He tapped the side of his temple twice. “Builders know more than we do. More than we think Builders know and more than we’re able to think. I bet you think you comprehend extraordinary desolation, staring at the emptiness within and projecting the void outward. You, beautiful Aki Shiraishi, have never struck me as less than haunted by what you did and saw up there.” He pointed out the window and up at the sky. “An Abnorm of level eight, and that was just to distract them while I tried to let her check her internal state.”


“Seven, I think. What does checking internal state mean? How is it different than a core dump?”


“Hah. A core dump is when a computer forgets something important. It records its working state because it’s going to crash. You know that computers don’t really have cores anymore, it’s just a colloquialism? The computers dump core from a fatal error and they store what they have so it’s available for debugging or salvage. Who needs that? Data are just as pointless as words.”


He looked down into his cup as if he were gauging the temperature of his coffee. Then he chugged what was left. “Real AI—AI like the UNSDF wants to believe can’t happen—is a cluster of neural networks. The processor and the memory are the same thing, like wetware that grew up and amputated its humanity. It’s like eliminating both biology and culture, and then seeing what’s left.”


Raul’s neck twitched. It was either a quelled cough or a tic, then he kept speaking.


“The whole problem is how meaning is communicated to sentient, reasoning minds. If we know a fact, it’s so important to humans that we can’t get past it. But it’s worthless. If you take away what it means to be human, you end up with no meaning at all. A neural network needs a chance to teach itself, not just mimic the twists of nerves inside people’s heads. A pulse gets put in a neuron, then jumps a synapse. Every person who is currently breathing is so weighed down by being alive and trying to communicate that they never experience a pure cogitation.”


Raul hoisted his coffee cup. “I look into this cup, my visual cortex gets excited and tells me all about brown. It’s liquid. We’re on stools. At the campus cafeteria. Eventually it all makes sense and I’m here now with you. You’re Aki Shiraishi, protector of the people, defender of the world. Guess what? Builders think every attempt at making sense out of signs and what signs signify is wasted energy, time, or breath. The cells in our heads are full of indecipherable symbols and we think that’s great. What’s brown? It’s a random sound that got delineated on the color wheel. You take that to the bush in Australia and all you’ve got is a funny sound that makes people laugh. Take it to the Builders and they figure we’re worth bringing to an end.”


“Raul. Point blank? I can see why meaning is not your strong suit,” Aki said. “Please, a layman’s definition of internal state, not a manifesto to go along with your thesis, if you would.”


“It’s not just a network of neural circuits and the state of its pulses. It’s connections that are free of useless attempts at comprehension and all the cultural baggage that comes with being human. You run humanity through fuzzy cluster loading and eventually there’s nothing left.”


“Why did you need the ETICC? Couldn’t you just have tested it yourself?” Aki held back a nervous titter as Raul drank the second cup of coffee the way he had the first.


“I’ll get more in a sec,” he said. “What the ETICC is proud to show the Builders, their glorious message, the Builders will see the way we see a cat leaving an eviscerated rat on the porch. It’s similar to the experience of attempting to interact with my AI. Free of language, free of words, she doesn’t have labels. I show her coffee and she gets the stimulation but none of the conceptions. You have to meet her. I’ll get you another coffee.” Raul jumped up quickly and wobbled. He led her out of the cafeteria and they started toward Soda Hall. Aki assumed they were headed to the computer science building. Then he led her past the computer science building, down an alley, and to the front door of a run-down aluminum trailer. She decided not to mention that he had not bought her a replacement coffee.


“Sorry about the smell,” he said.


Climbing the rickety steps and stepping inside, it was not as bad as she had feared. Cluttered, but not disgusting. The smell Raul had mentioned was chemical and reminiscent of warmed fiberglass insulation. He tossed a pile of textbooks to the floor and offered a seat on the bed. Across from her, an oversized fish tank was filled with a slightly murky liquid. A large rack of circuit boards was inside, submerged in the liquid. Cables running from each board snaked out and connected to a box outside of the tank. A few thicker wires came from that box and went to a computer on the desk.


Several plasma monitors crowded the wall above the disk. Colors flickered erratically, as if a transcendental abstract artist was trying out new brushes. Patterns exploded into other patterns. After a moment, Aki was unsure that there were patterns at all. She was still playing along, trying to soak up all she could from Raul, even though she was reasonably certain that the strange fiberglass smell was from the process of making or consuming illicit drugs.


“Why do you assign gender to your AI if you are so against the tyranny of meaning?” she asked.


“It’s a reconfiguration of a Hopfield network. His first diagram always made me think of the Tree of Life.”


Aki decided to try a different question. “How do you input commands?”


“There aren’t any commands,” Raul said matter-of-factly. “Do you know what a wetware error is? It’s when the fatal error takes place somewhere between the chair and the keyboard. Natalia has a camera if she really needs it, and she extracts data to build her internal state. You can say hi.”


Aki looked at the camera and spoke. “Hello, Natalia. I am Aki Shiraishi. How are you today?” She was not sure if the strange swirls of flashing patterns had changed.


“Wow! I think she likes you.”


“How do you know?”


Raul laughed. “If I knew that so easily, señorita, I wouldn’t need to use the ETICC’s supercomputer.”


“Don’t get sarcastic with me. What are all these monitors for?”


“The internal state. The monitors produce a visual representation of the exchange of pulses and field activations. I want her to teach herself how to communicate human principles, but only with pictures, never with words.”


“Has she ever said anything?”


“No. That’s why I needed the ETICC supercomputer. I figured her learning would speed up if—”


“Your monitors feed back into her camera for Natalia’s development of a dynamic internal state?”


“It loops her field activations and a visual representation of her pulse exchanges. The monitors are in the camera’s field of view so she can think.”


“You’re trying to break new ground in automata and cognitive development, and I like how you are trying to induce a Lacanian mirror stage. It makes sense that advanced AI would need psychoanalysis, but even a toddler has theory of mind,” Aki said, remembering the conversation with Jill from the day prior.


“Most do. Her patterns, attempt at mirror stage or not, astonish me because I’m not sure they’re patterns. They’re there but they aren’t. She understands her internal state enough to bring up excerpts from the camera visual of her monitors and rearrange them, but she doesn’t quite seem to know that she’s talking to herself. Theory of mind might come next. She changes the angle of display to make recursive swirls sometimes. I haven’t seen that recently.”


“How long has she been running?”


“Four months. She’s been spacey for weeks. Her psychedelic swirls don’t seem to make sense. Monitoring internal state information is a methodology for evaluating utility preferences. It’s where biology, psychology, and cognitive science combine and allow computers to understand what they want through artificial emotions and desires. The old model was external state, where a computer would measure and answer based on the solution most apparent from the available data. It worked flawlessly for chess, evaluating the pieces and the board, but external assessments don’t tell a computer what it wants.”


“Maybe she is bored of having too little to play with, shut up in here.”


“No, she’s wired. She watches TV and even has net access, though filtered. We can’t have Natalia suddenly perceive the outside world and immediately start shopping online, after all. I keep hoping she’ll make a sudden leap, like showing me pictures of new parts she wants. To understand Builders, we need to understand their long-term associations, the recollections of species memory that tie them together, no matter how different the long-term associations are.


“Homeostasis, cognitive architecture that models complex emotions, even adding the ability to fine-tune internal drives are all part of it. My breakthrough is that she gets to explore herself and generate affective control states. It got too complicated, from the human side, to create algorithmic interpretations that weren’t beholden to human principles. The ranges were still human-based. She’s going to find herself as an integrated mix of these, and I’m betting she’ll lean toward a high-level affective system with episodic and working memory that creates preferences.” Raul smirked again, a mix of pride and wonder. Aki never smirked, but Raul Sanchez’s attitude reminded Aki of herself. He sat down on the bed next to Aki.


“Maybe she needs a reboot.”


Raul glanced at the swirl. “I think she’s deep in thought. There was a pattern like a Riemann surface, maybe a numerical series from advanced math. Nothing lasts long enough to make me sure it’s not being kicked across her from somewhere else. With a thousand terabytes, I can’t keep track of what she’s storing and processing. The tools of decision-making are similar to the ones for interpreting communication, at least in the architecture of my model. But I steered clear of giving her too much detail. She’s going to build it herself, with as little interference from me as possible.”


“Now I get why you needed the supercomputer. Why didn’t you explain this on your application?”


Raul looked at her and laughed. It was higher pitched than Aki would have expected. “The high-priority work gets first dibs. It’s stuff like meteorological models that are important right now. Projects like mine get shoved aside and don’t stand a chance.”


“How do you justify cracking—sorry, using the system then?”


Raul crossed his arms. His glassy gaze fell to the floor. “It’s funny. They’re similar.”


“What are?”


“Alien logic and AI—they both sit there, watching us, never saying a word. When they finally do communicate, it will be clear because there will be no burbles and no interference.”


Aki stared at the tank. The insulating coolant bubbled and flowed, keeping the hardware from overheating. Surreal images wriggled on the monitors, then went away.


“At first, I believed that a strong AI would be something that could communicate and interact with language. One of many missteps. I even had a keyboard in her. AI fails because linguistics itself is bogged down in human definitions. Natalia’s not there yet, but she’s going to think without words, without definitions. Intelligence without language. Humans think words are an evolutionary competitive advantage. Natalia is a species of one. She’s free of having to form concepts that need to function outside of herself. Perhaps the Builders don’t need language or communication because there’s nothing they need to say. Builders will love Natalia. If Builders have a use for love.”


“You are quite convinced by your pet theories.” Aki wondered if communicating with an alien intelligence could be as challenging as communicating with an artificial intelligence. She had never considered that language would be unnecessary for a unique intelligent entity like Natalia. With or without his technology, Raul had given her fuel for her own concepts. She had never questioned the assumption that language could be unnecessary for an intelligent entity. AI systems created by humans communicate the same way humans do. Is this a fundamental characteristic that separates human and nonhuman intelligence, be it alien or artificial?


The message the ETICC was trying to send the Builders was based on the expectation that the Builders would use human deductive reasoning. Jill Elsevier, at least, was enamored with human definitions of sentience. The transmission assumed five identical pulses in a row would be interpreted as the number five, that a series of pulses with a fixed length sent in a cycle would be recognized as a facsimile image, and that the images were easily seen as a twodimensional representation of a 3-D world.


“Can thought and language be parsed?” Aki asked.


“The idea that language regulates thought is a myth. If that were true, children wouldn’t learn words, one language couldn’t be translated into another, and neologisms wouldn’t be coined. When you listen to or read another person’s ideas, it’s not their words that you remember, it’s the concepts the person expresses. Symbolism is very different from symbology.” At least Raul attempted to ground his strange views in logic. Aki had read worse arguments in academic journals.


“You have more interesting ideas than the ETICC does.”


“You really think so?”


“I’m trying to stay out of this, but I will explain excerpted and sanitized details of our discussion. Your girl might turn out to be useful.”


When Aki saw Raul’s eyes show gratitude, she had a feeling that all he had wanted was for someone to see the value of his work.


“You dream of working there.”


“I would like to. When I created Natalia, I had no interest in their bureaucracy and their oligopolistic compromising and politicking. When I started confronting how to communicate with Natalia though, I realized that the ETICC and I were trying to jump the same hurdles, even if they get stuck with much longer pieces of red tape. I would love to use their computers for Natalia.”


“I think they noticed that. You plan on continuing at Cal, getting your master’s here, or a PhD?”


“Absolutely, I just hope they don’t shaft me for being overzealous.”


“I will be rooting for you. From a distance that is—don’t think that I will be pulling any strings for you because I won’t. You have to earn it,” Aki said.


On her way out, Aki took one last look at Natalia. Aki was unable to tell if there was a change in Natalia’s monitor displays. An intelligent entity that has no language…could such a mind exist? Is she as concerned about her existence as we have been, is she as driven to preserve herself?


“Why did you name her Natalia?”


“A girl I loved in high school who didn’t love me back. Her parents named her after the Van Morrison song.”


Aki looked along the routing wires and found the circuit breaker that was next to the power unit and the processor. She ran up to the breaker and placed her finger on the switch. Aki looked at the camera. “Natalia? How close are you to understanding what this means? Have you learned that you have to answer me or you will end up in the scrap heap? How close are you to understanding that we will turn you off if you do not learn how to communicate?”


Raul grabbed Aki’s wrist. “Stop taunting her.”


They watched the monitors and nothing changed.


“She can’t relate to humans. She doesn’t understand the relationship between you, that switch, and the power supply. Threatening her doesn’t do anything that could possibly allow her to make the leap to communication with us.”


“I was trying to provoke a response,” Aki said. “Not that different from what you did at the ETICC, really.”


Raul licked his lips. His face was sweaty. “I didn’t mean to scare anyone. You’re trying to provoke a response from me, not from her. You’re the real loose cannon. I’m more into precision missile homing.”


“Interesting comment from a cracker. An organization like the UNSDF will never understand your ideas, let alone your argument for your actions, unless you approach them in a way that the UNSDF can comprehend,” Aki said as she extracted her wrist from Raul’s grip. “Raul, a piece of advice. I have not gotten to where I am by pushing every agenda that mattered to me. I have stayed true to my long-term goals, but I have had to play roles and I have had to make compromises. It is something you should try to learn. Otherwise intelligence just turns into a curse, especially in a world as damaged as ours.”


“I never thought a Nobel Prize winner would be such a player of games. You play nice with everyone but me, the one guy you can kick around, is that it?”


Aki exhaled and leaned against the doorway. “What other people think of me is none of my business. I do the best I can. I get angry and I get crazy, just like anyone, but I remember the day I saw the tower on Mercury, the day the whole world changed forever. I do the best I can to stay true to who I was back then—a young girl who just wanted to know.”


It dawned on Aki that she was more honest with Raul than with people she had worked with for years. Her deepest feelings would never surface in the most heated conversations with Director Riggins or Jill Elsevier. She almost told Raul how guilty she felt for what she had done to the braking system. She thought of how she could have opened up to Mark Ridley, but she had never really acted on the trust she felt for him. Mark Ridley sacrificed his life for her, and every living thing on the planet, but the Builders could not even be bothered to acknowledge humanity’s existence.


“We have communicated with the Builders, you know,” she started suddenly. “Well, at least once.”


“When? Does anyone know about it?”


“I destroyed their Ring. We know the Builders noticed. They may not have had an emotional reaction to the elimination of their braking mechanism, and they may not have had a response that we will be able to interpret, but they had to have heard it. The message was received, even if it was not processed.”


“Has the ETICC considered that unanswered is different than unheard?”


“Not really.” Aki wondered if the Builders really did understand that this solar system was not devoid of life. The very fact that their lasers were not arriving was a form of information no different from an encoded message being sent at the speed of light. “To the Builders, the lasers being gone and an encoded message from the ETICC being sent at light speed might both seem trivial or like natural phenomena. The subjectivity of language is more integral to the transmission than any of us had realized.”


Raul stared silently at Natalia’s monitors for a long moment before he spoke. “I guess you’re right. You started the dialogue in the worst possible way. If no one knew and no one would judge you, if there was no chance that it could potentially impede your ability to see the stars up close again, what would you do?”


“I am not sure there is anything I can do. How can I make it up to them? Maybe they are not responding out of spite for what I did. Maybe it is hard to believe a message of peace from the same beings who just damned you to an eternity of drifting through space?”


Raul folded his arms again. “It’s like with Natalia, except that you really did flip the breaker.”


“I refuse to think of it as killing them until my action actually causes their deaths. I know I am splitting hairs between dooming them and murder…Who knew that some quick thinking and some soldering would feel like this?” Aki could not continue. What she had done was different than removing a computer’s circuit boards, and she was often ashamed of her decision. Raul’s lack of professional demeanor and disheveled home made the perfect excuse for her to be honest. No reporter, researcher, or governmental hack would believe him if he tried to quote her.


“I guess you have to put them back,” Raul said.


“Put them back?”


“Don’t let the grief machine call the shots. Aki Shiraishi, you have to make amends if you want to make up with the Builders. And there’s only one way to put things back the way they were before.”










CHAPTER 2:


THE UNITED NATIONS


SPACE DEFENSE FORCE