25


'Just there, number forty-two,' shouted Ford Prefect to the taxi driver. 'Right here!'
  The taxi lurched to a halt, and Ford and Arthur jumped out. They had stopped at quite a number of cash dispensers on the way, and Ford chucked a fistful of money through the window at the driver.
  The entrance to the club was dark, smart and severe. Only the smallest little plaque bore its name. Members knew where it was, and if you weren't a member then knowing where it was wasn't any help to you.
  Ford Prefect was not a member of Stavro's, though he had once been to Stavro's other club in New York. He had a very simple method of dealing with establishments of which he was not a member. He simply swept in as soon as the door was opened, pointed back at Arthur and said, 'It's OK, he's with me.'
  He bounded down the dark glossy stairs, feeling very froody in his new shoes. They were suede and they were blue, and he was very pleased that in spite of everything else going on he had been sharp-eyed enough to spot them in a shop window from the back of a speeding taxi.
'I thought I told you not to come here.' 'What?' said Ford.
  A thin, ill-looking man wearing something baggy and Italian was walking up the stairs past them, lighting a cigarette, and had stopped, suddenly.
'Not you,' he said. 'Him.'
He looked straight at Arthur, then seemed to become a little confused. 'Excuse me,' he said. 'I think I must have mistaken you for someone
else.' He started on up the stairs again, but almost immediately turned round once more, even more puzzled. He stared at Arthur.
'Now what?' said Ford. 'What did you say?'
'I said, now what?' repeated Ford irritably.


  'Yes, I think so,' said the man and swayed slightly and dropped the book of matches he'd been carrying. His mouth moved weakly. Then he put his hand to his forehead.
  'Excuse me,' he said, 'I'm trying desperately to remember which drug I've just taken, but it must be one of those ones which mean you can't remember.'
  He shook his head and turned away again, and went up towards the men's room.
  'Come on,' said Ford. He hurried on downstairs, with Arthur following nervously in his wake. The encounter had shaken him badly and he didn't know why.
  He didn't like places like this. For all of the dreams of Earth and home he had had for years, he now badly missed his hut on Lamuella with his knives and his sandwiches. He even missed Old Thrashbarg.
'Arthur!'
It was the most astounding effect. His name was being shouted in stereo.
  He twisted to look one way. Up the stairs behind him he saw Trillian hurrying down towards him in her wonderfully rumpled RymplonTM. She was looking suddenly aghast.
He twisted the other way to see what she was looking suddenly aghast at.
At the bottom of the stairs was Trillian, wearing . . . No - this was Tricia.
Tricia that he had just seen, hysterical with confusion, on television. And behind her was Random, looking more wild-eyed than ever. Behind her in the recesses of the smart, dimly lit club, the other clientele of the evening formed a frozen tableau, staring anxiously up at the confrontation on the stairs.
  For a few seconds everyone stood stock still. Only the music from behind the bar didn't know to stop throbbing.
  'The gun she is holding,' said Ford quietly, nodding slightly towards Random, 'is a Wabanatta 3. It was in the ship she stole from me. It's quite dangerous, in fact. Just don't move for a moment. Let's just everybody stay calm and find out what's upsetting her.'
  'Where do I fit?' screamed Random suddenly. The hand holding the gun was trembling fiercely. Her other hand delved into her pocket and pulled out the remains of Arthur's watch. She shook it at them.
  'I thought I would fit here,' she cried, 'on the world that made me! But it turns out that even my mother doesn't know who I am!' She flung the


watch violently aside, and it smashed into the glasses behind the bar, scattering its innards.
Everyone was very quiet for a moment or two longer. 'Random,' said Trillian quietly from up on the stairs. 'Shut up!' shouted Random. 'You abandoned me!'
  'Random, it is very important that you listen to me and understand,' persisted Trillian quietly. 'There isn't very much time. We must leave. We must all leave.'
  'What are you talking about? We're always leaving!' She had both hands on the gun now, and both were shaking. There was no one in particular she was pointing it at. She was just pointing it at the world in general.
  'Listen,' said Trillian again. 'I left you because I went to cover a war for the network. It was extremely dangerous. At least, I thought it was going to be. I arrived and the war had suddenly ceased to happen. There was a time anomaly and . . . Listen! Please listen! A reconnaissance battleship had failed to turn up, the rest of the fleet was scattered in some farcical disarray. It's happening all the time now.'
  'I don't care! I don't want to hear about your bloody job!' shouted Random. 'I want a home! I want to fit somewhere!'
  'This is not your home,' said Trillian, still keeping her voice calm. 'You don't have one. We none of us have one. Hardly anybody has one any more. The missing ship I was just talking about. The people of that ship don't have a home. They don't know where they are from. They don't even have any memory of who they are or what they are for. They are very lost and very confused and very frightened. They are here in this solar system, and they are about to do something very . . . misguided because they are so lost and confused. We . . . must . . . leave . . . now. I can't tell you where there is to go to. Perhaps there isn't anywhere. But here is not the place to be.
Please. One more time. Can we go?'
Random was wavering in panic and confusion.
  'It's all right,' said Arthur gently. 'If I'm here, we're safe. Don't ask me to explain just now, but I am safe, so you are safe. OK?'
'What are you saying?' said Trillian.
  'Let's all just relax,' said Arthur. He was feeling very tranquil. His life was charmed and none of this seemed real.
  Slowly, gradually, Random began to relax, and to let the gun down, inch by inch.


Two things happened simultaneously.
  The door to the men's room at the top of the stairs opened, and the man who had accosted Arthur came out, sniffing.
  Startled at the sudden movement, Random lifted the gun again just as a man standing behind her made a grab for it.
  Arthur threw himself forward. There was a deafening explosion. He fell awkwardly as Trillian threw herself down over him. The noise died away. Arthur looked up to see the man at the top of the stairs gazing down at him with a look of utter stupefaction.
'You . . .' he said. Then slowly, horribly, he fell apart.
  Random threw the gun down and fell to her knees, sobbing. 'I'm sorry!' she said. 'I'm so sorry! I'm so, so sorry . . .'
Tricia went to her. Trillian went to her.
  Arthur sat on the stairs with his head between his hands and had not the faintest idea what to do. Ford was sitting on the stair beneath him. He picked something up, looked at it with interest, and passed it up to Arthur.
'This mean anything to you?' he said.
  Arthur took it. It was the book of matches which the dead man had dropped. It had the name of the club on it. It had the name of the proprietor of the club on it. It looked like this:


STAVRO MUELLER BETA


He stared at it for some time as things began slowly to reassemble themselves in his mind. He wondered what he should do, but he only wondered it idly. Around him people were beginning to rush and shout a lot, but it was suddenly very clear to him that there was nothing to be done, not now or ever. Through the new strangeness of noise and light he could just make out the shape of Ford Prefect sitting back and laughing wildly.
  A tremendous feeling of peace came over him. He knew that at last, for once and for ever, it was now all, finally, over.


In the darkness of the bridge at the heart of the Vogon ship, Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz sat alone. Lights flared briefly across the external vision screens that lined one wall. In the air above him the discontinuities in the blue and green watery sausage shape resolved themselves. Options


collapsed, possibilities folded into each other, and the whole at last resolved itself out of existence.
  A very deep darkness descended. The Vogon captain sat immersed in it for a few seconds.
'Light,' he said.
There was no response. The bird, too, had crumpled out of all possibility.
  The Vogon turned on the light himself. He picked up the piece of paper again and placed a little tick in the little box.
Well, that was done. His ship slunk off into the inky void.


In spite of having taken what he regarded as an extremely positive piece of action, the Grebulon Leader ended up having a very bad month after all. It was pretty much the same as all the previous months except that there was now nothing on the television any more. He put on a little light music instead.
OceanofPDF.com






Young Zaphod Plays It Safe




A large flying craft moved swiftly across the surface of an astoundingly beautiful sea. From midmorning onward it plied back and forth in great widening arcs, and at last attracted the attention of the local islanders, a peaceful, seafood-loving people who gathered on the beach and squinted up into the blinding sun, trying to see what was there.
  Any sophisticated, knowledgeable person who had knocked about, seen a few things, would probably have remarked on how much the craft looked like a filing cabinet - a large and recently burgled filing cabinet lying on its back with its drawers in the air and flying. The islanders, whose experience was of a different kind, were instead struck by how little it looked like a lobster.
  They chattered excitedly about its total lack of claws, its stiff, unbendy back, and the fact that it seemed to experience the greatest difficulty staying on the ground. This last feature seemed particularly funny to them. They jumped up and down on the spot a lot to demonstrate to the stupid thing that they themselves found staying on the ground the easiest thing in the world. But soon this entertainment began to pall for them. After all, since it was perfectly clear to them that the thing was not a lobster, and since their world was blessed with an abundance of things that were lobsters (a good half a dozen of which were now marching succulently up the beach towards them), they saw no reason to waste any more time on the thing, but decided instead to adjourn immediately for a late lobster lunch.
  At that exact moment the craft stopped suddenly in midair, then upended itself and plunged headlong into the ocean with a great crash of spray that sent the islanders shouting into the trees. When they re-emerged, nervously, a few minutes later, all they were able to see was a smoothly scarred circle of water and a few gulping bubbles.
  That's odd, they said to each other between mouthfuls of the best lobster to be had anywhere in the Western Galaxy, that's the second time that's


happened in a year.


The craft that wasn't a lobster dived directly to a depth of two hundred feet, and hung there in the heavy blueness, while vast masses of water swayed about it. High above, where the water was magically clear, a brilliant formation of fish flashed away. Below, where the light had difficulty reaching, the colour of the water sank to a dark and savage blue.
  Here, at two hundred feet, the sun streamed feebly. A large, silk-skinned sea mammal rolled idly by, inspecting the craft with a kind of half-interest, as if it had half expected to find something of this kind round about here, and then it slid on up and away towards the rippling light.
  The craft waited here for a minute or two, taking readings, and then descended another hundred feet. At this depth it was becoming seriously dark. After a moment or two the internal lights of the craft shut down, and in the second or so that passed before the main external beams suddenly stabbed out, the only visible light came from a small, hazily illuminated pink sign that read, THE BEEBLEBROX SALVAGE AND REALLY WILD STUFF CORPORATION.
  The huge beams switched downwards, catching a vast shoal of silver fish, which swivelled away in silent panic.
  In the dim control room that extended in a broad bow from the craft's blunt prow, four heads were gathered round a computer display that was analysing the very, very faint and intermittent signals that were emanating from deep on the seabed.
'That's it,' said the owner of one of the heads finally.
'Can we be quite sure?' said the owner of another of the heads. 'One hundred per cent positive,' replied the owner of the first head.
  'You're one hundred per cent positive that the ship which is crashed on the bottom of this ocean is the ship which you said you were one hundred per cent positive could one hundred per cent positively never crash?' said the owner of the two remaining heads. 'Hey' - he put up two of his hands - 'I'm only asking.'
  The two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration responded to this with a very cold stare, but the man with the odd, or rather the even number of heads, missed it. He flung himself back on the pilot couch, opened a couple of beers - one for himself and the other also for


himself - stuck his feet on the console, and said, 'Hey, baby,' through the ultra-glass at a passing fish.
  'Mr Beeblebrox . . .' began the shorter and less reassuring of the two officials in a low voice.
  'Yup?' said Zaphod, rapping a suddenly empty can down on some of the more sensitive instruments. 'You ready to dive? Let's go.'
'Mr Beeblebrox, let us make one thing perfectly clear . . .'
  'Yeah, let's,' said Zaphod. 'How about this for a start. Why don't you just tell me what's really on this ship.'
'We have told you,' said the official. 'By-products.' Zaphod exchanged weary glances with himself. 'By-products,' he said. 'By-products of what?' 'Processes,' said the official.
'What processes?'
'Processes that are perfectly safe.'
  'Santa Zarquana Voostra!' exclaimed both of Zaphod's heads in chorus. 'So safe that you have to build a zarking fortress ship to take the by- products to the nearest black hole and tip them in! Only it doesn't get there because the pilot does a detour - is this right? - to pick up some lobster?
OK, so the guy is cool, but . . . I mean own up, this is barking time, this is major lunch, this is stool approaching critical mass, this is . . . this is . . . total vocabulary failure!'
'Shut up!' his right head yelled at his left. 'We're flanging!' He got a good calming grip on the remaining beer can.
'Listen, guys,' he resumed after a moment's peace and contemplation.
The two officials had said nothing. Conversation at this level was not something to which they felt they could aspire. 'I just want to know,' insisted Zaphod, 'what you're getting me into here.'
  He stabbed a finger at the intermittent readings trickling over the computer screen. They meant nothing to him, but he didn't like the look of them at all. They were all squiggly, with lots of long numbers and things.
  'It's breaking up, is that it?' he shouted. 'It's got a hold full of epsilonic radiating aorist rods or something that'll fry this whole space sector for zillions of years back, and it's breaking up. Is that the story? Is that what we're going down to find? Am I going to come out of that wreck with even more heads?'


  'It cannot possibly be a wreck, Mr. Beeblebrox,' insisted the official. 'The ship is guaranteed to be perfectly safe. It cannot possibly break up.'
'Then why are you so keen to go and look at it?' 'We like to look at things that are perfectly safe.' 'Freeeooow!'
  'Mr Beeblebrox,' said the official patiently, 'may I remind you that you have a job to do?'
  'Yeah, well maybe I don't feel so keen on doing it all of a sudden. What do you think I am, completely without any moral whatsits, what are they called, those moral things?'
'Scruples?'
'Scruples, thank you, whatsoever? Well?'
  The two officials waited calmly. They coughed slightly to help pass the time.
  Zaphod sighed a what-is-the-world-coming-to sort of sigh to absolve himself from all blame, and swung himself round in his seat.
'Ship?' he called. 'Yup?' said the ship. 'Do what I do.'
  The ship thought about this for a few milliseconds and then, after double- checking all the seals on its heavy-duty bulkheads, it began slowly, inexorably, in the hazy blaze of its lights, to sink to the lowest depths.


Five hundred feet.
A thousand.
Two thousand.
  Here, at a pressure of nearly seventy atmospheres, in the chilling depths where no light reaches, nature keeps its most heated imaginings. Two-foot- long nightmares loomed wildly into the bleaching light, yawned, and vanished back into the blackness.
Two and a half thousand feet.
  At the dim edges of the ship's lights, guilty secrets flitted by with their eyes on stalks.
  Gradually the topography of the distantly approaching ocean bed resolved with greater and greater clarity on the computer displays until at last a shape could be made out that was separate and distinct from its surroundings. It was like a huge, lopsided, cylindrical fortress that widened


sharply halfway along its length to accommodate the heavy ultra-plating with which the crucial storage holds were clad, and which were supposed by its builders to have made this the most secure and impregnable spaceship ever built. Before launch, the material structure of this section had been battered, rammed, blasted, and subjected to every assault its builders knew it could withstand, in order to demonstrate that it could withstand them.
  The tense silence in the cockpit tightened perceptibly as it became clear that it was this section that had broken rather neatly in two.
  'In fact it's perfectly safe,' said one of the officials. 'It's built so that even if the ship does break up, the storage holds cannot possibly be breached.'


Three thousand eight hundred and twenty-five feet.
  Four Hi-Presh-A SmartSuits moved slowly out of the open hatchway of the salvage craft and waded through the barrage of its lights towards the monstrous shape that loomed darkly out of the sea night. They moved with a sort of clumsy grace, near weightless though weighed on by a world of water.
  With his right-hand head, Zaphod peered up into the black immensities above him, and for a moment his mind sang with a silent roar of horror. He glanced to his left and was relieved to see that his other head was busy watching the Brockian Ultra-Cricket broadcasts on the helmet vid without concern. Slightly behind him to his left walked the two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration, and slightly in front of him to his right walked the empty suit, carrying their implements and testing the way for them.
  They passed the huge rift in the broken-backed starship Billion Year Bunker, and played their flashlights up into it. Mangled machinery loomed between torn and twisted bulkheads two feet thick. A family of large transparent eels lived in there now and seemed to like it. The empty suit preceded them along the length of the ship's gigantic, murky hull, trying the airlocks. The third one it tested ground open uneasily. They crowded inside it and waited for several long minutes while the pump mechanisms dealt with the hideous pressure that the ocean exerted, and slowly replaced it with an equally hideous pressure of air and inert gases. At last the inner door slid open and they were admitted to a dark outer holding area of the starship Billion Year Bunker.


  Several more high-security Titan-O-Hold doors had to be passed through, each of which the officials opened with a selection of quark keys. Soon they were so deep within the heavy security fields that the Ultra-Cricket broadcasts were beginning to fade, and Zaphod had to switch to one of the rock video stations, since there was nowhere that they were not able to reach.
  A final doorway slid open, and they emerged into a large, sepulchral space. Zaphod played his flashlight against the opposite wall and it fell full on a wild-eyed, screaming face.
  Zaphod screamed a diminished fifth himself, dropped his light, and sat heavily on the floor, or rather on a body that had been lying there undisturbed for around six months, and that reacted to being sat on by exploding with great violence. Zaphod wondered what to do about all this and, after a brief but hectic internal debate, decided that passing out would be the very thing.
  He came to a few minutes later, and pretended not to know who he was, where he was, or how he had got there, but was not able to convince anybody. He then pretended that his memory suddenly returned with a rush and that the shock caused him to pass out again, but he was helped unwillingly to his feet by the empty suit - which he was beginning to take a serious dislike to - and forced to come to terms with his surroundings.
  They were dimly and fitfully lit and unpleasant in a number of respects, the most obvious of which was the colourful arrangement of parts of the ship's late lamented navigation officer over the floor, walls, and ceiling, and especially over the lower half of his, Zaphod's, suit. The effect of this was so astoundingly nasty that we shall not be referring to it again at any point in this narrative - other than to record briefly the fact that it caused Zaphod to throw up inside his suit, which he therefore removed and swapped, after suitable headgear modifications, with the empty one. Unfortunately the stench of the fetid air in the ship, followed by the sight of his own suit walking around casually draped in rotting intestines, was enough to make him throw up in the other suit as well, which was a problem that he and the suit would simply have to live with.
There. All done. No more nastiness.
At least, no more of that particular nastiness.
  The owner of the screaming face had calmed down very slightly now and was bubbling away incoherently in a large tank of yellow liquid - an


emergency suspension tank.
  'It was crazy,' he babbled, 'crazy! I told him we could always try the lobster on the way back, but he was crazy. Obsessed! Do you ever get like that about lobster? Because I don't. Seems to me it's all rubbery and fiddly to eat, and not that much taste, well, I mean is there? I infinitely prefer scallops, and said so. Oh Zarquon, I said so!'
  Zaphod stared at this extraordinary apparition, flailing in its tank. The man was attached to all kinds of life-support tubes, and his voice was bubbling out of speakers that echoed insanely round the ship, returning as haunting echoes from deep and distant corridors.
  'That was where I went wrong,' the madman yelled. 'I actually said that I preferred scallops and he said it was because I hadn't had real lobster like they did where his ancestors came from, which was here, and he'd prove it. He said it was no problem, he said the lobster here was worth a whole journey, let alone the small diversion it would take to get here, and he swore he could handle the ship in the atmosphere, but it was madness, madness!' he screamed, and paused with his eyes rolling, as if the word had rung some kind of bell in his mind. 'The ship went right out of control! I couldn't believe what we were doing and just to prove a point about lobster, which is really so overrated as a food, I'm sorry to go on about lobsters so much, I'll try and stop in a minute, but they've been on my mind so much for the months I've been in this tank, can you imagine what it's like to be stuck in a ship with the same guys for months eating junk food when all one guy will talk about is lobster, and then spend six months floating by yourself in a tank thinking about it. I promise I will try and shut up about the lobsters, I really will. Lobsters, lobsters, lobsters - enough! I think I'm the only survivor. I'm the only one who managed to get to an emergency tank before we went down. I sent out the mayday and then we hit. It's a disaster, isn't it? A total disaster, and all because the guy liked lobsters. How much sense am I making? It's really hard for me to tell.'
  He gazed at them beseechingly, and his mind seemed to sway slowly back down to earth like a falling leaf. He blinked and looked at them oddly, like a monkey peering at a strange fish.
  He scrabbled curiously with his wrinkled-up fingers at the glass side of the tank. Tiny, thick yellow bubbles loosed themselves from his mouth and nose, caught briefly in his swab of hair, and strayed on upwards.


  'Oh Zarquon, oh heavens,' he mumbled pathetically to himself, 'I've been found. I've been rescued . . .'
  'Well,' said one of the officials, briskly, 'you've been found at least.' He strode over to the main computer bank in the middle of the chamber and started checking quickly through the ship's main monitor circuits for damage reports.
'The aorist rod chambers are intact,' he said.
'Holy dingo's dos,' snarled Zaphod, 'there are aorist rods on board!'
  Aorist rods were devices used in a now happily abandoned form of energy production. When the hunt for new sources of energy had at one point got particularly frantic, one bright young chap suddenly spotted that one place which had never used up all its available energy was - the past. And with the sudden rush of blood to the head that such insights tend to induce, he invented a way of mining it that very same night, and within a year huge tracts of the past were being drained of all their energy and simply wasting away. Those who claimed that the past should be left unspoilt were accused of indulging in an extremely expensive form of sentimentality. The past provided a very cheap, plentiful, and clean source of energy, there could always be a few Natural Past Reserves set up if anyone wanted to pay for their upkeep, and as for the claim that draining the past impoverished the present, well, maybe it did, slightly, but the effects were immeasurable and you really had to keep a sense of proportion.
  It was only when it was realized that the present really was being impoverished, and that the reason for it was that those selfish plundering wastrel bastards up in the future were doing exactly the same thing, that everyone realized that every single aorist rod, and the terrible secret of how they were made, would have to be utterly and for ever destroyed. They claimed it was for the sake of their grand-parents and grandchildren, but it was of course for the sake of their grandparents' grandchildren, and their grandchildren's grandparents.
  The official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration gave a dismissive shrug. 'They're perfectly safe,' he said. He glanced up at Zaphod and suddenly said with uncharacteristic frankness, 'There's worse than that on board. At least,' he added, tapping at one of the computer screens, 'I hope it's on board.'
The other official rounded on him sharply.
'What the hell do you think you're saying?' he snapped.


  The first shrugged again. He said, 'It doesn't matter. He can say what he likes. No one would believe him. It's why we chose to use him rather than do anything official, isn't it? The more wild the story he tells, the more it'll sound like he's some hippy adventurer making it up. He can even say that we said this and it'll make him sound like a paranoid.' He smiled pleasantly at Zaphod, who was seething in a suit full of sick. 'You may accompany us,' he told him, 'if you wish.'


'You see?' said the official, examining the ultra-titanium outer seals of the aorist rod hold. 'Perfectly secure, perfectly safe.'
  He said the same thing as they passed holds containing chemical weapons so powerful that a teaspoonful could fatally infect an entire planet.
  He said the same thing as they passed holds containing zeta-active compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could blow up a whole planet.
  He said the same thing as they passed holds containing theta-active compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could irradiate a whole planet.
'I'm glad I'm not a planet,' muttered Zaphod.
  'You'd have nothing to fear,' assured the official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration.
'Planets are very safe. Provided,' he added - and paused.
  They were approaching the hold nearest to the point where the back of the starship Billion Year Bunker was broken. The corridor here was twisted and deformed, and the floor was damp and sticky in patches.
'Ho-hum,' he said, 'ho very much hum.' 'What's in this hold?' demanded Zaphod.
'By-products,' said the official, clamming up again. 'By-products . . .' insisted Zaphod, quietly, 'of what?'
  Neither official answered. Instead they examined the hold door very carefully and saw that its seals were twisted apart by the forces that had deformed the whole corridor. One of them touched the door lightly. It swung open to his touch. There was darkness inside, with just a couple of dim yellow lights deep within it.
'Of what?' hissed Zaphod.
The leading official turned to the other.
  'There's an escape capsule,' he said, 'that the crew were to use to abandon ship before jettisoning it into the black hole,' he said. 'I think it


would be good to know that it's still there.' The other official nodded and left without a word.
  The first official quietly beckoned Zaphod in. The large dim yellow lights glowed about twenty feet from them.
  'The reason,' he said quietly, 'why everything else in this ship is, I maintain, safe, is that no one is really crazy enough to use them. No one. At least no one that crazy would ever get near them. Anyone that mad or dangerous rings very deep alarm bells. People may be stupid, but they're not that stupid.'
  'By-products,' hissed Zaphod again - he had to hiss in order that his voice shouldn't be heard to tremble - 'of what?'
'Er, Designer People.' 'What?'
  'The Sirius Cybernetics Corporation were awarded a huge research grant to design and produce synthetic personalities to order. The results were uniformly disastrous. All the "people" and "personalities" turned out to be amalgams of characteristics which simply could not coexist in naturally occurring life forms. Most of them were just poor pathetic misfits, but some were deeply, deeply dangerous. Dangerous because they didn't ring alarm bells in other people. They could walk through situations the way that ghosts walk through walls, because no one spotted the danger.
  'The most dangerous of all were three identical ones - they were put in this hold, to be blasted, with this ship, right out of this universe. They are not evil, in fact they are rather simple and charming. But they are the most dangerous creatures that ever lived because there is nothing they will not do if allowed, and nothing they will not be allowed to do . . .'
  Zaphod looked at the dim yellow lights, the two dim yellow lights. As his eyes became accustomed to the light, he saw that the two lights framed a third space where something was broken. Wet, sticky patches gleamed dully on the floor.
  Zaphod and the official walked cautiously toward the lights. At that moment, four words came crashing into the helmet headsets from the other official.
'The capsule has gone,' he said tersely.
'Trace it,' snapped Zaphod's companion. 'Find exactly where it has gone.
We must know where it has gone!'


  Zaphod approached the two remaining tanks. A quick glance showed him that each contained an identical floating body. He examined one more carefully. The body, that of an elderly man, was floating in a thick yellow liquid. The man was kindly looking, with lots of pleasant laugh lines round his face. His hair seemed unnaturally thick and dark for someone of his age, and his right hand seemed continually to be weaving forward and back, up and down, as if shaking hands with an endless succession of unseen ghosts. He smiled genially, babbled and burbled like a half-sleeping baby, and occasionally seemed to rock very slightly with little tremors of laughter, as if he had just told himself a joke he hadn't heard before, or didn't remember properly. Waving, smiling, chortling, with little yellow bubbles beading on his lips, he seemed to inhabit a distant world of simple dreams.
  Another terse message suddenly came through his helmet headset. The planet toward which the escape capsule had headed had already been identified. It was in Galactic Sector ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha.
  Zaphod found a small speaker by the tank, and turned it on. The man in the yellow liquid was babbling gently about a shining city on a hill.
  He also heard the Official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration issue instructions to the effect that the missing escape capsule contained a 'Reagan' and that the planet in ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha must be made 'perfectly safe'.


From The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book, 1986
OceanofPDF.com






The Most Gratuitous Use of the Word 'Belgium' in a Serious Screenplay: an Undeleted Scene




The following passage comes from the American edition of Life, the Universe and Everything, where it replaces two lines of dialogue concerning the word 'fuck' (p. 391 of this omnibus). Douglas Adams's original US publishers insisted on removing the swear words - along with two instances of 'asshole' and one use of 'shit'. And lo, 'shit' became 'swut', 'asshole' became the delightfully whimsical 'kneebiter', and two lines on the word 'fuck' became an entire conversation in which 'Belgium' is revealed as the Galaxy's most award-winningly obscene expression. The conversation re-purposes a similar exchange from the Hitchhiker radio series (Fit the Tenth, recorded 1979), and has remained in US editions of the novel ever since. It is reproduced here for the enjoyment and edification of UK readers.
OceanofPDF.com






UK Edition
  'What was that about?' said Arthur to a girl he found standing beside him. 'Why did he tell me to win awards?'
  'Just showbiz talk,' shrugged the girl. 'He's just won an award at the Annual Ursa Minor Alpha Recreational Illusions Institute Awards Ceremony, and was hoping to be able to pass it off lightly, only you didn't mention it, so he couldn't.'
'Oh,' said Arthur, 'oh, well I'm sorry I didn't. What was it for?'
'The Most Gratuitous Use of the Word "Fuck" in a Serious Screenplay.
It's very prestigious.'
'I see,' said Arthur, 'yes, and what do you get for that?'
OceanofPDF.com






US Edition
  "What was that about?" said Arthur to a girl he found standing beside him. "Why did he tell me to win awards?"
  "Just showbiz talk," shrugged the girl. "He's just won an award at the Annual Ursa Minor Alpha Recreational Illusions Institute Awards Ceremony, and was hoping to be able to pass it off lightly, only you didn't mention it, so he couldn't."
"Oh," said Arthur, "oh, well I'm sorry I didn't. What was it for?" "The Most Gratuitous Use of the Word 'Belgium' in a Serious
Screenplay. It's very prestigious."
  "The most gratuitous use of which word?" asked Arthur, with a determined attempt to keep his brain in neutral.
"Belgium," said the girl, "I hardly like to say it." "Belgium?" exclaimed Arthur.
  A drunken seven-toed sloth staggered past, gawked at the word and threw itself backward at a blurry-eyed pterodactyl, roaring with displeasure.
  "Are we talking," said Arthur, "about the very flat country, with all the EEC and the fog?"
"What?" said the girl. "Belgium," said Arthur.
"Raaaaaarrrchchchchch!" screeched the pterodactyl. "Grrruuuuuurrrghhhh," agreed the seven-toed sloth.
  "They must be thinking of Ostend Hoverport," muttered Arthur. He turned back to the girl.
  "Have you ever been to Belgium in fact?" he asked brightly and she nearly hit him.
  "I think," she said, restraining herself, "that you should restrict that sort of remark to something artistic."
"You sound as if I just said something unspeakably rude." "You did."
  In today's modern Galaxy there is of course very little still held to be unspeakable. Many words and expressions which only a matter of decades ago were considered so distastefully explicit that, were they merely to be


breathed in public, the perpetrator would be shunned, barred from polite society, and in extreme cases shot through the lungs, are now thought to be very healthy and proper, and their use in everyday speech and writing is seen as evidence of a well-adjusted, relaxed and totally un****ed-up personality.
  So, for instance, when in a recent national speech the Financial Minister of the Royal World Estate of Quarlvista actually dared to say that due to one thing and another and the fact that no one had made any food for a while and the king seemed to have died and most of the population had been on holiday now for over three years, the economy was now in what he called "one whole joojooflop situation," everyone was so pleased that he felt able to come out and say it that they quite failed to note that their entire five- thousand-year-old civilization had just collapsed overnight.
  But even though words like "joojooflop," "swut," and "turlingdrome" are now perfectly acceptable in common usage there is one word that is still beyond the pale. The concept it embodies is so revolting that the publication or broadcast of the word is utterly forbidden in all parts of the Galaxy except for use in Serious Screenplays. There is also, or was, one planet where they didn't know what it meant, the stupid turlingdromes.
  "I see," said Arthur, who didn't, "so what do you get for using the name of a perfectly innocent if slightly dull European country gratuitously in a Serious Screenplay?"
OceanofPDF.com








Enclosed here are samples of original material sourced from the Douglas Adams archives










Original Press release for
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy






Typed up quotes from the Monty Python team






Press release about The Golden Pan Award




















Reviews for THE HITCH HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY were ecstatic:




"It is indispensable reading for mental hitch-hikers who want to thumb a lift out of the ruts of orthodox thought. Douglas Adams is not the first man to write intelligent science fiction. But he is only the second to write science fiction that is very intelligently amusing, or very amusingly intelligent. The first, of course, was Kurt Vonnegut.11        Peter Lewis - The Daily Mail




"I shied away from THE HITCH HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY simply because
it was so heartily and indiscriminately recommended. But having succumbed, I am half way through it again. There have been hundreds of dismal attempts at a funny Science Fiction novel, but this is the only one which
comes off."        John Kenyon, choosing THE HITCH HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE
GALAXY as his book of the year in The Observer, 1979




"It is funny and funny in every way ... it is the sort of humour which crops up from time to time and immediately finds its own level, its own audience."        Gillian Reynolds - The Daily Telegraph




"Douglas Adams has a dry, wry sense of humour which acts as a perfect foil to the madness of his imagination ... I approve."        Richard Cox -
Critics Forum-




"It's humour is cool and downbeat and it appeals unashamedly to those of us who feel that life is too short to be taken seriously"        Observer
Colour Magazine




"A modern fairy-story, a parable, a masterpiece of comedy." Television
Today






Publicity clippings for
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy






Fax from Douglas Adams to US editor Byron Preiss








FAX from Douglas Adams        Monday, January 13, 1992, 5:26 pm Page 2


are English (but make it twenty pounds rather than five - inflation) o why suddenly '::--Jewark' instead of 'Rickmanmorth'? And 'Bloomingdales' instead of 'Marks & Spencer'? The fact that Rickmansworth is not within the continental United States doesn't mean that it doesn't exist! American audiences do not need to feel disturbed by the notion that places do exist outside the "CS or that people might suddenly refer to them in works of fiction. You
\\'Ouldn't, presumably, replace l!rsa IIIinor Beta with 'Des '.\foines'. There is no Bloomingdales in England, and Bloomingdales is not a generic term for large department stores. If you feel that refen'iug to ''.\[arks & Spencer' might seriously freak out ,-\mericans because they haven't heard of it (or because (arks and Spencer owns Brooks Brothers) we could either put warning stickers on the co,∑er (''The text of this book contains references to places and institutions outside the continental "Cnited States and may cause offence to people who haven't heard of them") or you could, I suppose, put 'Han:ods', which most people will have heard of. Or we could e,∑en take the appalling risk of just recklessly mentioning things that people won't have heard of and see if they survi\'e the experience. They probably will - when people are bom they hal'en't heard of anything or anywhere, but seem to get through the first few years of their lives without ill-effects.


.Another point is something I'm less concerned about, but which I thought I'd mention and then leave to your judgment. You've replaced the joke about 'digital watches' with a reference to 'cellular phones' instead. Obviously, I understand that this is an attempt to update the joke, but there are two points to raise in defence of the original. One is that it's a ,∑et}, very well known line in Hitch Hiker, and one that is






















Note from Douglas Adams










Press release for The Restaurant at the End of the Universe




If you ha" read THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY and 1111ree with Tom Baker {alim Ot-. Who) that 'It chanpd
my whole life. It's literally out of this world' ... DON'T PANICI


For THE RESTAURANT AT THE END DF THE UNIVERSE is not merelyï sequel to HITCH-HIKER. In Douglas Adam,ï inimitable style, it extends the infinite improbability of the galaxy and incredibly - is even more hilarious and extraordinary than the first book.
As most people now know. THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY wa, launched without fanfare - indeed almost surreptitiously - by BBC Radio 4 onto an unsuspecting public over two years ago. It quickly attrilctcd a devoted audience and soon grew to have a cult following.


The PAN Original paperback of HITCH-HIKER was published in October 1979. went straight to Number One in the bestseller lists. staved in that position for many weeks and remained 1n the best-seller llsts for six months. Sales are now approaching half a million copies.


THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY has also been made into a highly successful double LP. a stage show under the direction of Ken Campbell. which played to packed houses at the ICA and. then last July, opened as a stage spectacular at the Rainbow Theatre. A further LP is released in November. A six-part television series starts on BBC 2 in January and a film is being discussed...


The tremendous cult following of HITCH-HIKER may possibly alienate some people. But as John Kenyon said, in choosing his 'Book of the Year' in the Observt1r: 'I shied away from THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUJDE TO THE GALAXY simply because it was so heartily and indiscr1minately recommended. But having succumbed, I am half way through it again. There have been hundreds of dismal attempts at a funny Science Fiction
novel, but this is the only one which come$ off.' He is not alone in his endorsement:
"It ;. indill}llnubltt rt!adlng for mt!fltal hltt'h-llilr. N wf'IO want ro thumb a lift our al thïruu of orthodo111 thought. DouO(as Adam, ,, nor thï firtt m-, to write mtelligeM aci.,-,cï ficrion. Bur IN 11 on/I( ti• s"ond ro write Kienc.
f,coon that 11 Yl!',Y mtellfgentlyam,aing, or ,y amullng/a, intïllil'fflt. Thïflnr of COUIN,  Kurt Vonnegutï:
Pttïr Ltw,a, DAILY MAIL
-it i, funny Md funna, in ..,.ty w.,.. ... It I f'h UJnof humc,ur which crops up from timï to timïand immtld,.rr,ly finds iu own 1ï11111. its own wd,ence".
G1lhan Reynolds. DAILY TELEGRAPH
"'/ ,m ly        ond forevtr gr,relul ro Doug/,s Ad.wns for THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY-.
Ph1l1ppa Toomey, TIMES BOOKS OF THE YEAR


''Doug/at Adami ha,ï dry, w,y sense of humour whic/1 acts
,s , ,,_rt"r foil ro titï mlldnHE of hi1 imagination .ï. I
111PPrO "
Richard Cox, CRITICS FORUM


"A modlm fa,,v-,ro,y, a parab/11, ï mïfflrplttee of com"ly ...
TELEVISION TODAY


'11'1 humour n cool attd doi.,,,bfrltr .a"d it Is un∑ mham":lly ro lhOSII of UI Mo'ho thït Ilk Is fOD fflort tr, 1>,i.lt.-nffnoc,1/y':
OBSERVER COLOUR MAGAZINE


Douglas Adams' work has been compared to Monty Python - with whom he worked for I time - Kurt Vonnetut, Tom Stoppard and ewen Lewis Carroll and Jonathan Swift!


From thcso illustrious names. we asked Monty Python for some quotes, as they know Douglas Adams and his work rather better than .the others:


'R l/y 6nt6rtaining and fun' -John Cleese
'Much funni11r than anything John Ot!ese has ever
written' - Terry Jones
'I know for II fact John OHStJ hasn't rtJed it' - Graham Chapman
Who is John C/,eul'- Eric Idle
'Really enr rta,ning and fun' - Michael Palin






Memo about cover design








Letter from Douglas to editor Sonny Mehta






Original synopsis from Douglas for Life, the Universe and Everything
















"The History of the Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy
is one of idealism, espair, struggle, passion, success, failure, and enormously long lumrh breaks."
Quoted from interview with Hurling Frootmig, 17th acting editor of the Guide.




"There is an art to flying, or rather a knack. The knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground and miss,"
Extract from the Guide, chfpter 973a, on "l!ecreational Impossibilities."


"The point is, you see, that there is no point in driving yourself mad trying to stop yourself goin' mad, You might as well give
in and save your sanity for later."
Ford Prefect, confronted with some of the awful truths about Life,the Universe and Everything.


"Why stop now, just when IIm hating it?" MarTin the Paranoid Andr1tild.
























Letter from Douglas to editor Sonny Mehta








Extracts from Douglas








Extracts from Douglas








Extracts from Douglas






Original press release for
So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish






Douglas Adams' original synopsis for So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish










  
Reluctant.ly, he sets out on his travels again, taking Fenchurch with him.
If he's to help her, he has to find out:


what really happened the day the Earth got demolished?


why have all the dolphins vanished?


and        what        is        0        W mi.@11
lm  @ @ It@ Irnn tlr"@@ll@mi.1
























Page 3










Promotional material for
So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish








Letter explaining how Hitchhikers should be spelled.






Advert for Mostly Harmless






Piece by Douglas Adams about the series










5
off the effects of thinking up the Babel Fish (six slices of toast and peanut butter, a packet or crisps and a shower). Marvin was...
          Marvin was different. Marvin was actually based on a real person, but the person concerned tends to get annoyed if I go around telling people it was him. However he gets even more annoyed if I don∑t go around telling people it was him becasue then he has to tell people himself before he can tell them how annoyed he is about it, and I think he finds that particularly irritating.
          There ls a rumour to the et!ect that the person rm referring to here is the comedy writer Andrew Marshall, who co-wrote The 8urt.iss Way, End of Part One, and Wboops, Apocalypse, but l WOUid like to emphasise that it is only a rumour. I know that tor a fact beeause I started it.
          Is there any evidence to support the rumour? Well, it is true that When I used to know Andrew well, he was the sort of person you would feel rather nervous about introducing to people. Suppose you were with a group of people in a pub and he joined you. You would say "Andrew, meet..." whoever it was, and everyone would say hello to him. There would be a slight pause, and then Andrew would say something so devastatingly rude to them that they would be absolutely stunned rigid. In the silence that followed Andrew would then wander off into a corner and sit hunched over a pint of beer. I would go over and say "Andrew, what on earth was the point of saying that?" and Andrew would say "What"s the point of not saying it? What"s the point or being here? What's the point of anything? Including being alive at all? That seems particularly pointless to me: