7
you have t.o start work. all over again When It's finished. However, this did in the end have a lot t.o do with now Hitch Hiker was actually produced.
         Though it was now ten years since Sergeant Pepper had revolutionised the way that people in the rock world thought about sound production, it seemed t.o me, listening t.o radio comedy at the time, that we still hadn't progressed much beyond Door Slam A, Door Slam B, Footsteps On a Gravel Path and the odd Comic Boing. This wasn't so much lack. of imagination, as a perfectly reasonable worry that an overindulgence in sound effects easily creates an irritating mish mash Which detracts from a strong script and fails t.o disguise a weak one. Also it t.ook time, Which, it was felt, could be better used making more programmes.
        However, long-standing rules are made t.o be broken, and I wanted Hitch Hiker t.o sound like a rock album. I wanted the voices and the effects and the music t.o be so seamlessly orchestrated as t.o create a coherent sound picture of a Whole other world - and I said this and many simllar sorts or things and waved my hands around a lot, While people nodded patiently and said -Yes, Douglas, but What's it actually ,fflt?ut.r
          We never did clear that one up, of course, but I think we can fairly claim t.o have made some good noises. In fact recording these sho.        s
was some of the best and most nerve-rack.ing fun I've ever had. Were we doing something extraordinary, or were we simply gomg mad? It was mostly very hard t.o tell. Because the BBC Light Entertainment Department had simply nev&r attempted anything like this before, we were largely having t.o invent the process by Which we worked as we went along.
Geoffrey Perkins has explained a lot of how the production techniques












Email from Douglas for an article






FW: Sorry lo bother ..on ¶rtlcl¶        01 Nov 2000  16:40
of a baton being passed. I think George Harrison once said something similar. But nowadays everybody's a comedian, even the weather girls and continuity announcers. We laugh at everything. Not intelligently any more, not with sudden shock, astonishment or revelation, just relentlessly and meaninglessly. No more
rainshowers in the desert, just mud and drizzle everywhere, occasionally illuminated by the flash of paparazzis.
Creative excitement has gone el ewhere - to science and technology: new ways of seeing things, new understandings of the universe, continual new revelations about how life works, how we think, how we perceive how we communicate. So this is my second point. Where, thirty years ago we used lo tart up rock bands, we now start up
Start-Ups and experiment with new ways of communicating with each other and playing with the information we exchange. And when one idea fails there's another better one right behind it, and another and another, cascading out as fast as rock albums used to in the sixties.
There's always a moment when you start to fall out of love, whether it's with a person or an idea or a cause, even if it's one you only narrate to yourself years after the event: a tiny thing, a wrong word, a false note, which means that things can never be quite the same again. For me it was hearing a stand-up comedian make the following observation. 'These scientists eh? They're so stupid! You know those black box flight recorders they put on aeroplanes? And you know they're meant to be indestructible?
It's always the thing that doesn't get smashed? So why don't they make the planes out of the same stuff?' The audience roared with laughter at how stupid scientists were, couldn't think their way out of a paper bag, but I sat feeling uncomfortable. Was I just
being pedantic to feel that the joke didn't really work because flight recorders are made out titanium and that if you made planes out of titanium rather than aluminium they'd be far too heavy to get off the ground in the first place? I began to pick away at the joke. Supposing Eric Morecambe had said it? Would it be funny then? Well, not quite, because that would have relied on the audience seeing that Eric was being dumb, in other words they would have had to know as a matter of common knowledge about the relative weights of titanium and aluminium. There was no way of deconstructing the joke (if you think this is obsessive behaviour you hould try living with it) that didn't rely on the teller and the audience complacently conspiring together to jeer at someone who knew more than they did. It sent a chill down my spine and still does. I felt betrayed by comedy in the same way that gangsta rap now makes me feel betrayed by rock music. I also began to wonder how many of the jokes I was making were just, well, ignorant.


My tum towards science came one day in about 1985 when I was walking through a forest in Madagascar. My companion on the walk was the zoologist Mark Carwardine (with whom I later collaborated on the book Last Chance to See), and I asked him 'So come on then, what's so special about the rain forest that we're supposed to care about it so much?'
And he told me. Took about two minutes. He explained the difference between temperate forest and rain forest and how it came to be that the latter produced such bewildering diversity of life but was at the same time so terribly fragile. l fell silent
for a few moments as r began to realize that one simple piece of new understanding had just changed the way I saw the world. r had just been handed a single thread T could
now follow into the tangled ball of a bewilderingly complex world. For the next few
Page 2 of 3






OceanofPDF.com








Turn over for previously unseen samples of original material sourced from the Douglas Adams archives exclusive to this 42nd anniversary edition.








Douglas Adams receiving a Golden Pan Award for The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy on 12 January 1984. He was the youngest author to receive a Golden Pan and it was the first Pan original to reach sales of one million copies






Advertisement in Radio Times, 1978


THE HIT.CH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY was launched without fanfare by BBC Radio 4 onto an unsuspecting public in 1978. It quickly attracted a cult following of such dimensions that the series was repeated numerous times and a second radio series was transmitted. There have been three stage shows and a six-part television series shown originally on BBC2 in January 1981 and repeated soon after ori BB Cl. There have been two long-playing records and a video game based on the book and a major film, scripted by Douglas Adams, is in development in the United States.
Douglas Adams is also the co-author, with John Lloyd, of THE MEANING OF LIFF which Pan published jointly with Faber & Faber last November.
Douglas Adams was born in Cambridge in 1952. He was educated at Brentwood School, Essex, and St John's College, Cambridge, where he read English.
After graduation he spent several years contributing material to radio and television shows as well as writing, performing and sometimes directing stage revues in Lon≠ don, Cambridge and on the Edinburgh Fringe. He has also worked at various times as a hospital porter, barn builder, chicken-shed cleaner, bodyguard, radio pro≠ ducer and script editor of Doctor Who.
He has not married, has no children, and does not wish to hear from any more Surrey estate agents.














Reviews for
THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY
'It is indispensable reading for mental hitch-hikers who wantto thumb a lift out of the ruts of orthodox thought. Douglas Adams is not the first man to write intelligent science fiction. But he is only the second to write science fiction that is very intelligently amusing, or very amusingly intelligent. The first, of course; was Kurt Vonnegut'
Peter Lewis - The Daily Mail
'I shied away from THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY simply because it was so heartily and indiscriminately recommended. But having succumbed, I am halfway through it again. There have been hundreds of dismal attempts at a funny Science Fiction novel, but this is the only one which comes off'
John Kenyon, choosing THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY as his book of the year in The Observer, 1979
'It is funny and funny in every way ... it is the sort of humour which crops up from time to time and immediately finds its own level, its own audience'
Gillian Reynolds - The Daily Telegraph
'Douglas Adams has a dry, wry sense of humour which acts as a perfect foil to the madness of his imagination        I approve'
Richard Cox - Critics Forum
'Its humour is cool and downbeat and it appeals unashamedly to those of us who feel that life to too short to be taken seriously'
Observer Colour Magazine
'A modern fairy-story, a parable, a masterpiece of comedy'
Television Today






The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy flyer, 1979






Promotional material for Life, the Universe and Everything










Promotional material for Mostly Harmless










Letter between Douglas Adams and editor Nicky Hursell shortly before his death






OceanofPDF.com






ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha, founded in 1980, is the official Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy appreciation society. (Owning a towel is not a condition of membership, though it is 'about the most massively useful thing an interstellar hitchhiker can have'.) For those interested in the Hitchhiker's trilogy and other works of Douglas Adams, we publish a quarterly magazine, Mostly Harmless, with news, reviews, artwork, fiction and competitions.


ZZ9 also offers a range of Hitchhiker's related merchandise, available to members by post, including T-shirts and our famous two-headed, three- armed Beeblebears. ZZ9 organizes meetings around the UK (and occasionally in other countries), and has members all over the world. On subscribing, members will receive one year's membership, which includes four issues of the magazine.


Visit www.zz9.org - you can join online or download a membership form. www.facebook.com/groups/ZZ9PluralZAlpha/
OceanofPDF.com






March 1978 saw the first ever transmission of Douglas Adams's The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy on BBC Radio 4; the beginning of a cult phenomenon.


March 2020 marked the 42nd anniversary of that first transmission - 42 being the answer, of course, to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe and Everything. To mark the occasion, Pan Macmillan are bringing back into print The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: The Original Radio Scripts with an introduction from Simon Jones.


The collection also includes the previously 'lost' Hitchhiker script from the 25th anniversary edition, 'Sheila's Ear' and the original introductions by producer Geoffrey Perkins and Douglas Adams.


This collection, which is a faithful reproduction of the text as it was first published in 1985, features all twelve original radio scripts - Hitchhiker as it was written and exactly as it was broadcast for the very first time. They include amendments and additions made during recordings and original notes on the writing and producing of the series by Douglas Adams and Geoffrey Perkins. For those who have always loved Douglas Adams, as


well as for his new generation of fans, these scripts are essential reading and a must-have piece of Adams memorabilia.


OceanofPDF.com


























OceanofPDF.com






Footnotes






* President: full title President of the Imperial Galactic Government.
  The term Imperial is kept though it is now an anachronism. The hereditary Emperor is nearly dead and has been for many centuries. In the last moments of his dying coma he was locked in a stasis field which keeps him in a state of perpetual unchangingness. All his heirs are now long dead, and this means that without any drastic political upheaval, power has simply and effectively moved a rung or two down the ladder, and is now seen to be vested in a body which used to act simply as advisers to the Emperor - an elected governmental assembly headed by a President elected by that assembly. In fact it vests in no such place.
  The President in particular is very much a figurehead - he wields no real power whatsoever. He is apparently chosen by the government, but the qualities he is required to display are not those of leadership but those of finely judged outrage. For this reason the President is always a controversial choice, always an infuriating but fascinating character. His job is not to wield power but to draw attention away from it. On those criteria Zaphod Beeblebrox is one of the most successful Presidents the Galaxy has ever had - he has already spent two of his ten presidential years in prison for fraud. Very very few people realize that the President and the government have virtually no power at all, and of these few people only six know whence ultimate political power is wielded. Most of the others secretly believe that the ultimate decision-making process is handled by a computer. They couldn't be more wrong.
* Ford Prefect's original name is only pronounceable in an obscure Betelgeusian dialect, now virtually extinct since the Great Collapsing Hrung Disaster of Gal./Sid./Year 03758 which wiped out all the old Praxibetel communities on Betelgeuse Seven. Ford's father was the only man on the entire planet to survive the Great Collapsing Hrung Disaster, by an extraordinary coincidence that he was never able satisfactorily to explain. The whole episode is shrouded in deep mystery: in fact no one ever knew what a Hrung was nor why it had chosen to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven particularly.
Ford's father, magnanimously waving aside the clouds of suspicion that had inevitably settled around him, came to live on Betelgeuse Five, where he both fathered and uncled Ford; in memory of his now dead race he christened him in the ancient Praxibetel tongue.
  Because Ford never learned to say his original name, his father eventually died of shame, which is still a terminal disease in some parts of the Galaxy. The other kids at school nicknamed him Ix, which in the language of Betelgeuse Five translates as 'boy who is not able satisfactorily to explain what a Hrung is, nor why it should choose to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven'.
* An ornamental tuft of plumes.
* A jumbled mass.
* A cleric ranking below a bishop.
* See Life, the Universe and Everything, chapter 18.
OceanofPDF.com






About the Author


DOUGLAS ADAMS created all the various and contradictory manifestations of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: radio,
novels, TV, computer game, stage adaptations, comic book and bath towel. He lectured and broadcast around the world and was a patron of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund and Save the Rhino International.
Douglas Adams was born in Cambridge, UK, and lived with his wife and daughter in Islington, London, before moving to Santa Barbara, California, where he died suddenly in 2001.
OceanofPDF.com










BOOKS BY DOUGLAS ADAMS


The Hitchhiker trilogy
  The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy The Restaurant at the End of the Universe
Life, the Universe and Everything So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish Mostly Harmless


The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: The Original Radio Scripts
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Radio Scripts: the Tertiary, Quandary and
Quintessential Phases


The Dirk Gently series
Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul


Collected Works
The Salmon of Doubt


With John Lloyd
    The Meaning of Liff The Deeper Meaning of Liff
With Mark Carwardine
Last Chance to See . . .


By Terry Jones, based on a story/computer game by Douglas Adams
Douglas Adams's Starship Titanic
OceanofPDF.com








First published 1995 by William Heinemann


This electronic edition published 2020 by Pan Books an imprint of Pan Macmillan
The Smithson, 6 Briset Street, London EC1M 5NR Associated companies throughout the world www.panmacmillan.com


ISBN 978-1-5098-8651-7


Copyright (c) Serious Productions Ltd 1979, 1980, 1982, 1984, 1986, 1992 Foreword copyright (c) Russell T Davies 2009
 Foreword copyright (c) Terry Jones 2009 Foreword copyright (c) Simon Brett 2009 Foreword copyright (c) Neil Gaiman 2009 Foreword copyright (c) Dirk Maggs 2009


Cover Images (c) Shutterstock, Cover Design by Stuart Wilson


The novels and short story comprising The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: A Trilogy in Five Parts were originally published separately: The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (1979), The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (1980), Life, the Universe and Everything (1982), and So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish (1984) by Pan Books; and Mostly Harmless (1992) by William Heinemann Ltd. First published as The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy: A Trilogy in Five Parts by William Heinemann Ltd in 1995. Young Zaphod Plays It Safe (1986) was originally published in The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book by Fontana Press.


The extract from the US edition of Life, the Universe and Everything quoted here was originally published 1982 by Harmony Books.


The right of Douglas Adams to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.


Pan Macmillan does not have any control over, or any responsibility for, any author or third-party websites referred to in or on this book.


You may not copy, store, distribute, transmit, reproduce or otherwise make available this publication (or any part of it) in any form, or by any means (electronic, digital, optical, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher. Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.


A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.


Visit www.panmacmillan.com to read more about all our books and to buy them. You will also find features, author interviews and news of any author events, and you can sign up for e-newsletters so that you're always first to hear about our new releases.


OceanofPDF.com