CHAPTER 5










STAGE 448JAPAN A.D. 248










Eeeyaaah!


A dozen warriors yelled in unison and charged, a log with a heavy stone lashed to the end carried between them. The ram struck the huge Reaper in the midsection, toppling it end over end. The men drew their swords and pounced, caving in its insectoid eyes and severing the tendons in its legs. Its blue-white metallic body was the first of its type the soldiers had seen. The thing thrashed wildly as it died.Once it was clear that the beast would never again be a threat, the men turned to seek their next target. Child soldiers, too young to wield the rams, approached cautiously and severed every tendon they could find, one by one.


“A Jumper!”


A single-legged ET the size of a little girl bounded wildly out of the woods, brandishing a thin blade like it was a strip of swirling silk. The blade dismembered men amid fountains of blood. The air filled with howls and screams. A group of soldiers with wooden shields surrounded the ET and hemmed it in. The Jumper kept moving, waiting for its chance, then tried to escape the circle with one tremendous leap, but a toughened warrior seized its leg. The men surrounded the fallen Jumper and killed it with a frenzied hacking of swords.


A call for help floated up to the ridge from below. A group of warriors were in full flight up the slope. Gaps in the trees behind them revealed another full-grown Reaper. Takahaya called out to them, in a voice loud enough to shake the leaves, “Make for the stockade! We’re dropping the sledge!”


The soldiers reached the ridge, stumbling over each other into the stockade. Waiting troops ran past them and cut the rope holding back a huge sledge made of logs, planed flat and lashed together. The sledge skidded down the mountain, sweeping the Reaper with it.


From all directions, bamboo war trumpets had been sounding from watchtowers along the ridges, warning of attacks. Now, one by one, the trumpets fell silent, a sign of successful clashes with the enemy. As Miyo listened from her quarters inside the stockade, Takahaya entered, drenched with sweat. “The enemy is nearly routed in the third valley,” he said.


Miyo had stopped using Kan to communicate with her senior commanders. It wasted precious time; moreover, it was no longer necessary to maintain Miyo’s aura of dignity.


“Good work. Send reinforcements to North Point and the Tama Cliffs. Help is needed there,” said Miyo.


“I sent forty to the cliffs this morning.”


“They’ve been repulsed. Send a hundred more.”


“As you command,” said Takahaya. Since the beginning of the fighting, Miyo’s orders had been prescient. Takahaya left with an air of complete confidence. But her directives were not the result of divination but were instead due to Cutty’s comprehensive grasp of the evolving battle lines, and to the Messenger, who fought ceaselessly on the front lines.


When the mononoké made their first incursion onto the plain of Iga, the Messenger went out alone and returned with a small specimen he had captured alive. He bound it to a tree with heavy rope and summoned Miyo’s captains. At first, they feared to approach this creature they had only heard about in legend. The Messenger walked up to it boldly, striking and touching it with his bare hands. Even the mononoké were not invulnerable, and their bodies were subject to decay. With the right technique they could be restrained, immobilized, and killed.


After careful explanation and encouragement, the Messenger gave the soldiers swords and cut the ET’s ropes. Then he faced the frenzied beast armed with nothing but a fighting staff. The men mustered their courage, attacked, and succeeded in killing the monster. In truth, this ET was in a greatly weakened state, but the men were heartened by their success and swore to follow the Messenger in battle.


The Messenger showed them how to use log rams to topple the enemy and shields for defense. He introduced the wheel and the crossbow. Till then, the Yamatai warriors had relied mainly on bronze swords, polearms, and wooden bows. When the soldiers saw firsthand how a crossbow bolt could penetrate a thick tree trunk at a hundred paces, even their armorers were dumbfounded. Nor was engineering neglected; roads were graded, bridges built; forts sprang up and barriers snaked across the mountains and valleys of western Iga.


The Messenger sent runners to Yamatai, summoning visiting traders and princes from the chiefdoms to observe the conflict, to see how the strange and barbarous mononoké were laying waste to Iga, and how Yamatai’s forces were pressing them back. Back in their homelands, the visitors were likely to exaggerate what they saw to their rulers and headmen. This would create far more impact than if Miyo had sent envoys to describe the events taking place. The war with the mononoké had been raging for two months. They had had to improvise, but Yamatai’s army held firm as it waited for more than just token reinforcements.


Miyo’s quarters stood on a hill overlooking the plain. All around her was the din of an army camp: shouts of men raising log walls, the shrill voices of women distributing food, the bellowing of captains overseeing the training of green recruits, angry demands for quiet from men trying to steal a few moments’ sleep. From the mountain at their back came the ceaseless ringing of the woodsmen’s axes.


Miyo was visited by an endless stream of messengers, soldiers, and captains. She had only the briefest periods of rest. As shaman, she was used to compelling obedience behind a screen of silence; never before had she been obliged to deliver immediate responses to question after question. Even with the magatama providing most of the answers, she was tired of talking and mentally worn out.


When the stream of visitors stopped for a moment, Miyo sent her maidservants outside, sat back, and muttered, “I am weary. I’m beginning to feel light-headed.”


“If you don’t feel well, I can examine you,” said Cutty through the magatama.


“You play at healing too?” Miyo shot back, then shook her head. “The problem is my spirit, moreso than my body. Two months ago I’d never have imagined this would be happening. It’s like some awful dream.”


“Wake up,” said Cutty. “This is not a dream. It really is happening, to you and your country. You can’t just quit. Still, I must say you’re holding up well. Until now there have been so many leaders who were ultimately of little use to us.”


“‘Of little use’? That’s rather harsh,” said Miyo.


“Please don’t be offended. O rates you very highly.”


At that Miyo felt so awkward she could not reply, and when she realized her own awkwardness, she winced. In truth, she’d hoped that cooperating with the Messenger would help her escape from all this. But now she was saddled with a responsibility that sapped her spirit. What a miscalculation. If only this upheaval could somehow end soon…


Her mind was wandering aimlessly when cheers of welcome came from the stockade gate. Soon the Messenger’s lanky form appeared in the doorway. He sat down, exhausted.


“Forty men lost,” he said. “I told them not to go forward so quickly, but I couldn’t stop those young soldiers from pursuing the enemy. I should’ve brought more seasoned men.”


“You held the cliffs alone? The reinforcements were too late?” said Miyo.


“They helped all the same. Thanks to them, I got some rest before I came back here. I’m thirsty.” One of the maid-servants brought a pot of water. He refused the ladle, stood and raised the pot to his lips, gulping water like a stallion. He said to Miyo, “I’m going to the watchtower.”


“You’re leaving already?”


“Come with me. You need to see the overall situation.” They climbed the watchtower on the ridge. The Messenger pointed toward the center of the Iga Plain. “See there? Along the river?”


“You mean where the sunlight flashes?”


“That’s the spot,” said the Messenger.


“They look like the scales of a fish,” she said. The banks of the river bisecting the plain were lined with rank upon rank of greenish panels. Probably the height of a man, each appeared tiny in the distance. They resembled a patch of scabies spread across many acres of tranquil, early summer farmland. Miyo felt her skin crawl.


“Those are solar panels fabricated by the enemy,” O said.


“I don’t understand.”


“Think of them as the mononoké’s paddy field. They draw nourishment from them. I don’t know what they’re doing for energy in Kunu, but it looks like this is the only way they can fill their bellies here. If we can destroy those panels, we can starve them out, in Iga at least.”


“Destroy them, then.”


“I can’t do it alone. That looks like more than two thousand panels, and they’re adding more as fast as they can make them. I’d need five hundred soldiers, but we have to protect the borders. We can’t spare that many right now. We’ll destroy them after we build up our strength here. That’s the most urgent objective.”


“Once you destroy them, will you reinforce the border crossing further on?”


“No. We can’t stop there. We have to push beyond the borders and keep pressing them. We can’t stop till we’ve destroyed the nest. This isn’t like fighting a human chiefdom, where you can pause once you’ve done a certain amount of damage to the enemy. As long as the mononoké live, they can and will replicate without limit. And they’ll keep trying to kill us.”


“It’s enough to drive one mad…” Miyo sighed, but the Messenger’s stern expression was unchanged. “Come,” he said, and climbed from the watchtower.


His destination was the edge of camp. As they passed, soldiers and peasants dropped to the ground and prostrated themselves before their queen. On the outskirts of the camp they came to a small, jumbled mountain of greenish-white metal fragments, the broken and melted bodies of dead mononoké. Miyo grimaced in disgust. The Messenger hefted a fragment in his hand.


“Right now they’re using zinc. That’s what this metal is called.” The Messenger called to a captain nearby. He handed the soldier the fragment and told him to see if he could shatter it. When the captain placed it on a boulder and struck it with a stone, it broke apart easily.


“As you see, zinc is not a good material for their purposes. Fire weakens it. They’re probably using this because they can’t get their hands on anything else.”


“There are large deposits of this metal in the mountains to the east,” said Miyo.


“Then we know where the enemy’s stronghold is,” said the Messenger. “We know where Earth’s mineral resources are located as a matter of historical fact. But the enemy has to do their own prospecting. In that sense, we have an advantage.”


“So the enemy, he is weaker than he appears?” asked Miyo.


The Messenger shook his head. “Maybe for the moment. If they can find a source of ore, they won’t need to carry out major mining. The ones who need the ore the most will ingest it. The main thing is whether they can reach an ore source. We hold western Japan, with the mines at Izumo, and that gives us the upper hand. But there are huge ore deposits in eastern Japan too, in Emishi territory.”


“By the time they reach Kamaishi, the enemy’s capabilities will probably be far stronger,” interjected Cutty. But Miyo heard this strange new prophecy as if from somewhere far away. She had never heard of the place Cutty named. How the mononoké’s power might change because of some different material was beyond her understanding. She felt more and more frustrated. Nothing seemed real.


“Even before they reach Kamaishi, there are small deposits of iron in Chichibu and Osaka. And the other ore fields are not completely devoid of iron. In any case, the longer we wait, the more our advantage slips away. It’s no use wishing we were stronger,” said the Messenger.


“I see,” said Miyo.


As they retraced their steps to her quarters, Miyo struggled to understand the Messenger’s words. The mononoké must be destroyed. As long as they drew breath, they would never stop attacking. That they could be destroyed meant they were neither demons nor devils. They were different from the gods of water and wind that the people of Wa had fought for ages without number. They were not like the days, the months, the seasons, which changed and returned in their endless cycles; not like the animals or the insects that might die, yet be reborn from an egg left behind. They were things, things with will, Things That Came. Suddenly, Miyo’s hazy images of her old adversaries seemed robbed of substance. She stopped in her tracks. “Messenger O. What are the mononoké?”


He turned and looked at her like a father gazing at a daughter. “That’s a very good question. But if you know too much, you might lose hope.”


“Have you lost yours?” asked Miyo.


He looked away and muttered, “I don’t know.”


“Messenger O…” Miyo suddenly felt a surge of anger toward this man who would tell her almost nothing, though she was sure he must know everything. After all, they both shared a common fate. Wasn’t there much more he should be telling her? But her thoughts were interrupted by a shrill voice. “Lady Miyo! Where are you?”


“Kan! I’m here!” Miyo waved. The boy ran up, out of breath. He gave a short, almost disrespectful nod to the Messenger and prostrated himself before Miyo.


“An urgent message from the palace. A pack of mononoké has appeared in Isonokami, attacking people and livestock!” Isonokami was only twenty-odd ri from the palace. Too close indeed.


“What!” Miyo turned to the Messenger and saw him frown for an instant. “Messenger O? Cutty? What of your vigilance now?” she cried.


“What indeed?” said the Messenger. He hardly seemed surprised. Would he say something like this was anticipated? No matter. Miyo turned to Kan.


“Summon Takahaya immediately. Does he already know?”


“Not yet,” said Kan. “The men are searching for him now.”


“Wait, there’s no time. Tell him what is happening. I return to the palace. He will accompany me.”


“Really? You’re going to defeat the mononoké yourself?” said the Messenger.


“You can’t come with me, can you?” she snapped. How she might take command of the fighting was far from her mind. She knew only that she had to return at all costs; her desperation spoke for her. But the Messenger just nodded, as if it were only fitting. Kan went to look for Takahaya. Miyo called her maidservants together in a state of distraction. Yamatai, the land of her birth and childhood, burning like Iga? She would never allow that to happen.










Never more did Miyo rue her inability to ride a horse. She drove her bearers relentlessly, pressing on by torchlight through the night, moving toward the plain of Makimuku with a hundred soldiers handpicked by Takahaya. Even so, the trip took a day and a half.


When they had crossed the last pass and descended into bright dawn over the Shiki plain, Miyo saw the land she had longed for. Rising above the paddy fields that stretched before them was Mount Miminashi, its heavily wooded slopes like an upended cup; on the left hand, Mount Amanokagu and the Yoshino Range. Miyo realized that she had never left this country before. Seeing it upon her return was like seeing a new land.But there was no time for emotions. Wisps of smoke were rising into the northern sky. The enemy? No, they might be morning cooking fires. Other small plumes of smoke were visible here and there. Miyo could not judge what was happening.


“Permission to send scouts ahead.” Takahaya’s voice came from outside the palanquin. Granted, Miyo was about to say, but then the magatama whispered.


“You have arrived? The enemy is twenty-five ri to the west—about forty, all RET.”


“Can you see them?” asked Miyo.


“The Wasps caught up with them,” said Cutty. Miyo had never seen one of these kinsmen of Cutty, but this was not the time to make enquiries. Miyo spoke in a commanding tone through the wicker screen.


“No need for scouts. The enemy is near Miminashi.”


“My lady,” acknowledged Takahaya.


“Take me to the palace. I must speak with Lord Ikima.” Takahaya began giving the orders. As she listened, Miyo thought, These men can be trusted. They have seen the Messenger in battle and fought the enemy themselves. Yet a hundred of the bravest are no match for forty mononoké. We need more soldiers. But the men from the palace have never seen this foe. Will they break and run?


With their remaining strength, the slaves carried Miyo’s litter over the palace moat at a half-run. By good fortune, the enemy had not yet come this far. But the moment the palanquin passed the gate, a single glance revealed chaos. Everyone was running around as if they’d already been routed, shouldering bundles of clothes and jars of rice.


Miyo could not restrain herself. She lifted the screen, leaned out of the palanquin and roared, “What is the meaning of this?”


The people in the forecourt froze. In Yamatai, there was only one woman who gave commands. Realizing that their queen had returned, everyone threw themselves to the ground, dropping their pots and bundles with a wave of clattering. One scrawny man emerged from the Great Hall. He seemed to want to prostrate himself, but confusion held him back. He lowered his head, but only partway. He looked up from under and spied Kan.


“Mimaso has no words to express his joy at the queen’s return, but if she would conduct a divination to show us how best to flee this urgent danger—”


“You speak of oracles at a time like this? Look at me!” shouted Miyo.


Mimaso sprang to his feet. He kept blinking like a rabbit. He did not know that Miyo had altered protocol completely. His confusion was not surprising, but Miyo had no time for explanations. She began firing questions at him.


“What is all this? Are you running away?”


“I, oh, please, forgive me for speaking directly…” Mimaso blinked again.


“Are you turning tail before you’ve even closed with the enemy? What are your arrangements for battle?”


“Lord Ikima is in charge. He is gathering soldiers.”


“Where is he?”


“He left this morning at the head of his troops,” answered Mimaso.


“Where did he go? How many men? What weapons did they take?”


“My Lady, I have been utterly preoccupied since daybreak preparing to leave the palace—”


“Leave it? You should be making ready to defend it, you, you…” Miyo groped for some earthy term of abuse, but she had never used such language and was speechless. In a calmer tone, she gave Mimaso his orders. “Gather every soldier in the palace. Let the women prepare provisions. Children will collect firewood. Stop making ready to flee. The mononoké are to be killed!”


“By you, my lady?”


Clearly Mimaso was going to be of little help. Miyo called to one of the captains and had him assemble his men, but when she saw them gathered together her face darkened. They had managed to scrape together swords and armor sufficient to equip themselves, but most of them were either aged or children—altogether unimpressive. Still, there was nothing to be done. The best soldiers had gone to Iga, and Takahikoné had taken the rest.


It is well that I brought Takahaya, thought Miyo. She was already mentally in command. She called for him and pointed to the men. “Takahaya! Will you slay forty of the enemy with these?”


“It will be a close thing, my lady.” The rough-edged fighter from Kumaso ran his gaze over the three hundred men assembled and rubbed his jaw.


“We have some war hammers, but for the rest, only swords and pikes. Not the way I’d like to go into battle.”


“We march in support of Lord Ikima.”


“Yes, my lady. I’ll do my best.”


Takahaya had come to Yamatai from Kumaso partly as hostage, to secure the alliance between the two chiefdoms. Takahikoné had showered him with grain and slaves, treating him with cordiality and respect. Perhaps because of this, Takahaya suddenly recovered his enthusiasm. Though he’d hardly slept the night before, he began energetically directing the men to prepare for departure.


Amid the commotion, a war trumpet sounded from the western watchtower. “Fire on the mountain!” Miyo stretched her neck to peer in that direction. Thick, ashen smoke was rising into the sky. This was no cooking fire. Without hesitation, she asked the magatama, “Is the enemy on the mountain?”


“It looks like all the people have fled there,” answered Cutty. This did not quite match her question, but Miyo instantly understood the significance of Cutty’s reply.


“They’re going to burn the whole mountain!” Cutty was silent. Miyo turned to the soldiers and shouted, “Takahaya! We march as soon as you are ready!” He waved in response.


The column set out. Breakfast was rice cakes with chestnuts and dried meat, taken as they left and hurriedly eaten on the march. Mount Miminashi was only six ri from the palace, almost within hailing distance. As soon as they were across the moat, the mountain was visible just beyond the river that ran west. Takahaya, riding alongside the palanquin, put a hand over his eyes.


“A large pack of Reapers surrounds the mountain. If they come at us all at once, we’ll be finished.”


“Can we not trap them?” asked Miyo. Takahaya was about to reply, then seemed to think of something. He wheeled his horse and galloped off to the end of the column toward the baggage train. After a few minutes, he returned. “There is one thing we could try, and I don’t even know if it will work. We could lure the enemy, then surprise them with the Hayato.”


“A baited trap,” said Miyo.


“You should remain here, my lady.”


She thought for a moment. “The Hayato for the trap. As for the bait, anyone can go out and make some noise.”


“Just so, my lady.”


“I will serve as bait. The palanquin is conspicuous,” said Miyo.


Takahaya started in surprise, but did not object. “We will pray for your success, then.”


After conferring on details, Miyo had her litter brought to the head of the column. With a retinue of only ten, she moved along the embankment road that ran between the river and the paddy fields. The heat in the palanquin was suffocating, but Miyo raised the screens on all sides. Walking alongside, Kan glanced up from time to time with a look of disapproval.


Mount Miminashi drew closer, seeming out of place atop the flat plane of the paddy fields. Then the strange shapes of the mononoké came into view, skulking about the base of the mountain. Thin shrieks could be heard from the flickering fires on the slopes. Miyo gasped.


How many people had been driven up the mountain? Planting was done, but the fields of green rice shoots were deserted. In this season, dozens of farmers would normally be weeding and fertilizing. Naked children should be running and playing on the levees between the fields.


Miyo looked ahead and noticed red lumps scattered across the fields. Suddenly she realized they were corpses. “Butchers,” she said, her teeth grinding in rage. Then Kan spoke quietly. “Lady Miyo. They see us.”


The nearest mononoké was standing motionless, looking intently toward them, less than two hundred paces distant. Miyo responded sharply.


“Not yet! We must draw as many as possible. Stand fast!” Her bearers closed their eyes in fright and went forward on trembling legs. As she urged them on, Miyo knelt on the floor of the palanquin, braced her back against the roof and pushed. The roof gave way. She tossed the uprights of the litter aside.


As she stood in the sunlight, she looked up at the rock ledge that ran along the top of the mountain. Tiny shapes were visible on its edge. Miyo waved and tried to make them out. She saw the glint of a sword and someone waving wildly, a soldier. He looked somehow familiar.


It was Takahikoné.


He must have gone out to save the peasants and been driven up the peak. A large crowd surrounded him. The flames and smoke were close and getting closer. Miyo could hear screaming and crying.


“Lady Miyo!” shouted Kan. One hundred paces to the base of the mountain. Every one of the beasts was now staring their way. They were probably unable to withstand the fire; nor could they climb the mountain. There looked to be twenty or more.


Miyo took up a war trumpet, inhaled as much air as she could, and blew. A sound like the howl of a huge beast resounded across the fields.


“They come!” shouted Kan. The mononoké leaned on their long arms and rushed forward on all fours, like apes. Kan drew his sword.


There was a scream of fear. The palanquin lurched violently. One of the bearers took off at a dead run. That did it; the other bearers dropped the litter. Miyo was pitched into a water-filled paddy. She felt a flash of rage. “Weaklings!” she yelled.


By the time Kan and the soldiers had helped her up, the mononoké were almost on top of them. They ran. The nearest mononoké did not use the levees but came splashing straight at them across the field. Its scythe flashed and the head of a soldier flew past Miyo. She kicked it out of the way and kept running. “Go!” she shouted, and looked behind her. For a moment she doubted her own eyes.


“Save yourself, my lady!” The remaining soldiers formed a line behind her and held their ground. Miyo stopped reflexively. Kan pushed her forward. “Hurry!”


She ran again. Miyo heard one of her men sounding a deep-throated battle cry into the face of death. She wondered who he was; she realized she didn’t know his name. To Miyo, her slaves, her soldiers, they had generally been nothing more than chattel to her. What a fool she was. If some fled for their lives, others shielded her with their very bodies. All were people, all bound by the name Himiko. But she was only Miyo, nothing more.


The sounds of slaughter behind her lasted only a few moments. Miyo and Kan had run fifty paces on. Again, the heavy drumming of many legs splashed toward them across the field.


“Miyo!”


“No!” she shouted. Kan turned to face the monsters. Miyo yanked his arm with all her strength. Too many had died for her already. She ran, dragging the boy with her. She struggled to breathe. Her heart pounded, her vision darkened, blurred.


It was then that she saw a soldier drawing a bow. “Quick, my lady!” She leapt into the last paddy field. There was a gust of air behind her. She couldn’t help turning to look, and one was there. Face to face with a mononoké. Takahaya’s longbow sang and a steel-tipped arrow pierced the monster’s skull. The mononoké toppled backward into the mud. As soon as they climbed atop the embankment, Takahaya gave the order.


“Burn them!”


Still on hands and knees, Miyo heard the sharp rap of a fire striker, then a sweeping roar. She turned to look behind her and sat down on the embankment.


The field was a sea of flame, burning oil floating on the surface. The mononoké caught in the fire thrashed wildly but made no attempt to escape to the next field. Miyo remembered something the Messenger had told her: the mononoké were able to see heat itself. But because they were so sensitive to it, heat blinded them as if one had thrown a red and swirling blanket over their insectile eyes. Mononoké could not find their way when surrounded by the heat of fire.


Still, about half the enemy had stopped short of the flaming field and were trying to make their way around it. As soon as Takahaya saw them spread out, he gave his next order.


“Attack!”


The Hayato hiding on the riverbank burst over the embankment, screaming their war cry. The enemy was pincered between soldiers and fire. They whirled and used their weapons on the weaker obstacle, the men. Five or six soldiers were cut down, but the rest did not flinch. They gathered around the mononoké, hacking at them and driving them into the fire. The inexperienced soldiers of Yamatai looked on, then joined the slaughter, timid at first but soon fighting wildly.


They were victorious. As the flames ebbed, the piled bodies of the mononoké smoldered in the field and along the levees. Takahaya inspected the battle site and returned to report.


“Twenty-two enemy killed.”


“Well done,” said Miyo.


“Now we must hurry and deal with the rest.” Only the mononoké on this side of the mountain had attacked them; the others remained. As Miyo realized this she stood up quickly, but then someone was shouting, “Look there!”


Battle flags hove into sight at the foot of the mountain. They were long and narrow, not like the flags of Yamatai. They rounded the mountain and moved toward them. Trailing behind them was a force of hundreds. No, more than a thousand. Miyo and the others stared in dumb amazement.


A herald rode forward and stopped before Miyo. “You are from Yamatai? You killed these creatures?” Miyo sensed the need for protocol and looked toward Kan. The boy stepped forward. “Before you stands Himiko, Queen of Yamatai. Who are you?”


“The queen!” The herald dismounted quickly and knelt. “I serve Inumori, Second Lord of Kunu. In accordance with the covenant of the Laws and by order of Shimako, First Lord of Kunu, I bring a force of twelve hundred to put down the mononoké.”


“From Kunu,” murmured Miyo. Bringing princes from the other chiefdoms to witness the fighting had apparently had its effect.


“We killed twenty on the other side of the mountain and came to the aid of Lord Ikima of Yamatai,” said the herald.


“He is safe, then,” said Takahaya with a grin. The herald nodded.


In a few minutes Takahikoné arrived with an escort from Kunu. He dropped to his knees before Miyo. His armor was soot-blackened and split at the shoulder. Clearly he had seen some hard fighting. “My lady, I am filled with emotion to see you here,” he said in a hoarse voice.


“Good soldier, you stood fast in defense of people and country. You must be weary.”


Takahikoné looked up, startled at being addressed directly by Miyo, but quickly looked down again. Miyo thought she detected a faint look of frustration in his face.


Cries of joy rose from the nearby village. Kan peered in that direction and whispered to Miyo. “The villagers are overjoyed. See how they dance.” Miyo looked toward the village. Jubilant at their survival, women and children were hugging each other, dancing and making merry.










Miyo was back in the Great Hall of the palace for the first time in two months. She could hear the distant voices of soldiers celebrating in their night encampments. Near sundown, three thousand troops from Toma had also arrived. They brought word that at this very moment, soldiers and provisions were likely on the way from many other chiefdoms.


With noises of celebration echoing faintly in the background, Miyo sat opposite Takahikoné. Lord Ikima’s face was dark, and not only because the illumination from lamps placed at either end of the room was so faint. There were black circles under his downcast eyes. His bristly beard moved as he spoke in a low voice. “Queen Himiko—”“Himiko is enough. When you kidnapped me from my village, I bawled like a child. How long ago was that?”


Takahikoné ignored her invitation to revisit the past. He inched closer on his knees. “Himiko. Then permit me to ask this. Do you really intend to lead the combined armies yourself?”


“Why not? The soldiers can scarcely understand each other’s dialects. How can I expect them to follow orders given by the Messenger of the Laws, a man they’ve never seen?”


“Pray allow me to render this service to you.” With stiff formality, Takahikoné bowed deeply. “I would wish that you remain here, to look after the people and perform the rituals. Affairs of war are best left to men. It would be a terrible tragedy if any harm were to come to your person.”


“Speak not what is not in your heart, Takahikoné,” she answered. “I think the sight of all these troops makes you fear for your position. If I lead the armies, I shall not only win military distinction. If I’m so inclined, perhaps I’ll even point my staff at the leadership of Yamatai.” She paused and laughed lightly. Then in a voice full of scorn, she continued, “Is that what you think I want? I can barely fulfill my responsibilities as shaman queen. I believe you know well enough what is in my heart.”


“That is true.” For just a moment, an expression—an honest expression—of wry humor crossed his face. “You hated the very name Himiko, didn’t you?”


These things only you and I understand, thought Miyo. She knew only too well what to expect from this man’s character. The first time she laid eyes on him, he gave her a glimpse of what was to come. She was only ten, perhaps not even that. She was catching eels with her friends when a man rode toward them along the stream, horse hooves splashing through the water. He was beardless when she’d first seen him. When he learned from the children which of them was Miyo, he glared at her sternly. She would never forget his first words.


“Are you unsullied, girl?”


Miyo was speechless with astonishment. Takahikoné turned to the other children and said harshly, “Have any of you copulated with this girl?”


Some of Miyo’s friends were wed at the age of eleven or twelve, but nowhere in Yamatai was there such a debauched custom as indiscriminate sex. Even for someone of his station, Takahikone’s behavior was outrageous. The children looked away and pretended not to hear him.


Unfortunately, Takahikoné took their silence as the answer to his question. He suddenly leaned down and hoisted Miyo with one arm. Turning to the children, he shouted in ringing tones, “The oracle proclaims it: this girl will be shaman queen. Go home and tell your parents. Miyo will rule Yamatai!” And so it came to be. Miyo cried uncontrollably atop the violently swaying saddle. She was taken to the palace and handled roughly, like a piece of property. Her parents never saw her again. Not long after, word reached her of their deaths.


Every day was a form of imprisonment. Old Mimaso, her predecessor, taught her the rituals. Every day she performed them, just as instructed. For his success in finding Miyo, Takahikoné was promoted to the rank of Ikima, and arranged affairs as he pleased in her name. Miyo had no shortage of whatever she needed, but her servile handmaidens were under Takahikoné’s thumb, and they kept a close watch on her. Often she did not see the sun for days.


If Takahikoné miscalculated, it was because Miyo turned out to have real gifts. As she grew, she acquired an excess of strength and started making all sorts of trouble. Her handmaidens were strict, but only concerning the things Takahikoné had forbidden; they were afraid to use their own discretion for fear of his wrath. Once Miyo realized this, she would refuse her meals, punch holes in the thatch roof, hurl the ritual implements, indeed do anything she could think of that was not explicitly forbidden. Of course, each time she got up to something, it would immediately be forbidden and she would no longer be able to do it; then she would think up some new form of rebellion. By doing so she developed both cunning and stamina.


But by the time she was fifteen she had given up these pranks. She had learned much, and instead of using force to get her way, she began to maneuver the treacherous people who surrounded her into granting what she wanted. Leaving behind a substitute in order to steal outside the palace, arranging for Kan to be her attendant; these were just examples of what she could do with the skills she acquired during this time. Based on her long dealings with the ministers of state, she also realized that as long as she performed her ritual duties, they cared little what else she did. She simply had to avoid doing anything that could damage her authority as a distant object of reverence.


But the greatest incentive for Miyo to conduct herself as shaman queen was Takahikoné himself. His intentions were all too evident. When her monthly cycle began, her breasts and hips began to fill out and she grew taller, her hair long; then Takahikoné began coming to the palace more often. As she felt his sticky gaze, Miyo could not help but remember the question he had put to her on that day she first saw him. Takahikoné wanted Miyo on a pedestal as queen, but he also wanted her for himself.


In defense, Miyo retreated behind the barrier of her authority as ruler. The more formally she conducted herself, the more Takahikoné was forced to withdraw in embarrassment. Until now, this expedient pose had seen her through. Takahikoné knew that if he yielded to his lust he would lose his position. Miyo could feel how this tension, like a bottomless swamp, hung always in the air between them—even here, as they discussed the conflict and the future of the country.


“Himiko…” In the flickering lamplight, Takahikoné again edged his knees closer. Two more paces and he would be close enough to touch her. Miyo stiffened, suppressing the urge to slide backward away from him.


“Keep your distance. You are my younger brother, are you not?” she said firmly.


“That is just a pretense—”


“And you already have three wives. If you leave them behind and go into battle, I’m sure they will be heartbroken.” Adroitly, Miyo returned the conversation to its original topic. She looked sternly at Takahikoné, this imposing man near fifty, subserviently kneeling before her. But he was no fool. Quite the opposite; he was calculating above all else. And Miyo knew this well.


“Listen to me, Takahikoné,” she said. “You and Takahaya are close. He can guide the armies with a strong hand. I have seen him in battle. I know how loyal this man is. Leave the fighting to him. On the other hand, only you can manage the government. At a time like this the country needs a strong hand. I think you are that strong hand. What say you?”


Takahikoné stared at her fixedly. He blinked, again and again. Miyo almost felt as if she could see through the back of those pupils and into the whirlpool of his brain, weighing the alternatives. Finally he bowed deeply. “Of course. You are right, my lady. I spoke foolishly.”


After he withdrew, Miyo was seized by fatigue. Her maid-servants entered, carrying trays of food at eye level, which they then set before her. And when Kan entered the room, it was as if the air in the palace had been cleansed.


Attended only by Kan, Miyo reflected on the audience that had just ended. What a waste of time it had been. The only important thing now is to work out how to defeat the mononoké: who should do what, to increase our strength as much as possible. Yet instead, I must make allowances for this man’s ambition, win him over…


“Lady Miyo, are you tired? Your face—” said Kan.


“What of it? Your face is still flecked with today’s grime,” she said with a laugh. Kan began frantically wiping his cheeks. Miyo laughed. She took a piece of grilled deer with her fingers. Enough with Takahikoné. It would be best to put him out of her mind. Something more troubling was nagging her. Why had the other chiefdoms suddenly begun cooperating now?


The chiefdoms that form the axis of the Land of Wa are suddenly embroiled in a war against the monstrous mononoké. The Messenger of the Laws appears, to smite the enemy. Staking her claim on the Laws, Himiko calls for assistance from the armies of the alliance. And the chiefdoms agree, easily. Was this not truly odd? Even Miyo, with little desire for power, could imagine what the chiefs would be thinking. How many would see this misfortune as an opening to take control of Yamatai and become the new king of Wa? No doubt the fingers of both hands would scarcely suffice to count them.


Still, more motivation than that would be needed. Sending a force of thousands of men was a heavy burden for any country. Yet with the ambitions of tens of chiefdoms to account for, a bid for domination would face daunting odds. Was there anything else, other than a self-interested thirst for power, that would explain their willingness to help?


Suddenly Miyo was seized with a terrible suspicion. Her fingers trembled slightly as she touched the magatama.


“Cutty, can you hear me?” Miyo tried to sound nonchalant.


“Yes.” The eerie voice answered coolly.


“You certainly made things easy for us today. You’ll need more than forty mononoké to really rouse the soldiers.”


Cutty’s reply went far beyond anything Miyo suspected.


“You finally understand him, don’t you?”


“What do you mean?” said Miyo, in complete bafflement.


“You and your people depend on me for so much. But as you see, I am not your ally.”


Miyo shivered. Cutty spoke calmly, as if describing another person. “You are quite perceptive, Miyo. I lured the mononoké to Yamatai this time. Just as O showed the soldiers step by step how to fight the enemy in Iga, I sent weakened mononoké to raise the fighting spirit of the soldiers in Yamatai. Think of it as a kind of immunization, a boost for their immune systems. I am doing the same in chiefdoms throughout the Land of Wa. Now you’ve discovered the truth. O knows of this and he concurs. To rally the forces we need, we must not shrink from deception. This we have learned from bitter experience. We are using you, and by so doing we defend you, and defend humanity.”


“Is that what he really wants?” shouted Miyo. “Then I’ll never understand him!” Hearing her suddenly cry out, Kan looked up. “Lady Miyo?”


“Wait!” She turned to the bead again. “Did you hear me, Cutty?”


“You misunderstand,” answered Cutty. “O would never deceive you for sport. On the contrary, the necessity to do so wounds him deeply. But since we learned its necessity he’s deceived countless people, used them, sent them to their deaths. Because of this—no, in spite of this—the guilt he’s carried with him since he started on this journey grows stronger. It is the remorse he feels for not abandoning the larger mission of saving the species just to help those in immediate need.”


His guilt? As Cutty’s words sank in, Miyo was overcome with a painful dizziness. It would be as if she had abandoned Kan to the mononoké to help spring the trap. And this the Messenger had done, again and again?


Cutty’s voice betrayed the hint of a smile. “I am Cutty Sark, witch of artifice. I brandish the mare’s tail, I am the guide on the swiftest path to victory. I use whomever and whatever suits my purposes. The winds of time scatter all. The sands of time bury all. The winds and sands have battered no one more than Messenger O. If anywhere there were a woman who could sustain him, I would make quite sure that she did. But in a thousand centuries there has been no such woman.”


“Lady Miyo!” Kan was shaking her shoulder. Miyo woke from her reverie. The boy was holding a cup of water and peering at her with concern. “You look so pale. Perhaps you should rest.”


Kan was so kind. Single-mindedly devoted, always ready to sacrifice his life for her. Losing him would be more than Miyo could bear. She embraced him and held him fast.


“My lady?” Kan’s body stiffened. The cup slipped from his hand. After a few moments, Miyo pushed him away and stood up.


“Where are you going?” asked Kan, still dazed.


“I need solitude.”


Miyo climbed one of the watchtowers and asked the soldiers to leave her. The light from the encampments gave the palace a festive atmosphere. Beyond stretched the endless paddy fields, glistening in the moonlight.


For the first time, Miyo truly realized that she ruled this land and understood how much she loved it: the mountains, the fields, and Kan and Takahaya who lived there, and others like them, nameless soldiers and peasants. Not until they were threatened did she grasp their true value. Toward the person she had been, a girl dreaming of running away at the right opportunity, she felt nothing but contempt. With that realization, the weight of her responsibilities, the terror of wondering how in the world one could possibly accomplish what was needed, hit home.


She looked eastward. Beyond the Kasagi mountain range looming darkly before her was a man. A man who felt the same burden.


“Messenger O—how did you bear it?” She had much to say to him.