CHAPTER 7










STAGE 448JAPAN A.D. 248










By the time the Yamatai forces reached central Japan, eight thousand men had fallen.


Miyo herself led the armies in three major battles, Takahaya in eight. His captains led the troops in thirty or more smaller engagements, and every day brought short, sharp clashes with Jumpers and flying Red Snipes that harried the columns all along the march. The Eastern Sea Road, later to become the main artery between Edo and Kyoto, was still just a weed-choked path. All along its course, the armies shed casualties and a rain of discarded armor and weapons. Not a day passed without burial ceremonies for the dead.The fighting at Toyokawa was a bloody affair. Just as the Kunu messenger had warned, they found that the fan-shaped plateau extending from the foot of the mountains was so thick with wriggling Kappa and Centipede ET that the ground was hardly visible. The base of the tableland was ringed with waiting Reapers and Jumpers.


The Yamatai forces opened the battle with hundreds of huge darts fired from Scorpio catapults, a weapon from far-off Roma. Until the Messenger taught them the techniques of construction, they had known of this weapon only by name.


Equipped with steel armor and swords, the Yamatai armies charged the waiting Reapers. Eight hundred yards to the rear, in her palanquin, Miyo heard the low rumble as their lines collided. She saw dead soldiers hurtling through the air like dolls, streaming blood. Thunderous explosions sent columns of greasy smoke into the sky above the battlefield. Crossbow bolts glancing off the enemy glittered in the distance like spray in the sun.


The line was contested for hours, until the dead lay in heaps. The Messenger was always in the thick of the fighting, his great sword slashing in all directions until the ground around him was strewn with twisted metal. But it was not the Messenger who decided the battle’s outcome. It was the Emishi, whose lands had been stolen by the mononoké. They broke the enemy line after a suicide attack that claimed more than half their men. Miyo seized the opportunity and sent her small force of cavalry to strike the retreating foe. This marked the end of the Reapers. The small green Kappa and many-handed Centipedes were poor fighters and were cut down by the thousand.


When the armies reached the forest atop the plateau, they discovered round stone structures like forts on the rocky ground. The nests of the mononoké. They were extremely tough—even with war hammers the men could not break them down—but the entrances to the nests were open. The men poured in water and oil, tossed torches into the openings and sealed them. Soon the nests erupted in towering pillars of fire. The explosions were violent, incinerating the soldiers who stayed too close to the nests after delivering the oil and torches.


After the battle came the Wasps, the size of dogs, droning over the battleground on transparent wings. These kindred of the Messenger were keen lookouts in the sky, but they could not fight. They landed and examined the ground with their feelers, looking for small black fragments of metal to eat. They had a taste for the bodies of young mononoké. It was said they would not harm people, but no soldier dared approach them.


After the straggling Reapers and Jumpers had been dispatched, the men smashed the remains of the nests. They had completed their trial by fire acquiring the combat techniques they would use in countless future engagements.


In their camp near Lake Hamana, Miyo saw a map of Japan for the first time in her life. “This is the Land of Wa. The shaded area is ocean, the white is land,” said the Messenger.


They were in a pavilion guarded by soldiers. The Messenger’s brush sped over the silk as he drew the map. The shape that emerged was like nothing Miyo imagined, extending diagonally across the cloth from upper right to lower left. It resembled some sort of creature. Miyo looked up at the Messenger, perplexed.


“I don’t recognize this island. Where is Kunu? Or Yamatai?”


“Kunu is here, on this plain. Yamatai, in this basin here.”


“What, is Yamatai so small?” asked Miyo.


“The island is huge. To the east lies the largest plain in Wa and the biggest iron mines.” It was not just the shape of her country Miyo had never seen. The lands beyond Kunu were shrouded in mists of uncertainty. Nothing was known of their geography or the names of those places, or about the relationships between chiefdoms—which were friends and which were foe. She did not even know how far to the east the land extended. She could only listen like a child and try to remember the place names the Messenger taught her. The journey to Lake Hamana alone had seemed long enough to reach China. When she thought of the distance that lay before them, she felt close to dizzy. “The Land of Wa is so vast.”


“If that’s what you think, I’d better not show you a map of the world. You’d faint. Roma and Kentak are a hundred times farther.”


“One hundred!” exclaimed Miyo. The Messenger smiled. Miyo leaned toward him. “You have been to other countries, yes? You’ve seen Roma and Kentak?”


“I have,” said the Messenger.


“Tell me about them.” Kan brought cups and a beaker of sake. He turned to go, but Miyo stopped him. “Kan, you should hear this too, about the lands beyond.”


“But my lady…” Kan feared it would be presumptuous.


“Don’t be so formal. The Messenger’s tales are always better with an audience. Isn’t that right, O?” The Messenger said nothing, and Kan seemed unconvinced. Nonetheless, Miyo tugged the boy’s hand and made him sit. The Messenger took up a cup.


“Shall I tell you about Kentak, then?”


“Yes. Please.”


“I arrived in 1863, to intervene in the North-South War and destroy the ET.” The Messenger began his story. Miyo had heard many of these tales since the armies embarked on their expedition. Each began the same way, with an unknown era in an unknown land.


“At that time, Kentak was part of a country called America, where the white-skinned peoples had taken over from the red-skinned tribes. The country was divided into whites who held the black-skinned slaves by force, and other whites who were opposed to slavery.”


“They wanted to kill the slaves?” asked Miyo.


“Kill them? No, they wanted to free them.”


“Then what? Would they abandon them?”


“They assumed the slaves could fend for themselves,” replied the Messenger.


“How heartless,” said Miyo. “Slaves would die without their masters.”


“People in the north of that land thought it would be better for the slaves to die than to be worked like beasts.”


Miyo quietly poured the sake for Kan. Although Kan disliked the Messenger, he always found these tales from other times and places enchanting and strange. How could a country get along without slaves? There were curious lands indeed on the other side of the ocean. Yet as Kan the slave found himself stressing the indispensability of slaves, it occurred to him that there was something odd about it all, though he could not say exactly what.


“Well then, did you fight to free the slaves?” asked Kan.


“No. I told you, I was pursuing the ET. Slavery did not concern me. In fact, I used the slaves against the enemy. I roused them and sent them out to fight. And many of them died, among the seven hundred thousand who fell from North and South. Maybe there were more. Toward the end the situation was so confused I couldn’t keep track. Perhaps by trying to help, I only made history worse than it would have been.”


“And you joined with people in that era to fight, as you do here?” asked Miyo.


“Yes, I did.” The Messenger suddenly seemed at a loss for words. He looked up into space. Miyo waited, thinking she might hear the names of those he had known. But finally he shook his head. “They all perished.”


“You lost?” said Kan. Miyo glared at him, but he took no notice. He was gazing at the Messenger.


“It’s not as if you killed them,” said Miyo. “In fact there must have been some countries that fell before you were able to help.”


“Japan, in 1710,” said the Messenger. “It was the Genroku era. They simply did not have the strength to fight the ET. I had barely gotten them organized when Honshu was wiped out, then the three other main islands. The Satsuma clan managed to hole up in the Ryukyu Islands, but there was no way we could win. In the end I had to withdraw.”


“Where is Japan?” asked Miyo.


The Messenger smiled. Miyo rarely saw this vulnerable, relaxed expression. Even when he laughed, he rarely opened up like this, and never when conferring with his captains or urging the men on.


Wherever he went, thousands were caught up in his exploits. The harder he fought, the more men died. Mountains of dead and oceans of blood marked his path. Expecting him to shed tears when recounting these horrors was useless. He must have lost the strength to cry long ago.


For Miyo it was the same. Since leaving her homeland, she had seen nothing but death. The soldiers guarding her palanquin seemed to change daily. These men, whose laughter and quarrels she heard through the wicker screen, were like chestnuts being fed into an enormous mortar, daily broken into pieces.


She ordered them to fight. She ordered them to cut down anyone who tried to run away. All she could do in return was to promise to make each day’s burials as lavish as possible. And still they obeyed her. They heard again and again that their homes would burn if they were defeated, and seeing the ruined villages along the way, the men faced the enemy with a boldness that startled their leaders.


Miyo noticed Kan was nodding off. She sent him away. Now she was alone with the Messenger. “Aren’t you going to turn in, Miyo?” he said.


“I should ask the same of you,” Miyo replied. He gave her a sharp look of concern. Then he gradually seemed to understand, but shifted nervously in his place on the dais. “So you haven’t been sleeping either,” he said.


“No. There are too many ghosts,” said Miyo.


“I’m sorry I pulled you into this. You didn’t have to be here. Lord Ikima should have come in your place.”


“I’m not sorry. It’s given me the chance to know you.”


“I’m not worth knowing,” said the Messenger.


“Really? I would know you more.” Miyo felt her pulse quicken as she took his hand. It was a huge, muscular hand with tapered fingers. He recoiled in surprise, but she gripped his hand tight and placed it against her breast.


“You don’t have a wife, do you?”


“No, but…”


“I know,” said Miyo. “You promised yourself to another, and you intend to return to her one day. But when will that be? Ten years from now? A hundred? A thousand?” Miyo tugged on his arm but he did not move. Instead she drew herself toward him. “Is this woman so important that you would wait alone for a thousand years just to spend a bit more time with her?”


The Messenger turned away. He was staring at his other hand. “This hand remembers her. This remembers that human form, how it felt. That’s the basic difference between me and Cutty Sark, a difference my makers granted me. If I forgot about Sayaka, it would be like forgetting who I am.”


“O…” Miyo had feared these very words, but on actually hearing them, she felt her strength draining away. Her cheeks burned with embarrassment and anger at being spurned for another, yet she could hardly deny his feelings. But as she began to withdraw her hand, he gripped it harder. “Miyo,” O said. He looked at her, his faced etched with pain. “I can’t go back.”


“What?”


“I’ll never go back. We’ve changed too much history. Sayaka’s timestream is buried under the far reaches of eternity. The odds of her being born again are a hundred billion to one—no, even less. There’s no way I could ever reach her now. My memories of her are all I have, but even my memory isn’t immune to the passing of time.”


He clasped her roughly, holding her with a fierce strength. Passionately he whispered the name of a stranger in her ear, over and over. Just as passionately, Miyo suppressed the resentment she felt rising within her. O had carried this burden for far longer than she could imagine. He had abandoned his native land, knowing he could never return.


She exhaled deeply, releasing the tension in her body. If necessary, she was ready to be his lost lover. All she wanted was to bring this man some measure of peace.


“O, tell me your name. Your real name.”


“My name.”


“Let me call you by your true name.”


“Orville.”


“Orville,” she repeated. For a moment the Messenger shuddered violently, as if an electric current had passed through him. He began to weep uncontrollably. Miyo struggled free, then embraced his powerful body again.










From that night on, Miyo and Orville shared the same bed. Neither of them spoke of it, but they did not tell their attendants to keep it secret, and thus it soon became widely known. Miyo worried for a moment that the morale of her troops might be affected, but her fears were groundless. The pairing of a demigod who wrote the Laws of the Messenger with the shaman queen who served the gods and spirits was not so surprising; the armies seemed to think it augured well. Gifts of meat and fruit from the soldiers arrived each day.


The Yamatai armies left Lake Hamana strengthened by twenty thousand men from the western chiefdoms. They were now a huge force of thirty-seven thousand. They also heard rumors of aid, soon to come, from a great chief who held sway over the far lands facing the northern ocean.They pressed on, encountering many unknown chiefdoms of the Emishi. Most had been ravaged by the mononoké and were now resigned to their doom. The Yamatai forces took the survivors as slaves or slaughtered them as enemies. And still the armies crept forward, like the kudzu vines that spread across the land.


As they headed east, summer turned to autumn. It took them a day to round the smoking, savage cone of Mount Fuji. That night was cold, and at dawn the next morning they saw the mountain crowned with silver. Above the soldiers’ heads, geese and swans called stridently as they crossed over, enormous flocks flying now high, now low in the sky.


As the armies neared the Sasago Pass, the peak of Fuji, dyed a mysterious blue, towered above them in the distance. In a fierce ambush, the troops lost several hundred soldiers and many veteran captains. Takahaya came to their aid immediately, pursuing the mononoké through the pass and destroying them with overwhelming force once on open ground. But Orville looked grim as he watched the Wasps pick over the battlefield.


“Has something gone wrong, O?” asked Miyo.


“I don’t know. Maybe I was wrong about where they’ve built their stronghold.” He said no more, but was clearly worried. Late that night, hordes of Wasps, more than anyone had ever seen before, droned across the sky, heading east.


Orville led the armies down onto the huge plain of Musashino. The vast flatland was covered with rushes, small groves of trees scattered here and there. Along the coast lay a few Emishi villages. The land was overrun with tens of thousands of deer that had never seen a hunter, along with huge numbers of fox, badgers, and weasels.


Scouts were sent to the top of any rise in the ground. They built towers to survey the land, but haze obscured the northern mountains. To the east, they could make out a vast, shallow lagoon fed by a huge river. The lagoon was covered with what at first seemed to be white fog or haze. On closer inspection they realized it was flocks of migrating cranes and swans.


Takahaya was not happy in this new terrain. He murmured to himself, “I don’t know how we’re going to defend ourselves in this country.” His fears were justified. The armies were hauling huge catapults, and the baggage train extended for many ri. Defending this huge collection of men and pack animals would be difficult when the plain offered so few natural defensive positions. Takahaya was nervous and repeatedly sent cavalry to reconnoiter. But the enemy was almost disappointingly few, numbering only an occasional Red Snipe. After three days’ march, the armies went into bivouac in the lee of a small, beach-rimmed cape called Atago Hill.


That evening, Miyo climbed the hill in search of Orville, who had still not returned from an earlier errand. He had opened his heart to her in their camp at Lake Hamana, and they had become still more intimate since. But when they entered the plain of Musashino, he had donned his warrior’s armor. Miyo was unsettled.


“Why are you so anxious? There probably isn’t a mononoké within a hundred ri of this place,” said Miyo.


“That’s what bothers me,” Orville replied. He peered into the dark. His vision was keen even on starless nights. “If I were the enemy, I’d lure us out onto this plain and surround us,” he said in a low voice. “Our supply lines are stretched to the limit, and winter will be here soon. It’s the perfect time for them to strike. Why don’t they come?”


“They must be hiding in the mountains,” said Miyo. “You said yourself that they like the metals they find there.”


“Perhaps. Or they might be planning a flanking move from the north, down the Nakasen Road. But I raised cairns in that direction. We’ve been keeping a close watch and we’ve seen nothing.”


“Could you send Wasps?”


“I already have, but the air from here to Kofu is full of FET. They make it hard to do good reconnaissance.”


“The Snipes never leave us in peace,” said Miyo, her voice defeated. “Red Snipes” was the name the men had given to the flying ET. They posed little threat to the armies and few took them seriously. But FET did target Orville’s Wasps, and they were victorious more often than not.


Orville was silent for some time, deep in thought. Suddenly he said, “We should build a settlement here.”


“You mean stay the winter?” Miyo was astonished. Orville nodded.


“Withdrawing now would not be wise, and I don’t like our dependence on pack trains from the west for provisions. Game is plentiful here. We could even plant grain and bring the women from Yamatai. The men could settle down, gather stone, fell trees, and fortify the settlement.”


“You would have us stand our ground here till next year?”


“Next year or the year after, until this land is fully under our control.” Miyo’s eyes widened in surprise. “Do you miss your country? You can go back. It’s all right with me,” he said.


“You’re not serious.” Miyo glared at him, but Orville just laughed. It was a strong laugh, full of warmth.


Next day the armies began the laborious preparations for overwintering. Men were sent out to cut down trees. Hunters fanned out in all directions in search of deer and boar. Those whose nagging injuries kept them from seeking game went to gather wild fruit. A stockade was raised, moats were dug, and a storehouse for grain was built. Every female survivor from the villages in a hundred-ri radius was brought to the camp. Then the wives and children of the older soldiers began arriving from Yamatai. The fortress of Atago began to take on the features of a town.


Orville sent out Wasps and scouts, not only over the plain but to Hitachi and Shimotsuke—even as far as Iwaki in the northeast. But the country was empty except for deer and other wild animals.


“Maybe the mononoké died out? Maybe only the Snipes survive, and only because we cannot bring them down.” Kan’s unsophisticated surmise even started Cutty deliberating seriously, but she decided there was not enough data to reach a conclusion.


And so autumn passed peacefully into winter. The stockade and moat were completed three days after the first snowfall decked the plain with white. Then the last supply train arrived from Yamatai, and the fortress gate was closed.


That night, the enemy came.










Miyo’s dreams were cut off by a detonation that rocked the ground beneath her. She sprang up, fumbled with her tunic, and raced to the door. The next instant Orville was by her side. A red flash lit the sky. The north gate of the fortress splintered under an exploding shell. More shells rained down on the north side of the fort. The building rocked with each impact.


The instant Orville saw the explosions, he groaned in despair. “Cannons. They’ve got artillery!”“What do you mean? Is the fire another mononoké?” said Miyo. Orville said nothing but went to get his sword. Cutty’s rapid-fire updates poured from the magatama bead. “Warning, artillery detected. Fifty units, large-caliber, ballistic. Explosive projectiles. Ground troops detected five hundred meters from the north wall. Fifty…eighty…one hundred twenty ETs. Thermal stealth—no, low-temperature cloaking. The enemy are disguised as animals!”


“I don’t believe it,” said Orville. “The Wasps would see right through that. What about magnetic and sonic scanning?”


“Sonic scanning is limited by Wasp wing beats. Apparently the enemy’s sonic signature fell below that limit. Magnetic scanning is ineffective in this area due to the geology.”


“What, metal deposits on a floodplain? No way. The ET must have seeded the area!”


“In that case we have a real problem, O. You built your fortress in the center of the spider’s web.”


“Enough! There’s work to do!” shouted Orville. He ran, cursing, to meet the enemy, sword in hand. At last the war trumpets began to blare from the watchtowers. Stunned soldiers poured from their quarters, struggling to don their armor. Miyo shouted to Cutty, “I’m sending troops to the north. Is that where they should go?”


“Keep the men well dispersed. The shells—” Cutty’s voice disappeared in the roar of a huge detonation. Miyo was blown off her feet. The world spun around her, then the ground came up. She lost consciousness.










She did not know how much time had passed. It might have been seconds or hours. Her ears were buzzing. She could hear the frantic screaming of the slaves, the shouts of the men, and even Cutty’s voice, but everything was strangely muffled. She had no idea what was happening. Then someone slapped her lightly on the cheek.


“Lady Miyo!” Kan’s voice was hoarse. Miyo opened her eyes to find him bending over her, his face streaked with tears. Gradually her senses returned, but each was sending the same message: pain. Miyo shuddered as the agony took concrete form. Kan was distraught. “Where does it hurt?”“Everywhere. Help me up.” As she sat up, she tensed her arms and legs and tried to move them. She could not raise her right arm. She turned toward her shoulder and just as quickly looked away. The bones must have shattered. Her shoulder was deformed, her back scorched. She must have been thrown clear of the building and struck the ground. She grabbed Kan with her left hand. “Don’t touch my right side, I tell you! What happened?”


Instead of answering, he looked over Miyo’s shoulder. She turned to see her quarters reduced to a pile of burning debris, as if a volcano had erupted beneath them. “A fireball struck,” said Kan.


“Where is Takahaya?” Again Miyo’s words were cut off by an explosion from another part of the stockade. A wail of despair came from one of the watchtowers. “The sea wall!” A great shout rose from a thousand throats. Soldiers streamed past them, racing to defend the opening in the wall. Miyo shouted to Kan through the din.


“Where is Takahaya? Where are the catapults?”


“I don’t know,” Kan shouted back. “I came as soon as you were hit.”


Three more explosions. The northeast tower toppled slowly, like a tree felled by loggers. Battle cries and the ringing of swords came from all directions. The war trumpets blew wildly. Captains bellowed at their men. Soldiers ran toward their assembly points, others wandered in a daze. It was perfect chaos. Miyo shouted into the magatama, “Where is the enemy’s main force?”


“All around you,” Cutty replied quietly. Miyo sagged with shock. “Just before the attack, thermal signatures of deer and boar were detected encircling the compound,” said Cutty in the same dismal tone.


“How many?”


“Three thousand seven hundred.” Just then a roar of voices rose from the eastern ramparts. Bloodied soldiers came streaming back from the line, shouting in panic, their swords ruined, some nothing more than shards. Slow-moving Reapers loomed behind them in the smoky darkness. In the light from the torches their bodies were rust red, clearly different from before. Miyo remembered the first of these beasts that she had seen up on the mountain, and how its unyielding body had broken Kan’s sword with ease.


“It’s just as I feared. They found the mines at Kamaishi.” It was Orville.


“Messenger O?” Miyo strained to hear him through the magatama. He was gasping for breath. It sounded like he was in the middle of combat.


“They’re using iron catalysis to make gunpowder—that puts them a thousand years ahead of us. It’s no use; we can’t fight this. You’ve got to give the order to withdraw.”


“Withdraw? After all our work?”


“We need reinforcements from other countr—” The word was swallowed by a scream.


“Messenger O!” Miyo shouted. All she could hear was Orville panting as he grappled with some foe. She looked toward the north. Beyond the smoldering stockade, the rumble of explosions sounded like the foreshocks of an earthquake. A mass of burly Hayato warriors rushing with log rams pushed forward to repel the ET advancing into the fortress. Takahaya was there, and he turned and shouted to Miyo. “Queen Himiko! You must flee!”


“Push them back, recall your men, and prepare to withdraw!” Miyo shouted in reply. She stood up, but a wave of agony from her shoulder nearly brought her to her knees. Instantly Kan was beside her, lifting her onto his back. “Give the order, my lady. I will bear you.” Miyo nodded and shouted for all to hear, “Men and women of Wa, to the west! Follow your queen!”


Perhaps the counterattack had been somewhat successful. The shells stopped falling. People emerged from their huts with everything they could carry. The Hayato ran ahead to the west side of the stockade, to repel the enemy who would be waiting there.


“Messenger O, we leave through the west gate. Join us, quickly,” said Miyo into the magatama.


“No. I have to hold them here, otherwise they will follow you.”


“Orville!” cried Miyo fearfully, but the Messenger laughed. His voice was suddenly dry, like a summer wind. “Spare me the histrionics, I’ve got my hands full. I’ll follow you as soon as I can.”


“I’ll be waiting!” said Miyo. One of the Hayato brought over a horse. Kan jumped into the saddle, and the men helped Miyo climb up behind him.


“You can ride?” she asked with surprise.


“I’ve learned,” he answered in a low voice, and drew himself up with pride. Miyo realized his voice was finally starting to break. He shouted, “Open the gate!”


The enemy stood lurking in the darkness just beyond the light of the torches. A barrage of fire tore the gate apart. The Hayato ran forward, screaming their war cry. Miyo held tight to Kan and the boy spurred his horse.










Of those who had crossed the Sasago Pass that autumn, just over half made it back to the west side. From there they marched to the sea, where Orville finally joined them. But soon the enemy, far stronger now, caught up and hit them hard. Very few of the men Takahaya fed into the maw of that terrible machine returned alive. Stripped of their catapults, tormented by hunger and cold, the armies retreated, leaving a trail of the sick and the dead like grains of rice trailing a torn sack. Orville’s Wasps could not approach an enemy equipped with firearms. High in the sky over the dwindling armies of Yamatai, the enemy FET circled in dismal swarms, like the great birds who fed on the bodies of the dead in far-off Maya. By the time the armies reached the snow-clad shores of Lake Hamana, their numbers had shrunk by more than two men in three.


“Well, we can expect no help from China,” said Cutty. The Yamatai forces were now gathered by the lake, in more of a bivouac than a defensible encampment. The snow fell heavily.“The Western Jin Empire sent four hundred thousand to fight the ET in northern China. Messengers from Lishan Station are assisting them, but the situation on the ground is not developing to our advantage. The battle in East Africa is shifting toward Lake Victoria. The enemy forces are increasing rapidly. Messengers in cryostasis at Uluru Station in Australia have been urgently mobilized to deal with an ET communications node I discovered on Mount Bruce.”


Miyo glanced at Orville and looked away. He had become terribly gaunt. His armor, which he now wore night and day, was riddled with holes and cracks. It was a wonder he wasn’t badly injured. Or was he?


“O, are you all right?”


“I heal quickly,” Orville replied. He emptied a large cup of sake in one gulp, but this only increased Miyo’s concern. She took his hand. “You must rest. For one day, or even one night.”


“Rest? No. This is one war we can’t afford to lose. We’ve reached the end of the road,” he said.


“But couldn’t you go back into the past,” said Miyo, “and try again?”


“It’s not that simple,” Cutty interjected. “This entire conflict has reached a turning point. For the last thousand centuries we have consistently frustrated the enemy’s plans, sweeping their fragmented forces off the map of time before they can replicate past the point of critical mass. If they defeat us here, their numbers will grow exponentially. The advantage we’ve enjoyed until now will be gone. Then the ET will upstream and destroy us where we first appeared in the past. But…” A new tone crept into Cutty’s voice. “O, has it ever occurred to you that we could automate the upstreaming process into an endless loop?”


“Don’t even think it!” Orville shouted. “Another hundred thousand years of fighting? Give up everything we’ve won so far, and keep doing it over and over till we get it right? Maybe we should just redo evolution from the beginning! What a load of crap.” He hurled his cup across the tent.


“We would have to build an antimatter plant,” said Cutty, as if she hadn’t heard him. “Our energy supplies are dangerously low.”


“That’s why we have to finish this here, in this timestream,” snapped Orville. “We have no choice.”


“Naturally. After all, there’s Miyo to consider,” said Cutty quietly. The color drained from Orville’s face. “Miyo is here, so you cling to this stream. Isn’t that correct?”


Orville recovered his ability to speak after a long moment. “Cutty, are you malfunctioning? What are you talking about?” He spoke slowly, with a hint of menace. Cutty’s reply came in a voice nearly devoid of expression.


“It is time for me to reevaluate our strategy from the ground up. I may have to carry out a full-scale retreat and reorganize our forces. If necessary, I can travel to multiple star systems, building strong points along the way. To do this, I will require all the antimatter in this timestream. That includes the antimatter that now powers the Messengers.”


“You’d fight on alone?” said Orville. “And sacrifice all of us in the process?”


“There is that option.” Cutty’s voice was like ice. “If reinforcements from the future fail to appear, I’ll create them myself. Everything depends on how things develop in this timestream.”


“Go ahead and try it,” Orville said. “I’ll warn every Messenger and see that you’re destroyed.”


“How interesting, since I have a kill switch for each of you.”


Miyo could not bear to hear more. “Stop it, both of you! What about the Laws? Where did they come from, if not from you? How can we stop the mononoké unless we join hands and combine our strength?”


Cutty and Orville fell silent. Kan’s voice came from outside the tent. Miyo told him to enter, and his head appeared at the tent flap. After a long look at Orville, he finally spoke, his voice downcast, “The messenger from Yamatai has returned. Lord Ikima says he cannot send us further provisions until spring.”


“How unfortunate,” said Cutty. Miyo glanced sharply at the magatama. Cutty was an AI. Doubtless the statement was meant to be taken at face value. Yet the hint of sarcasm was unmistakable.


There was a rumble like thunder in the distance. Another explosion. Orville grasped his sword and stood up. Miyo clutched at him. “Wait—”


“I won’t be long,” he answered. She looked up at him. He was wearing the inscrutable smile she had not seen for months. A tired smile, one with nothing left to hide.


They could hear Takahaya now, rallying his men. Miyo’s right shoulder was throbbing. Orville had used another of his mysterious techniques to treat her injury, but she discovered that accelerated healing brought heightened fever and pain. Yet Orville suffered physical trauma almost daily. How much pain had he experienced? How much of his strength had been used up simply to recover?


Miyo stood and followed him out of the tent. She resolved never to speak of her pain again.