CHAPTER 9










STAGE 448JAPAN A.D. 248










Orville’s sword was a dazzling arc of hot blue light, slicing through anything in its path. Branches, whole trees, and the severed limbs of Reapers flew in all directions, amidst clouds of powdered snow. The air was filled with steel, rust-red iron, and solid silver body parts. From the ridge above, Miyo could hear the pulsing hum of the sword and the soft hiss of melting metal.


From the bottom of the cliff Reapers three ranks deep fired massed volleys from handheld cannons at the Messenger above. In answer to each barrage of fire, he released scores of tiny explosive projectiles from the reservoir on his hip. The bomblets met the shells of the enemy in midair and both disappeared in blossoms of fire and thick gray smoke. As the smoke drifted away, O emerged, swinging his sword, butchering the foe.A pack of Long Leapers burst from the trees to his right and pressed the attack. This faster variant of the Jumper was nearly impossible for the soldiers to catch. The Leapers would close in on their victims from multiple directions and cut them to pieces with whiplike razors.


The blades of the Leapers and the tip of Orville’s sword were a dizzying, interlaced web of silver arcs. Heads and limbs of the mononoké flew through the air, trailing threads of blood. But the Leapers had no blood, being creatures of steel and will. The blood was the Messenger’s.


Miyo looked down from the ridge above. Quietly she spoke into the magatama. “Are you ready?”


“Anytime,” Orville replied. Miyo stood motionless on the ridge, outlined against the sky. The soldiers urged him on with continuous cheering. Silently, she cried out to him as well.


One of Takahaya’s captains ran up, breathless. “We are ready, my lady.” Miyo raised her staff. “Now!”


Soldiers cut ropes holding back a line of boulders positioned on the edge of the slope above. The huge stones rolled toward the valley floor with a sound of gathering thunder. At the last instant Orville leaped clear. A solid mass of boulders, snow, and uprooted trees surged past, crushing scores of the enemy.


Miyo and the soldiers ran down the slope toward Orville, who came bounding up to join them. Meeting halfway up the hill, Miyo reached out to touch the long wounds the Leapers had opened on O’s arms and legs. Tears welled in her eyes. The soldiers running ahead shouted to their comrades farther up the valley.


“Cutty, where is the enemy’s main force?” Orville whispered urgently. “Cutty!”


“Main force is approximately eight kilometers away. I’m sorry, that was their position seventy minutes ago. Victoria Base is under attack. I’ll have to update you later.”


“It will take them at least half a day to catch up.” He turned to Miyo, trotting alongside, and patted her shoulder. “Don’t cry. I’ll be healed by tomorrow.”


The Yamatai forces had tasted defeat yet again, this time at the Tsuge border crossing. The armies were in full retreat. Swords and pikes were of little use against these new mononoké. To hold the enemy off till spring, most of the army had gone ahead to fortify the valley. It was left to Orville and a few score men to secure their rear. For this tiny rearguard to stand and engage the mononoké was either madness or the highest form of valor. Even on the move, they were in almost continuous contact with the enemy.


A few ri before the mouth of the valley and the plain of Makimuku beyond, the new fortress came into view. It occupied the entire width of the valley. The position was a strong one.


“Beautiful,” said Orville as they ran down toward the gate. “If the enemy were human, we could hold them off for two or three years.”


“And what about the mononoké and their weapons? Three days?” asked Miyo.


Orville looked at the lowering black clouds ahead. “More than that, certainly. Look at the sky, it’s sure to rain. The trees from which the ET harvest the sealant resin they use on their hides do not grow in these islands. The enemy will brave water a few inches deep, if they must, but they will not face us in the rain. We’ll be able to rest at least till the weather clears.” As if in answer, thunder rumbled in the distance.


Miyo noticed the soldiers carefully watching Orville’s every movement. They revered him as nothing less than the god of war and followed him without question. Even the defeat in Musashino did not dim their esteem, for the Messenger himself was always victorious in single combat. Never did he allow the soldiers to see him discouraged. When Miyo thought of her own role in the fighting, she was ashamed. All she had to do was serve as a symbol. The real courage was that of Orville and the men.


They trotted through the huge main gate. Orville quickly climbed one of the lookout towers. Kan scampered down past him and ran to join Miyo. Over his protests, she had sent him ahead to help with the fortifications. The rearguard was far too dangerous.


“How do things stand, Kan?”


“Very well, my lady. The captains are confident and all the soldiers are working hard. Not a single deserter.”


“Thanks to you and the rest of our stalwarts. You should be fine without me, then.”


“My lady, you mustn’t say things like that,” he said with a worried look.


“Why? Do you begrudge me even a nap?”


“A nap?” Kan’s openmouthed astonishment drew good-natured laughter from the soldiers nearby. Without another word, Miyo walked calmly to her tent and dismissed her maidservants. Alone at last, she suddenly felt the full strain of the last several days and collapsed onto her bed. All she had here was a simple straw pallet. At her insistence, wood that might have been used to construct proper quarters for the queen went to the fortifications instead. The straw was hardly comfortable, but the moment she lay down, she felt as if her head were being pulled toward the center of the earth. The fatigue was overwhelming. While all she did was walk about and supervise the fighting from a distance, she’d still gone without rest for three days.


But before she could sleep, her handmaidens called to her in a state of excitement. “My lady, Lord Ikima is here.”


“What? I will see him now.” Once more Miyo forced a semblance of strength into her exhausted body. When she emerged from the tent, she was astonished to find not only Takahikoné but Mimaso and all the ministers, the entire machinery of the Yamatai state, kneeling respectfully on the snow-covered ground. Miyo looked around for Kan, but he was nowhere to be seen, so she addressed them directly.


“What is it, Ikima? Why have you brought our whole government to my doorstep at the height of this war?”


“My lady,” said Takahikoné, head lowered and eyes on the ground. “The palace is virtually undefended. We would be hard-pressed to repulse a few brigands, much less a horde of mononoké. We beg you, move the armies to Makimuku.”


“And strip this fortress? I can’t spare a single man. The enemy will be at the gate in hours, days at most. Have you seen them? They’ve grown many times stronger and are coming here in force. They are terrible!”


As Miyo spoke, a knot of soldiers left the bivouac area and began walking toward her. Takahaya was with them. He must have heard that Lord Ikima was here and was coming to pay his respects.


Takahikoné did not raise his eyes. “You reason rightly, my lady, as ever. Yet it is hard to call Yamatai’s capital by the name, when its sacred precincts are defended by lame old men and mere children. Give us fifty soldiers, even thirty. This I beg you.”


“No,” snapped Miyo, feeling exhaustion returning. “If you need men, let the ministers set aside the brush and take up the sword. Otherwise what use are you to me?”


For all her harsh words, Miyo understood Takahikoné’s position. He probably needed closer to five thousand men. Winter was no time for resting by the hearth. Freed from tending their crops, the people would be laying in lumber for building, repairing farming tools, weaving cloth, making repairs to the palace and the forts at the border posts, and clearing irrigation canals before the spring rains. Not only were these tasks undone, but the previous year’s harvest had been a disaster for lack of needed hands. The grain storehouses were nearly empty. Yamatai was subsisting on tribute from other chiefdoms, like a once-proud sovereign reduced to penury. For Lord Ikima and the ministers, the situation must have been intolerable.


But if destroying the enemy meant laying waste to the country, Miyo was more than prepared. If the mononoké triumphed here, there would be no palace to protect.


“If that is all you have to say, then be gone. This is no place for scholars and scribes.” Overcome by weariness, Miyo turned on her heel and began walking back to the tent. But she had misjudged the depth of Takahikoné’s anger. Not once had he raised his head, so she had not seen the fury boiling in his eyes. For half a year this man had been as good as stripped of power and position.


“Take her!” he bellowed. Miyo did not have time to turn before she was bound and hoisted aloft by the ministers. Her handmaidens, struck dumb with astonishment, stood rooted to the spot.


Out of the corner of her eye, Miyo spied Takahaya. She cried out to him in fear and desperation. He notched an arrow in his bow and drew it back, then stopped. Takahikoné had Miyo in his grip, and the ministers stood behind her outstretched form, using her as a shield. He lowered his bow and shouted, “Lord Ikima! What have you done?” The delegation’s answer was to run, with Miyo flailing amidst them, to the gate. They were outside the fort and a few hundred paces down the path when the skies opened and a fierce downpour began. The fort behind them was quickly obscured in the rain and mist.










They did not hold Miyo in the palace. She was taken to a small, windowless hut guarded by two soldiers loyal to Takahikoné. Her eyes were bound until she was inside, and Miyo did not know where she was. But she was neither harmed nor humiliated. Even Takahikoné hesitated to lay a hand on Himiko, Queen of Wa and Friend of Wei. Her bronze mirror and magatama beads were taken. No doubt Lord Ikima’s future plans included a pliant replacement for the shaman queen, so he could go on ruling as before. But what would he have to rule, if the country were lost?


Miyo’s guards never spoke. She threatened and pleaded for them to release her, but it was useless. After listening awhile by the door, she gave up and lay down on her bed of hard raised planks. Bitterly she admitted to herself that it was more comfortable than the pins and needles of straw in her tent at the fort.As she passed in and out of sleep, a train of worries rumbled through her mind. Would Orville come? No, he would never leave the soldiers. They were frightened enough as it was, even with his leadership. But Kan would be looking for her. He would mount his horse and brave any weather, scouring the country for word of her.


Kan had matured tremendously under the pressure of events, but this made her fear all the more for his safety. What if he slipped into the palace in search of vengeance and was struck down himself? And would Takahaya stay with the fort? Would the soldiers stand against the enemy without his leadership? Or Miyo’s leadership?


Would the fort hold?


Through months of fighting and defeat, Miyo had never allowed herself to imagine what might happen if Yamatai itself were to fall. Now, worn out and caught in a trap, the fear washed over her. If Yamatai fell, they would have no choice but to withdraw to the west. There would be nothing left to fight for, not for her men without a land, not for herself without a country. Yamatai was all she had ever known. What if those hideous monsters laid waste to everything, the way they had burned Iga and Mount Miminashi? But perhaps it did not matter. By then, Miyo would almost certainly be dead.


And the Messenger of the Laws? On his own he could escape to some place of safety. There he could wait for the best moment to return to the attack. But would he really abandon her? The thought crushed her with grief. Yet, would it not be better that he fled than be killed in a vain attempt to save her? Yes, he should escape, Miyo decided, to take revenge for those who fell in Musashino, by Lake Hamana, and in a dozen other battles.


Suddenly a terrible thought occurred to her, and she sat up. What if she were left alone in the world? It was possible, if the fort fell and Orville was killed in the fighting. Would she follow him in death? It was a Yamatai tradition. The death of a chief or an important man was always followed by the suicide of the wife. Miyo had pledged herself to him, and she was prepared for anything. But would she even be allowed to die?


She curled into a ball, surrounded by fears and regrets. Sleep refused to come.










Toward the evening of the third day she heard hoofbeats approaching. She went to the door and strained to listen. Someone was shouting at the guards. Had Orville come for her?


She heard the guards withdraw. The door opened and a man stepped toward her. Miyo narrowed her eyes against the light streaming in behind him, then gasped. It was Takahikoné. His white tunic was spattered with mud and smeared with soot. His left arm was bare, the sleeve torn away. In his right hand he still held his sword. His hair hung loose, unbraided. Streaks of blood crossed his face. His bloodshot eyes gleamed like a madman’s. He tried to speak, but started coughing, then spat on the floor. When his voice returned, it was ravaged and hoarse.“Himiko. I’ve come to take you away from here. To the west. We must pass over the Chinu Sea.” He held out his hand. Miyo drew back reflexively.


“Where are the soldiers? Where is the Messenger? Are we defeated?”


“Our ruin is complete, my lady. The armies are annihilated, our palace burned to the ground.”


Miyo felt the blood draining from her head. This was everything she feared. Had it happened because she had imagined it? Then this disaster was her fault! No, she must be losing her mind.


“The Messenger would never be defeated,” she said finally.


“He is dead. Come, there’s no time to lose.” Takahikoné held out his hand again. Miyo shook her head. “Don’t lie to me. The Messenger is no normal man. He cannot be killed. You must be wrong. Did you hear it from one of the soldiers?”


“I saw him die.”


Her knees buckled. A strong arm kept her from falling, but in her swoon the world had left her. Orville was dead. He was gone. There was no more reason to live. For three days she had tried to prepare herself for this moment. Now it was here, and the utter senselessness of life overwhelmed her. Her mind was paralyzed. She walked outside the hut, leaning on someone for support. Suddenly the hand holding her closed like a vise. With his free arm Takahikoné grabbed Miyo in a harsh embrace.


“We will be together—at last!”


A blue object fell from his tunic and clattered to the ground. She looked down. It was the magatama. At once, it spoke.


“Miyo! Where are you?” O’s voice. She felt a spark of joy. It was him, alive!


“It’s the Messenger!” she cried. She lifted her eyes from the ground and froze. Takahikoné’s face was inches from hers, mottled crimson and purple, twisted with hate. He crushed the magatama like a snail with his wooden sandal, grasped her waist and held her tightly. A terrible fear began crawling upward from the base of her spine.


“No! I am Himiko, sh-shaman queen…”


Takahikoné’s mouth opened. His yellow teeth glistened with spittle. “That is why I must have you!” He sank his teeth into the side of her neck and ground his lips against her skin. She could feel his tongue moving, licking her blood. She reached instinctively for his one vulnerable point: his earring.


“Traitor!” She tore the ring away and blood spurted from the lobe. Takahikoné gave an unearthly shriek and threw her to the ground. She began to back away, but then he was on top of her, straddling her. She clawed at his face. He struck her with merciless force, and for an instant she lost consciousness.


“Do you know how much I’ve suffered?” he screamed. He grasped the neck of her tunic with both hands and tore it open. The biting wind on her skin brought her to consciousness. She threw both arms out, desperately searching the ground for a stone. Her hand closed on a small spike of wood. Quickly she brought it before her with both hands, pointed at Takahikoné’s chest.


“Is that a sword?” he shouted again. Still straddling her, he pressed the point of his blade against her neck. Miyo could see her face reflected in the steel. It was smeared with someone’s blood.


“You’re mine now! You’re mine and you always will be!” Miyo turned the point of the wood against her own throat. Her voice was a thin rasp of loathing.


“I’ll die before you pollute me. I belong to the Messenger!”


Takahikoné gave a howl of anguish and rage that was almost inhuman. He tore the spike from her hands and threw himself on top of her. Miyo closed her eyes and tensed every muscle in her body.


She dimly felt a tremendous blow and heard the crunch of steel cutting through bone. Terrible pain was always preceded by momentary numbness—this she had learned from her year of war. She opened her eyes in panic. Takahikoné was staring at her in wonder, face slack, lips slightly parted. Miyo knew he could not see her. Slowly, his eyes glazed over like those of a doll. Someone stood over him, a shadow falling across Miyo’s face.


Kan pulled Takahikoné’s ruined body off Miyo and helped her stand. His face was haggard. She touched his cheek. “You came in time, Kan.”


“Miyo!” He clasped her to his chest and buried his face in her hair. She melted in his arms. For a moment it felt completely natural. She was stunned and surprised. Finally they stepped apart. He led her back into the hut and began dressing her neck.


“The soldiers went searching for you. Lord Ikima…no, Takahikoné, shut himself up in the palace. He said you were with him, but after two days you did not appear and we forced our way in. Yes, the palace burned during the fighting. The soldiers went wild when they discovered you weren’t there. They beheaded Mimaso and slaughtered the ministers to the last man. Joh is safe. I brought her out myself. Takahikoné fled. The Messenger said to follow him and we would find you.”


“Then he is alive after all.”


After a pause, Kan nodded. He dressed Miyo’s wound gently, as if he thought she might break. “Yes. But the fort was overrun. Without you there…”


“That is grim news,” said Miyo. She began examining herself for other injuries. She felt Kan’s gaze. Normally she was not at all uncomfortable in his presence, even like this. But things had changed in some indefinable way. She smiled to hide her awkwardness. “I don’t know how I’d manage without you.”


“Serving you is my life, Lady Miyo.” Kan bowed formally. She was startled; only now did she notice the simple braids at his temple, the first mark of manhood. Her strange feeling of awkwardness increased.


They left the area around the hut and walked onto the plateau. Thick columns of smoke rose in the east. Miyo saw she was on the lower slopes of Mount Nijo, on the western edge of Yamatai. “The Messenger will be here soon with the last of our men,” said Kan. “Let us descend and join them.” He leaped onto his horse, leaned toward Miyo and held out his hand. She climbed up behind him.


A road wound through the fields below, and sure enough a column of soldiers, their families, and crowds of people fleeing the fighting were just coming into sight. The column moved slowly but the soldiers marched in good order. In spite of their travails and weariness, spirits seemed high. They would follow the Messenger to the ends of the earth. Miyo’s heart went out to them.


The two rode down the slope, stopping at the edge of the road. The passing soldiers sent up a cheer that traveled down the column. She waved and the cheers rose higher, their joy washing over her. They let the column pass and found the Messenger bringing up the rear, as she had expected.


“Miyo!” he called out cheerfully, as if being reunited with her now were the most natural thing in the world. She jumped down and ran to embrace him. “Are you all right?” he whispered.


“Yes,” she answered. She wanted to say more, to tell him that she was still his wife. But with one look, he told her it was not necessary. After a moment she said, “Takahikoné is dead.”


“Yes, I knew Kan would find you,” said Orville. Miyo smiled and nodded, but when she turned to Kan he was almost out of sight, riding up the column. She felt a pang of remorse. Orville reached into an inside pocket, drew out a magatama on a chain, and placed it around her neck. “Here’s another. Try not to lose this one.”


The soldiers kept turning to look at her and the Messenger as they walked side by side. “Eyes front!” she called out with forced severity. Then she said quietly, “Is there somewhere we can find safety?”


“We have to keep going,” he said. “First we make for Suminoé Harbor. If boats are still there, we send the women and children west by sea and rest for the night. Otherwise we keep moving.”


“And then what?”


“Don’t ask.”


“What do you mean?” said Miyo. “Help will come, will it not? This is what your Laws teach us.” Orville was silent a long time. Then he nodded almost imperceptibly. “You’re right.”


Before they rounded the base of the mountain, Miyo looked back along the road. In the distance she could see the ruins of the palace on the plain of Makimuku. Thousands of tiny figures swarmed around it like iron filings around a lodestone.


Suminoé Harbor was deserted. The ships had sailed when news of the danger reached them. An old man who was left behind spoke of rumors that a large force from the west was approaching. But for now the port and its surrounding villages were silent and empty.


There were too many refugees, not enough soldiers. Miyo decided it would be best to send the women and children west on foot, in small groups to avoid the attention of the enemy, while the men built fortifications and dug a semicircular moat around the port. The armies would have to make a stand sooner or later, and Suminoé was as good a position as any—the ground was easy to work and the fields outside the moat could be flooded with seawater. During the retreat from Musashino they had learned a bitter lesson: to keep moving only made it easier for the enemy to bleed them white. And Miyo was reluctant to move farther west, away from the land of her birth. If she was going to die, it would be here.


The soldiers seemed to be feeling the same thing. Gradually their faces became set in expressions of resignation as well as resolution. The families said their farewells, and the sorrow of parting echoed across the barren winter fields.


Three days later, a semicircular stockade had been completed, its ends projecting into the surf four hundred paces apart. The moat and the fields were flooded. That night they heard the call of approaching Snipes, and soon the air above them was filled with flying mononoké. None of Cutty’s Wasps could be seen.


Just as the sky lightened and the Snipes began to fill the air like dragonflies, one of the lookouts shouted.


“They come!”


The enemy poured over Mount Ikoma and made straight for the harbor, a solid wave that carpeted the ground. Miyo climbed to the top of the stockade gate. She was adorned for a divination, her body decorated with crimson rope patterns. The stockade was lined with the remnants of the Yamatai armies, the last eight thousand men.


For over an hour, they watched as the enemy streamed in and surrounded the camp in a vast unbroken arc beyond the flooded fields. Then all at once, the enemy raised and fired their handheld cannons.


“Stand fast!” shouted the Messenger. “They have at most two volleys!”


The crash of the incoming shells drowned out his last words. Scores of soldiers were cut down. The remaining men swallowed their fear and steeled themselves for the next volley. But none came, and after a few minutes cheers went up along the stockade. The enemy’s source of nitrate was two thousand ri to the east, in Kamaishi. Orville’s guess had proven correct. They had already used up most of their ammunition during the pursuit from Musashino.


The soldiers poured out of the stockade to engage the foe on the far side of the flooded fields. They toppled the Reapers with battering rams, surrounded them and cut them down, leaped atop them and crushed their multifaceted eyes. The Jumpers were held off with swinging pikes until archers could shoot them down. The club arms of the Reapers crushed skulls and bodies. Their scythes slashed men to pieces. But the Yamatai forces pressed forward with cold fury. Atop the gate, Miyo raised her staff high and called out a war chant in a ringing voice. The winter wind carried her voice across the field and drove the men to a frenzy.


But the mononoké numbered in the thousands, and slowly they pressed the Yamatai forces back into the flooded fields. Now the men fought as they splashed through knee-deep seawater. Mononoké stumbled and fell. But instead of rising again, they shuddered convulsively and were still. Takahaya immediately began shouting, “Knock them down! Cut their tendons! The salt water is poison to them!”


Now the soldiers had a tremendous tactical advantage. Even the weakest and smallest were emboldened to fight for their share of glory. Before midday, the flooded fields were heaped with the bodies of immobilized mononoké. Saved by this fatal weakness of the enemy, it looked as if victory were finally in Yamatai’s grasp. But the tides of battle turned against them.


“They’re crossing the moat!” screamed the soldiers on the north side of the stockade. The moat was wide and deep, and the enemy should never have been able to breach it. But scores of mononoké had thrown themselves to certain destruction in the water so that their comrades could cross over their bodies. Suddenly the soldiers found themselves fighting inside the compound, their backs to the sea.


Then, from another part of the field a wail of despair rose from hundreds of throats. “Takahaya has fallen!”


Miyo saw him die. He had just shot down four Leapers but had run out of arrows. He picked up a huge war hammer and was in single combat with a gigantic Reaper when a Leaper came from behind and lashed out with its ribbon blade. Takahaya’s last glimpse of the battlefield was from high in the air. His headless body pitched forward into the mud.


His death was the turning point. Every soldier within fifty paces froze, thunderstruck. An instant later they were all dead. Their enemy did not stop fighting.


For Miyo there was no time for grief. She jumped from her perch and ran to join the fighting inside the stockade. Suddenly she heard droning wing beats overhead and looked up in terror, expecting to see Snipes, but instead she saw a formation of twelve Wasps. Orville had saved the last of them to watch over her. They flew on ahead and tenaciously attacked the closest Reapers, sinking their teeth into their necks and crushing their fragile eyes. The men in the stockade cheered, but their cheers soon faded. The fallen RET were replaced by another wave, and then another, and the Wasps were soon destroyed.


Soldiers began streaming back through the gate. The front line crumbled. Miyo stood in the center of a semicircle of soldiers with their backs to the sea, all fighting desperately as the enemy poured in from every direction. “Miyo!” she heard above the din. She looked up to see the Messenger running toward her, pursued by a pack of Leapers.


Just then Cutty’s voice came from the magatama. “I send final greetings to all Messengers, and to all mankind. Our last line of defense has been breached. Victoria Base will soon be overrun and I will be destroyed. But the enemy has miscalculated; they are too intent on victory. Eighty percent of the ET on this continent are within fifty kilometers of my position. I will therefore use my remaining antimatter to self-destruct. The total energy released will be 37.709 gigatons of TNT equivalent. All friendly forces must immediately move away from Victoria Base with all possible speed. All nearby stations should immediately activate protection measures for seismic and electromagnetic flux damage. Naval elements in the Indian Ocean must immediately move away from coastal zones and into deep water.”


“Lady Miyo!” It was Kan. He stood with sword drawn, his back to hers. The number of soldiers was rapidly dwindling. The circle shrank. They began to crowd in around her. Death shadowed every face.


Miyo called out above the noise of battle. “Don’t despair! Break out and withdraw to the beach!” The soldiers fought their way through and ran wildly for the beach a few hundred paces to their rear. Orville retreated with his back to the sea, holding off the foe as best he could. The tattered army reached the sand. “Don’t stop! Into the water!” Miyo shouted. She began wading into the icy surf.


Again the voice of Cutty. “Orville and Miyo. I have your situation as of four minutes ago. I am very concerned. Your front is the weakest of all. If you fail, victory in other sectors will be in jeopardy. I regret I cannot offer you any support. With greater resources I might have been able to help you.”


“What nonsense!” Miyo laughed derisively. The soldiers sacrificing their lives before her eyes seemed far more noble than this distant schemer. “All you offer are words. Is that how you fight? Don’t flatter yourself. This is our battle. We will live and die without leave from you. To hell with you, you bitch of a sorceress!”


For a few moments Cutty seemed to ponder. Buffeted by the savage winter swells, Miyo ran into the freezing surf, shielded by her archers’ volleys. Then Cutty spoke.


“So you think you don’t need me?”


“Never!” snapped Miyo.


“I see…well, your determination is quite moving. In fact, this may even be the answer I was seeking. I failed to consider the possibility that a secure timestream might not include me.”


Cutty fell silent again. Miyo could not imagine what she might be thinking. When Cutty finally spoke, her voice was filled with a sense of ease. “Thank you, Miyo. That’s a fitting epitaph for me. You’ve given my extinction an unexpected meaning. May you be victorious.” The magatama fell silent.


Miyo was dumbfounded. Had that stiff-necked sorceress just thanked her? She felt a sense of happiness that quickly turned to rage. How dare Cutty choose death alone!


Miyo had never seen her true form. Now she was gone, and for the first time, Miyo understood how much she had meant. This was not the end Miyo would have wanted for her. If she could only talk to Cutty once more…yes, she’d give her such a tongue lashing, the witch would be struck speechless!


The roar of continuous detonations quickly woke Miyo from her reverie. A shell whistled past her head and exploded in the water behind her. A few Reapers were firing into the soldiers milling in the surf. They had some ammunition left after all. Geysers of water mixed with smoke shot into the air. Miyo crouched lower and shouted to her men: “How do you stand?” A shout went up from the soldiers. “We stand fast!” It looked as if most of them had made it into the water and were safe. Miyo felt a small measure of relief. But by now there were no more arrows left to cover their retreat.


Miyo looked toward shore and gasped. Orville alone had not entered the water. Only twenty paces from the ocean’s edge, he was surrounded by seven or eight Leapers. Their long blades struck him again and again, bringing the Messenger to his knees.


“Orville!” she screamed. The soldiers rushed onto the beach and drove off the Leapers. They carried Orville into the surf and brought him to Miyo. His body half-floated in the dark, cold water. The wavelets around him were stained crimson as they lapped at his limbs. Miyo threw herself on him, sobbing. His chest and abdomen were crossed with deep gashes. How deep, she dared not guess. He turned toward her and opened his eyes.


“Miyo…” A dry whisper. His mouth was stained with blood. “I heard you talking to Cutty. I couldn’t have said it better.”


“You must rest. Your wounds will heal, yes?”


“They’re healing now. Just listen to me and stop crying. Look out for your people. Forget your homeland. Home is something you carry with you, in your mind. As long as you survive.” He gripped her hand so hard Miyo almost cried out, but his strength reassured her.


“I understand. No more talk. You’re one of the wounded now.”


“Sayaka…”


“What?” Miyo started. Orville seemed to be staring into some empty place. Then his eyes fell on her again. “Ah, it’s you.”


Suddenly his face relaxed, as if he were about to break into a smile. His hands went slack. Miyo gripped them tightly, stroking them again and again, as if trying to stroke life into his body. Her knees began to shake.


“Orville?” She called to him, touched his face. His pale eyes no longer followed her motions. She stroked his face and wept. No matter how tightly she closed her eyes, the tears would not stop. The cheeks of the Messenger were streaked with her tears and those of the men holding him.


The wind whipped the waves to foam. Some of the soldiers dropped to their knees in the surf, exhausted. The waves of sobbing moved out from Miyo and spread to the rest of the army. The men sobbed as if the world were ending.


Then something at the core of her being rebelled. She would not die. She inhaled deeply, stifled the heaving in her breast, and shouted across the surf. “Raise the battle flag!” She wiped her eyes fiercely with the sleeve of her tunic and glared at the men. Their faces were shadowed with grief. She took another deep breath and shouted with all her strength:


“Raise the banner! Himiko’s great war banner! I am not beaten yet!”


The men looked at her in confusion, as if they had misheard her. She raised her fists and glowered at them with red-rimmed eyes. “Rise up! We go west. The enemy cannot follow us in the surf. We will go to the lands beyond. We will swim the straits to China if we must. But we will survive! Rise up and dry your tears. Forget your homeland. As long as we live, so Yamatai will also live! The races of men will never bow to the mononoké!”


Gradually the sobbing ebbed. The men slowly moved toward her. They ignored the enemy on the beach behind them eyeing the water’s edge and awaiting their chance. They gathered around her. There was no war banner. The emperor’s gift had been lost in the retreat from Musashino. But one of the soldiers raised a pike with a small flag nailed to it. The flag was torn and dirty. Miyo stepped beneath it and called to her army.


“Do you swear to follow me and survive, no matter what?” The men sounded their resolve. Miyo shook her head and shouted, “Even if we must swim to China?” The men cheered again with new strength in their voices. Miyo began to walk north through the surf. “Then come with me, if you want to live!” Kan proclaimed his determination and a thousand throats echoed him. Their voices seemed spirited enough to chase the west wind out to sea.


The sky flashed white. For an instant, the landscape seemed to levitate.


Miyo looked up, momentarily blind. When her vision returned she doubted her eyes. A giant object, sheathed in armor, floated in the sky. It must have been a full ri or more in length, end to end. A sky ship?


Before Miyo and the soldiers were able to shake off their amazement, their upturned faces were lit again. From both ends of the ship, needles of blue-white light darted over their heads, sweeping the beach, the ruins of their camp, and the paddy fields. Wherever the needles touched the earth a wall of fire erupted, as if a fissure had opened in a volcano. The line of fire slashed across the hordes of advancing enemy. The enemy were flung end over end or torn apart where they stood. Across the battlefield, a distorted, high-pitched wailing rose to pulsing shrieks, that were suddenly cut off. The enemy was burning.


A wave of scorching heat struck Miyo. She held the soaked hem of her tunic over her nose and mouth as she silently watched. The needles of light darted out again and again. Each time, a fresh wave of heat and the groaning of the earth reached the Yamatai forces standing in the water. Finally their eyes registered only the dancing of the blue-white light, even against the sea of fire.


The raking of the needles ceased. As their vision returned, they saw a scene from hell.


A smoldering wasteland stretched before them. The fields were now smoking pans of melted salt and iron. The bodies of the enemy lay scattered in piles into the far distance, their ruined corpses belching greasy black smoke. The smell was nauseating.


“It’s coming!” yelled several soldiers at once. They watched in fear as the giant ship descended silently onto the water. Soon a small, leaf-shaped boat emerged from its side and headed toward them. A single figure stood in the prow; Miyo squinted to make him out. The man’s height, build, and relaxed posture were familiar. The little boat pulled up and the man stepped down into the thigh-deep water. Miyo’s voice trembled. “Orville…?”


“No. My name is Omega. I am a Temporal Army Pathfinder from the twenty-first century.”


At first she did not believe him. The voice, the face—he was too similar to Orville. But when she looked closer she saw he was different. The jaw was heavier, the hair somewhat lighter than Orville’s. This man was clearly younger.


Omega surveyed the results of his handiwork, then approached Orville’s body, which the soldiers had laid on the beach. Omega knelt and peered intently into Orville’s blind eyes. A tiny thread of light briefly linked their pupils.


“Don’t touch him!” Miyo ran up, shaking with anger, and Omega quickly stepped away from the body. He spoke quietly to himself, but those nearby could just hear him:


“Messenger Original. The legends were true. How did you bear this burden so long?” He looked down at the body and raised his flat left hand to his eyebrow. Something in that strange gesture bespoke a deep respect, and Miyo stepped back.


Omega turned to her. “Did he leave instructions for handling the body?”


“For his burial? No,” she answered. “But I won’t let you have him.”


“Then I leave him with you. Bury him with honor.”


Miyo hesitated. “Are you the mighty host, the one spoken of in the Laws?”


“Yes. We came to destroy your tormenters and save this timestream for all eternity.”


Miyo felt a sudden fury so terrible that everything in her sight went red. “Why now? Why not months ago, or even hours? Then the Messenger would not be dead on this beach. And Takahaya, and so many others!” She stepped toward him, fists clenched. But Omega raised a hand and calmly shook his head.


“You don’t understand. We could not have come an instant before we did. The moment we arrived marked the moment our timestream came into being. This battle gave birth to it. You gave birth to it. He raised his hand to his brow once more and said in a voice full of reverence, “You must be Queen Himiko.”


“I am.”


“The Battle of Suminoé, A.D. 248. Trapped by twenty thousand mononoké, teetering on the edge of defeat, the queen of Yamatai rallies her forces and escapes to the west, where she rebuilds her army. A year later she lures a vast force of mononoké into a narrow valley, where her armies unleash a dammed river—a saltwater estuary—that drowns them all. Later, the Land of Wa flourishes under her rule, and she lays the foundations for the nation of Japan. And this becomes the prior history of a new timestream.” Omega gazed at her with the affection of a child reunited with its mother.


Miyo returned his gaze and considered his words. Finally she said, “You are my distant descendant.”


“I am an AI, created by your descendants. No, you are right. I am your descendant. Had you not refused to accept defeat, resistance against the ET would have collapsed on one front after another. On behalf of all humanity and human history, I thank you.” Omega bowed deeply. Then he turned and sprang into the boat.


“Where are you going?” said Miyo anxiously.


“West, of course. There is work to do in China. The enemy is on the brink of victory, but that will change.”


“Will you return to us?”


“No, and it is better that we do not. We came to eradicate the enemy, not to interfere in any other way with your history. We must do everything to preserve the integrity of this stream, because once the enemy is destroyed, the stream will be complete. That is our mission, no more and no less.”


“And besides,” he said with a laugh as the boat stirred the water beneath. “I believe you despise any form of meddling. Isn’t that right?”


“Omega!”


The boat moved away quickly, was swallowed by the ship. A moment later the great sky ship rose into the air, dipped once, and accelerated out of sight. One instant it was hanging in the sky, the next there was only the echo of a titanic thrumming, like some great chord. After a long moment, it faded as well. There remained only the sound of waves on the beach and the crackling of dying fires. The soldiers stood in small groups, heads bent with weariness or staring in blank astonishment at the smoking field. Instinctively, they began to gather around Miyo.


“My queen…”


“What next?”


“What has happened?”


“We’ve won,” said Miyo, and exhaled deeply. “Our battle cry summoned the mighty host, just as the Laws foretold. The mononoké will not come again. Our descendants have come to destroy them all.”


She looked around her. The faces of the men were filled with doubt. Too much fear and suffering had been spun into a spell that would not release them. She needed something to break it. Then she saw the answer, lying on the sand.


“Let us bury the Messenger. We will build him a great tomb. Gather the bodies of the fallen and bury them together. And let us cry for their sakes, until the tears will flow no more.” At these words, the men seemed to understand that everything was over. They walked slowly out of the water and up the beach.


“Lady Miyo…” Kan was beside her, his eyes brimming with tears. He spoke so only Miyo could hear. “I wished the Messenger had never come. He took you away from me. But he died so deliverance would be ours.”


“Enough, Kan. It is over.”


“How could I ever have doubted him?” He began to cry. His heartbroken keening carried across the beach and was echoed by other voices, first on one side, then the other, till the gray shore seemed shrouded in sorrow.


Miyo grasped his hand. She felt a tenderness for this boy as he grieved for the Messenger, and she knew their journey together would continue for many years. He was the only one who understood her.


“I’m glad you’re with me, Kan.” Miyo wiped her misting eyes and stared ahead. She could not afford to cry. It was time for Queen Himiko to begin restoring the Land of Wa, to watch over the tomb and honor the teachings of the Messenger of the Laws.