CHAPTER 1










STAGE 448JAPAN A.D. 248










“Lady Miyo! Lady Miyo!” The boy’s voice rang through the grove of trees. He sounded angry, and a little scared.


A light smile crossed Miyo’s lips. She ignored the voice and walked up the narrow game path through a stand of mixed oaks. The air was far cooler here than in the lowlying basin where her palace stood. Still, she had to wipe her brow, sweating from the steepness of the path. Her hand was sticky with the powder that coated her face, hiding her tattoo. A look in the bronze mirror hidden at her breast would not have revealed a pretty sight.The keening of the cicadas felt loud enough to pierce her skull.


“Lady Miyo!”


The voice was closer now. The boy cutting was straight across the thicket. The sword at his waist rustled the underbrush, then he burst onto the path beside Miyo, gangly legs struggling to keep pace with her.


Miyo threw the boy a sidelong glance and almost burst out laughing. His face looked as if he’d landed in a puddle. His hair was festooned with swatches of spiderweb. A potter after a hard day’s work might have looked better.


Miyo finally paused. She turned, then gestured toward the boy’s face. “Slow down, Kan. You’ll spoil your good looks.”


“Don’t trouble yourself over me,” he replied, catching his breath. His gaze traveled over her face. Eyebrows arched, he pushed Miyo’s hand aside and touched her cheek. “My lady, your face looks even worse!”


“You needn’t be so truthful.”


“A person like you shouldn’t… Now, please don’t move.” Miyo tried to turn away, but Kan held her arm and began busily applying powder to her face, as if she were an errant daughter. The work soothed him.


Kan was the only male permitted to touch Miyo. She would not have had it otherwise; yet that was probably because he was still just a boy, too young to bind up his hair. With Kan’s motherly attentions complete, Miyo took her turn wiping his face. Still just a sprig, she thought.


By the time Miyo had finished carefully cleaning his face, the color had returned to Kan’s round cheeks. He was at that age when the jaw starts filling out and the profile sharpens, but those large, sulky eyes were nothing like those of a grown man. Miyo felt safe with him. Someday this fourteen-year-old would be a strapping specimen even taller than she was, but for now he was in no danger of breaking hearts.


Miyo was a virgin—in fact, as well as name—and it seemed likely she would remain one for some time.


“Just how far do you intend to go?” Kan grumbled, brushing shards of rock from his bare soles. “We’ve already walked fifty ri. If we don’t turn back now, we might not reach the palace before dark.”


“Why go back? If it comes to it, we can stop near Ikaruga and wait the night out there.”


“Please—don’t tease me.” Kan scowled. Teasing him was precisely the point, and Miyo was poised to continue, but his next words stopped her.


“Think of Joh. She’s so afraid when you are away.”


Joh was Kan’s sister. Plucked at random from the maids in the palace, she was compelled to stand in for the queen when Miyo was away. Of course, all she had to do was sit in the dim inner shrine, with no duties to speak of other than play the part, speak when spoken to, and be waited on hand and foot by Miyo’s capable maidservants. Yet such was not a welcome duty for youngsters like Kan and Joh, bound to a life of service and unaccustomed to being served as Miyo was.


“You’re right, Kan. It has been hard for her.”


“Well, then—” let’s return, he was about to say, but Miyo casually cut him off. “Yes. Let’s keep going.” She walked on. Kan brought up the rear with a sigh.


The mountain path quickly climbed higher. Here and there large boulders jutted through the moist black soil. Taller than the average male and toughened by her duties, Miyo clambered straight over them with little shortness of breath. Kan tried to scamper nimbly around them, but his meager diet betrayed him, and he quickly fell behind.


“Where,” Kan gasped, out of breath, “are we going?” Miyo had planned a surprise, but this was beginning to seem slightly cruel.


“To see the ocean.”


“The ocean!”


“You’ve never seen it, have you?” As Miyo spoke, they emerged onto the spine of the ridge. A fresh breeze hit their faces. Kan shielded his widening eyes from the glare and cried out in admiration.


The panorama before them stretched far to the west. A broad river ran north, along the foot of the mountains. At one point along its bank, an enormous host labored with digging tools, gouging the face of the plain. To the right, toward the north, stretched a lake surrounded by mud flats. The plain beyond the river was an endless carpet of paddy fields, verdant with rice seedlings. Farther out a harbor dotted with white sails, water shimmering in the sun.


The early summer sunlight flowed over the blue haze of the landscape. The scene was like nothing in the low-lying plain where they lived. There was the slightest whiff of ocean in the air. Kan filled his lungs with it.


“Is this what you came to see?” he asked.


“Yes. I heard you can see the ocean from Mount Shiki. Look there—the lower reaches of the Hatsuse River. It flows near the palace. Beyond is Lake Kusakae. On the canal from the lake to the sea is the harbor of Naniwa.”


“Are they building something along the river?”


“They’re straightening it. You gave my oracle to the ministers—the order to straighten the river’s course to the sea. Whenever there’s a heavy rain, floodwaters damage the crops. Have you forgotten?”


“Oh, that.” Kan shook his head. Such matters no doubt held little meaning for him. He was merely a conduit of communication between Miyo and her ministers; the significance of her oracles was wholly beyond him.


Yet in a sense, for Miyo it was no different. It seemed passing strange to see this mass of people, moved by her divination to change the face of the land. This feeling only grew stronger as she spoke again of the sights below.


“See there? That wide avenue coming down from the north is the Shiha Harbor Road. The town at the end of it is Suminoé Harbor. And beyond that, the Chinu Sea.”


“I see great ships. Enormous. Do they come from Wei?”


“Perhaps,” said Miyo. Then it occurred to her that the ships might hail from somewhere else. “Or from Kushina or Akuso.”


“Maybe they’re from Kentak. Or Roma.”


Miyo tried not to laugh. Not likely, she thought. Innocent Kan thinks a ship can take you anywhere, but Kushina and Akuso are even farther than Wei, and they say Roma and Kentak are on the other side of the world, a voyage of several hundred days. Sea trade with those lands is decades in the future.


Yet it was a fact that ships from these distant countries had reached the Land of Wa. Half the vessels sent on the return diplomatic mission were lost, but the rest survived to make it back, perhaps protected by the scapegoats they took with them on the voyage. They returned to Miyo’s realm with astonishing articles of foreign culture from countries beyond the empires of China. Many more ships would surely ply those waters—someday.


“If we went with one of those ships, we could visit countries we’ve never seen,” said Kan.


Was that what he really wanted? Or was it something that he thought could never really happen? With one eye on Kan’s enraptured profile, Miyo sank deeper into thought. This world really was a mystery.


Her thoughts traveled back twenty-odd years, when chaos reigned the length and breadth of Wa. Wars over water and territory among the great clans—Nu, Toma, and the rest—had embroiled dozens of smaller chiefdoms. Countless people died, countless villages had been put to the torch.


Still, such terrible conflict could not drag on forever. There were men of compassion among the clans, men who knew Wa would be laid waste if the fighting did not stop. A ruler was raised over them all, the nations made peace, and since that day the Land of Wa had been free from strife. Relations were sometimes tense with the San’on lands, with Kunu and the other chiefdoms that stayed outside the union. But for the most part, Heaven and Earth were at peace, and an era of plenty was underway.


None of this would have been possible without the Laws of the Messenger.


The Laws were recorded on a single scroll handed down from a time lost to memory. Of the many chiefdoms of Wa, only Kunu did not possess a copy of the Laws. Their origin was unknown, but the meaning was plain. Calamity is part of the fabric of this world and is certain to come, but those who join hands and work together will stave off disaster. And in the end, a mighty host will come to deliver victory.


To Miyo, the Laws were little more than stale platitudes. For the clan leaders, they were sacred and inviolable, and the headmen were apt to invoke them in the most trifling of circumstances, for once invoked they must be obeyed. Had the Laws not commanded cooperation between the clans, the fighting would likely have gone on without end, no matter how great grew the weariness of the people.


Strange, too, was it that the Laws were known to each and every inhabitant of Wa. Stranger still, thought Miyo, was the fact that they were known in Wei and the other Chinese empires, as well as in Kushina, Kentak, and Maya.


It was said that seventy or eighty years had passed since the first ships from Kentak, piloted by red-skinned people over the vast ocean beyond the Chinu Sea, had reached Wa. At first, using gestures, they requested fresh water and an exchange of laws. When the leader of the small chiefdom where the visitors made landfall did as he was asked and showed them the Laws, he discovered that the visitor’s own laws, written in their language on a sheet of animal hide, matched his scroll down to the smallest detail. The headman was astonished, but the red-skinned captain merely gave a knowing nod.


Exchanges progressed, and at each port the Kentak sailors visited they demonstrated the universality of the Laws. It seemed that all peoples under Heaven were bound by the same obligation to join together and stave off disasters. Without this accident of history, collaboration among the chiefdoms of Wa might never have been possible. For Miyo, the Laws were platitudes, but their influence could not be denied. Because of the Laws, Miyo was forced to serve the state.


“Indeed,” Miyo said to herself. She looked down at the rich fields and bustling seaports spread out before her. What would this world have become without the Laws of the Messenger? War without end, killing without limits, each individual cut off from all others.


Throughout the land, all agreed on their good fortune. But Miyo paid for it with her freedom.


She felt a wave of revulsion at the thought of her enormous power and absently took a step forward. Then she turned, her reverie broken by the sound of Kan’s bronze sword leaving its sheathe.


“Lady Miyo—” His voice was charged with apprehension. “Lady Miyo, come back.”


“What?”


“Your domain ends here. You are forbidden to leave it.”


“Nonsense, the view is poor. See, beyond that tree…”


“Miyo!” He was pleading now, his voice rising almost to a scream. Miyo froze. She was fond of Kan, and he of her. She could not abandon him. They shared an affection for Kan’s sister serving at the palace. Neither of them was ready to escape.


So this was it. Her bond to the state, to headmen, officials, ministers. Of all the shackles they had placed on her, this was by far the cruelest.


Miyo stepped back quietly. She turned and smiled. “Forgive me. Let’s go home.”


Kan’s air of profound relief reminded Miyo how much she hated the state—and the Laws of the Messenger, bringer of peace to the world.


“We must hurry. Better to return to Ikaruga and take the post horses from there. But please step carefully,” said Kan.


Miyo kept her eyes on his back as he strode ahead of her. She couldn’t help wishing he were a little older. If only we could run away together, escape the wiles of the state…


Something shook the underbrush close by the path. The cicadas fell silent.


In one smooth motion, Kan drew his sword again. His stare bored into the thicket. Miyo stepped behind him and to one side, arming herself with an oak branch. It was less of a weapon than the sacred staff she used in divination rituals at the palace, but better than nothing.


Kan called out, “Who goes there?”


Wild dogs make no sound. If this were an ape, it would retreat. No, Miyo thought, it must be a woodcutter. Or a hunter. She hoped it was. Then there would be little to worry about. The common folk would not know her; she could easily talk her way out of things.


Bandits? Then they would be in real trouble.


Miyo swallowed. The hair on Kan’s arms stood up. The thicket parted and a towering shape emerged as if from nowhere, its shadow falling over them.


At first they could not grasp what they were seeing.


The creature stood on two legs, like the bears that roamed the eastern lands. It was perhaps twice the height of a man. The two of them together could not have encircled its torso even if they’d clasped hands. Huge faceted eyes, insect eyes, twitched in their sockets, peering down at Miyo and Kan.


The creature was built like a bear, but everything else about it was unlike anything they had ever seen. The body was completely hairless, its hide red like a coating of rust. The way it leaned forward, long arms dangling, was more ape than bear. Here and there, whitish bones peeked through its coarse skin. The fingerless right arm was bludgeon-shaped. The left limb was like a scythe, yet sharper than any blade Miyo and Kan had ever seen. But they could not absorb all these details clearly. They were simply overwhelmed.


The creature’s body gave off a pungent, smoldering smell. It eyed them intently and emitted a repulsive insect drone.


It is a law of nature—almost without exception—that the large prey on the small. Miyo and Kan knew this only too well. Deep in the mountains of this land were places where enormous creatures held sway, beyond the reach of men.


They were frozen with terror, struck dumb and drenched with sweat, their knees quivering. Except for a tiny boon of luck, they would have been taken where they stood. But luck did come, in the guise of a tiny deerfly. It flew, buzzing, landed on Miyo’s ankle, sank its proboscis into her flesh, and began to feed. The stinging pain brought her to her senses.


“A mononoké!”


As she recovered her voice, her sense of danger reasserted itself. She slapped Kan’s back with her open palm. Startled into awareness, the boy roared from the pit of his bowels and plunged forward.


“Eeeyaahhh!”


His sword, a green-black arc, struck the mononoké on the crown of its head. One multifaceted eye collapsed inward with a crumpling sound, but the monster showed no sign of pain. It raised its club arm high and brought it down with a dull hum. The club struck Kan’s arm with brutal force, tossing him aside as if he were a puppy. He tumbled across the ground in a cloud of dirt. In an instant Miyo was at his side, stroking his battered arm. “Kan!”


He grunted in pain and winced as he got to his feet. “Not my sword arm,” he muttered. He meant I can keep fighting, but that left arm was limp, dangling at his side. Very soon it would be swollen and black. “Go, Miyo.”


“Don’t talk like a fool.”


“You are the fool. Hurry!”


The mononoké dropped its head and charged, the underbrush parting with a hissing sound. Its scythe arm was raised to strike. Miyo threw her arms around Kan and rolled violently to one side. The scythe boomed past them.


Miyo raised her head from the sticky grass to see a tree thicker than her thigh toppling, sliced through. Cold spread along her spine. The beast turned and moved in closer. The grass murmured. The immense creature’s gliding, weightless silence was unnerving.


Will it eat us, like a bear? No—it has no mouth. It seeks no food. It hunts only to kill.


Without a sound, Kan leaped to his feet. His sword struck the monster’s flank like a hornet’s stinger. There was a cold, metallic clang and the weapon rebounded, shattering. Miyo took in Kan’s dazed look and the sword’s broken tip as it flew away, end over end. Was this monster made of stone? Of steel?


Despite her astonishment, Miyo maneuvered to one side of the beast. As it raised the scythe, she struck with all her strength, but the branch merely shivered from the impact. Then a tremendous blow knocked her flat.


“Kan!”


Kan threw himself atop Miyo, shielding her with his body. The scythe opened his back. To Miyo, everything seemed to be taking place in some other world.


“Kan…”


“Quickly…” The boy tried to speak.


“Kan?”


“Go quickly…” A whispered groan. Bright blood welled up from the gash, pooling on his back in a crimson lake. The mononoké emitted a creaking sound. It might be tiring, but it showed no signs of breaking off the attack. Again, it raised its club. Before it could strike, Miyo hoisted Kan’s slender frame onto her back and fled, stumbling forward as she ran.


“You think I’d leave you?” she yelled.


She heard a series of sharp cracks, the mononoké raking the standing timber as it advanced. Its footfalls swept closer with horrifying speed. Miyo plunged forward, staggering, stumbling, slipping.


Something hissed close by her ear. Miyo crouched lower, to crawl, scrabbling on all fours, climbing the slope, her pulse hammering. She gasped for air and pitched forward, eating a mouthful of dirt. She felt the rush of air as giant legs planted themselves on either side of her.


Miyo could see the western ocean shining in the distance. She looked up at the belly of the beast as it stooped over her. Strange, she thought. To die like this. We could have gone the other way, over the far side of the ridge.


Was this retribution for daring to leave her realm?


A sudden sequence of huge booms split the sky over her head. The shockwave pressed her flat against the earth.


“Bolt fire ineffective. Target appears to have withdrawn voluntarily. No counters, traps, or criticals. I’d say this is a rather low-grade RET, a newborn Reaper.”


“Spare me the commentary. Any nests in the area? What about FETs?”


Two voices—one female, one male—but Miyo understood nothing they said. Her terror was unabated. Whatever it was that had brought down that roar like thunder over her head, it could only be another mononoké.


She struggled with bleary eyes to peer around her. The monster was gone. In its place stood a man, tall and powerfully built. He was arrayed like a soldier, encased in soot-blackened armor webbed with cracks. A helmet completely covered his head, its visor concealing his face. In his right hand he gripped an enormous sword. He was clearly the source of the male voice but was like no man Miyo had ever seen.


“Both humans are viable. The female has minor injuries. The male has lost a considerable amount of blood. Loss of consciousness in six minutes.” Again the female voice, but no one was there. The soldier approached and spoke to Miyo.


“Let me help the boy.”


Miyo could not understand him, but she knew he was no threat by the way he held his sword, low and casually. All she could think of was Kan. She eased him onto the ground. The horrible wound on his back seemed far beyond help, but she tore a strip from her hem and tried to bandage him.


“Subject may survive one hour if blood loss is halted. If he’s to be left here, antibiotics are required.”


The female voice. Miyo glanced up. To her amazement, the voice seemed to be coming from the sword—and the man looked to the sword as he answered.


“Later. What about FETs?”


“None detected, not even a comm net. This suggests that the RET has not been fully activated. Probably a stray,” said the sword.


“It may be a stray, but it’s also a threat. Location?”


“Thirty-five meters from your position and holding. O—look out!”


A log hurtled from the trees, striking the soldier like a battering ram and flinging him through the air. The sword flew out of his hand and plunged into the ground, inches from Miyo. The mononoké scudded out of the woods and onto the ridge. It pounced on the soldier.


“Sword!” As the soldier shouted, the monster’s heavy club swung down. With astonishing speed the soldier sprang to his feet, out of harm’s way. He touched his hip and a swarm of small stones flew at the beast and exploded in a flurry of detonations. The mononoké flinched for just a moment, then advanced as if it had hardly noticed. Swinging club, then scythe, then club again, it pressed the attack.


“Throw me, woman.” Miyo was transfixed by the fighting, but when she heard the voice of the sword she wheeled in surprise. It spoke again.


“Throw me to him. Now!”


The blade was huge, gently curved. The spine was milky white, but the edge was transparent and shone with a blinding radiance. This was nothing like Kan’s sword, neither in make nor material. And it spoke!


“Quickly, woman!”


“Give me Cutty!” As sword and soldier called out to Miyo in the same moment, she understood. She wrenched the sword from the soil, marveling at its unexpected weight, and took a running start before flinging it through the air. Turning through its arc, the sword plunged grip first toward the soldier, who sprang to catch it.


The blade flashed white.


The giant’s upraised club arm dropped away like a stalk of grass beneath a razor. The swinging scythe shattered like glass. As the mononoké staggered, the sword swept across its belly. The soldier leaped atop the creature and hacked at the bug-like head, severing it from the body. Then he plunged the sword into the creature’s neck and twisted it. “Burn!” he roared.


From the stump came a hissing sound like hot iron plunged in water, then a thin plume of smoke. The dismembered behemoth toppled backward as the soldier jumped down from it. The soldier stowed his sword in the sheath across his back and walked over to Miyo.


Surely this was some waking dream. How could Miyo have defeated such a being? She might have needed a hundred soldiers or more, and a stout fort. They might have lured it into a deep pit. That was the only defense she could imagine. Yet this man took mere seconds to cleave the horror into pieces. Miyo knew no other legend to match it, and so she knew him, the ancient sage whose word was proclaimed throughout Heaven and Earth. There could be no other answer.


“You are…the Messenger? Of the Laws?”


The soldier spoke over his shoulder. “Language.”


“There seems to be some vowel shift relative to the root stream, but the language is still recognizable as archaic Japanese. Shall I translate?”


“Confirm the era and I’ll do it myself. Chronocompass reads two, four, eight CE. Yours?”


“The same.”


The soldier nodded and spoke to Miyo. “I am Messenger O. Do you understand?” O. The word for king, Miyo thought. “I understand. You are Messenger…O.”


“I bring tidings of war.”


Miyo lifted the hand she’d been pressing against Kan’s wound and bowed her head deeply. “Messenger O, I thank you. You have delivered us.”


“Save it for later. Let’s have a look at the boy.”


Miyo wordlessly yielded her place beside Kan. The Messenger leaned over the boy and touched his wound. Miyo caught a glimpse of blood-soaked white muscle through a gap in the bandage and reflexively turned away. After a few moments she looked back. Her eyes widened when she saw that the gash had been closed by a thin film.


“His wound…” Miyo faltered.


“There’s nothing I can do about the blood. He needs rest,” said the Messenger.


“I have no words to thank you.” Miyo knelt, touching her forehead to the ground. Her eyes brimmed with tears of relief, but in another part of her mind she was beginning to feel uneasy. How would her ministers react to the coming of the Messenger, creator of the Laws? No doubt she would have to perform a divination to determine whether this event was propitious or not. But would tortoise shell or deer bone divination be enough? For an event of such momentous importance, someone might demand a sacrifice divination—the beheading of a condemned prisoner, with the future gleaned in the splash of blood.


And Miyo would have to preside over the sacrifice. There is no need to go that far, she thought. Miyo wanted to avoid a sacrifice at all costs. The Messenger stood.


“Tell me, woman. Is this your country? Are you a slave?”


“No.”


“An outsider? Do you know anyone living nearby? I need information on local geography and the state of affairs in this country. Do you also call this place Mount Shigi?” asked the Messenger.


“Shiki. I know no one near here.”


“You must know the way down the mountain, at least. I need to find a village. Show me the way.”


“Why?”


“I came to meet the ruler of this land. He must prepare for war.”


Miyo looked up at him. The ruler? Did the Messenger say he had come to meet not officials of state but the nominal ruler? If so, there might be a way out—a way to force her ministers accept him. What she needed was to link this strange occurrence with everything she had learned over the years. It just might work. No—she was certain it would. After all, if this were a matter for divination, why had she not foreseen it?


“Messenger O.” Miyo stood tall and looked straight into his eyes, so as not to be intimidated by his towering presence. “I am no foreigner. When I spoke before, I meant that I am not a slave.”


“I see. A princess, then?”


“No. I rule.”


Miyo wiped her cheeks with care, revealing the tattoo of the shaman. She opened her tunic, exposing one breast, and drew forth the palm-sized bronze mirror. Carried as proof of her identity, this was the first time she had actually used it. She drew herself up, as if pronouncing an oracle, and solemnly spoke the name she had been given by kings and ministers.


“I am Himiko, Ruler of Wa, Friend of Wei, Queen of the land of Yamatai.”










They waited until dusk to set out. In the early morning hours they reached the capital of Yamatai, on the plain of Makimuku. They had traveled under the cover of darkness so that no one would see the imposing visitor, but that was not the only reason for the secrecy. The Messenger had to be received at the palace in a fitting manner. It would not do for him to slink inside.


Miyo’s plan was this: First, she would conduct a divination at her own initiative, proclaim the oracle, and dispatch a party to the mountains. There, as predicted, they would discover the Messenger. Perhaps they would see signs of his power in the mononoké’s dismembered corpse. That way, the ministers would be unable to raise objections to receiving him. All in all, this was far better than telling them she had stumbled on the Messenger during the course of an outing.So Miyo did not return directly to the palace but brought the Messenger to kinsmen of Kan on the outskirts of the capital. Kan’s people received their unexpected visitors with astonishment, but when they saw Kan, borne on the Messenger’s back and gravely wounded, they dropped everything to tend him. Miyo watched silently from a corner of the tiny pit-house as Kan’s relatives boiled water, wiped the child clean, ground healing herbs, and applied a poultice to his injuries.


While they nursed Kan, his father and white-haired grandsire glanced frequently at the visitors. Miyo ignored them, pretending not to notice. But the Messenger—sitting hunched over in the confines of the tiny hut—seemed nervous. “Queen Himiko,” he whispered.


“Miyo.”


“Miyo. You rule this land, don’t you? The court physicians, or your maidservants? Couldn’t they just as easily—”


“The ruler of Wa does not leave her palace. The ruler does not leave, therefore neither do the court physicians.”


“Of course…but can’t you tell them the boy was attacked outside the palace?” He glanced at the old man, who was taking care not to look at them directly. “Can you trust these people?”


“Far better than my own ministers. We’ve known each other long, since I was a mere child.” For a brief moment, Miyo’s thoughts wandered back twenty years, to a time before the chiefdoms chose a shaman queen to rule over all. She had been the daughter of a village headman, covered with mud, playing hide and seek in the grass. Her family was very close to Kan’s, and they had showered her with millet cakes and gifts of fruit.


Traces of that closeness endured, and when Miyo made one of her frequent visits, Kan’s people received her warmly, without question. But now a barrier of reverence and fear divided them. Miyo was here not as friend, but as sovereign; now too there was the Messenger. Plainly this was someone extraordinary. And so as ever—if not so much as with her maidservants, who dared not even meet her gaze—Miyo was cut off from the warmth of human tenderness.


The firelight showed some color returning to Kan’s pale face, where not long ago he had seemed to be at death’s door. The Messenger turned to Miyo, who was staring fixedly ahead. “I think he’s out of danger.”


Miyo took the hint. She rose to her feet. “Let’s go outside. It’s too crowded here.”


They stepped outside and crossed the moat that encircled the cluster of houses. The chorusing of frogs enveloped them. No star gleamed through the thin cloud cover. The grainy moon, almost full, cast a gentle glow over the paddy fields. The Messenger sat down on the embankment.


“Agriculture is far ahead of schedule,” he said quietly. “You’re diverting the Yamato River, aren’t you? That wasn’t supposed to happen till the Edo era.”


“Eh-doh?”


“Far in the future. But this whole area—it’s very impressive. You should only just be starting to carve cropland out of the silt. Overall, I’d say this is three centuries, in some ways, maybe thirteen hundred years ahead of the root chronology.”


“I detected fore-and-aft rigged oceangoing vessels with keels in the harbor at Suminoé. The technology of seafaring is a millennium ahead of schedule.” Miyo heard the sword’s voice, but did not ask what it meant. Her lack of understanding frustrated her, but at the moment there was something she had to know.


“Messenger O, what did you mean about preparing for war?”


“Ah. That. Well, you must fight, or you will lose.”


“Lose what?” asked Miyo.


“In the near term, your lives. Ultimately, your species.” The word of the Laws, thought Miyo. Disaster is inevitable. Join hands or die. The Messenger turned to look at her. “You don’t believe me?”


“Who is the enemy?”


“They come from beyond this world. We call them ETs. Like the one you saw today, but traveling in packs. What you saw was real. So you must believe me.”


“But everyone knows the mononoké are real,” said Miyo.


“Do they, now?”


“Many tales are told of them, in Wa and in the Chinese empires. They are terribly strong. Merciless monsters, yet not invincible, not like the spirits one can neither see nor hear. We people survive only because we continue to slaughter and vanquish them. But today was my first encounter with one. The village headmen say a plague of the beasts happens every few decades.”


“They’re right.” The Messenger pounded a fist on the flat of his hand. “Wonderful. Excellent. If people in this era see things as you say, my task will be that much easier. Sometimes all I have to do is mention the creatures and people start making ready to flee. That’s not going to help. My message is this: the ETs must be destroyed. Instead of fleeing in fear, we must annihilate them.”


“But why?” Miyo slowly ran her eyes over the soldier’s well-muscled body. “Did you not dispatch it with ease? Why not do the same with the rest?”


“I could—fighting them individually. The one I killed was a stray, separated from the pack. Probably from a colony that arrived in ages past. What you saw today was nothing compared to the terror of the horde. Don’t you have records of anything like that?”


Miyo paused, then spoke. “Yes. They say the empire of the Hsiung-nu, in the far west of China, was destroyed by them. The Hsiung-nu joined forces with the surrounding kingdoms to stop a huge army of mononoké, but were wiped out. It seems our good relations with Wei, Kushina, and Roma came out of this. I never believed the story myself. So it was true after all.”


“Very.”


Miyo shuddered. An army of mononoké, strong enough to annihilate an empire? These were grim tidings indeed. “If these creatures are so frightful, I don’t see that we have the strength to vanquish them.”


“No, it’s possible. They don’t come in force initially. First they build small nests and build up their numbers. To find and destroy a nest before they’ve had a chance to multiply is within your capabilities. Cutty will handle search and location. I need you to mobilize your forces. But first you must learn to make steel. Bronze swords like the boy’s won’t do at all.”


“We know about steel,” Miyo said. The Messenger turned, his posture betraying disbelief. Miyo was glad of his astonishment, but checked herself from rejoicing. “Much steel was produced in Isumo, but it was forbidden. The mountains were left barren and rain washed down the poison. Is there a way to keep the poison from escaping?”


“No. Even if there were, we can’t afford to worry about your environment. I want you to lift the ban and start producing as much as you can. Well, well. So you know about steel.”


The Messenger nodded slowly, seemingly satisfied. Miyo suddenly sensed a deep fatigue behind his words and gestures, something she hadn’t noticed by day. The weariness didn’t seem physical—he’d carried Kan fifty ri, almost fourteen Roman miles—and she’d had trouble just keeping up with him. As far as physical fatigue was concerned, she needed rest more than he did. No, this was something deeper, a weariness of the soul. On impulse, Miyo leaned toward him. “Don’t you ever take off your helmet?”


“Of course.”


The Messenger turned toward her, grasped his close-fitting, bell-shaped helmet with both hands and lifted it off. Miyo was astonished to see a wiry, masculine face covered with stubble, close-cropped hair the color of dry grass, deep-set eyes, and a prominent nose. As he peered at Miyo—she couldn’t be certain in the darkness, but even his eyes seemed to be of some pale hue—the Messenger cocked his head amiably. “You don’t seem surprised.”


“I’ve seen foreigners before.” But she struggled to conceal her surprise. Somehow, this was exactly how she thought he’d look. He’s exhausted. His smile could not hide the shadow behind his sunken cheeks and the crooked line of his mouth. Even Miyo, with no experience of men, knew a single day of hardship could not cast such a deep shadow over one so strong.


“Where did you come from?” In spite of herself, Miyo felt a growing interest in this man. “What happened to you? You seem so…gaunt.”


“Do I look that bad?” The Messenger seemed slightly surprised, but then he smiled. “Don’t worry about me. You’re the one who should be resting. Walking that far without rest is hard for a woman. You must be tired.”


“Not at all. This day was easy compared to rituals at the palace.”


“But you’ve had nothing all day except swamp water. At least get something to eat.”


The Messenger’s repeated urgings made Miyo suspect he was trying to change the subject. Perhaps he didn’t care to have others nosing about in his affairs. But she was about to entrust her fate and that of her people to this man. She could not remain in the dark about him.


Suddenly the sword spoke quietly. “O, heads up.”


In one movement he was standing, sword in hand, but after peering into the darkness he just as quickly relaxed. Miyo turned to see something atop a rock. Nearby, an old woman was sliding backward across the ground in an attitude of reverence. It was Kan’s grandmother.


Miyo went to look. There was a tray with hot rice porridge and dried cakes, enough for two.


“Sustenance. Now we can talk a bit longer.” Miyo brought the tray over. She watched the Messenger as she set out the plates. The cakes were made from dried dates, carefully set aside last autumn. Miyo tasted one. An inexpressibly delicious sweetness melted across her tongue.


The Messenger stared at the porridge a long time before taking a bowl in both hands and inhaling half the contents in one go. He sighed deeply. “My first food in twelve centuries.”


Miyo paused. She returned the cake she’d been eating to its dish and silently passed him the entire tray. It was as she thought. This man had traveled here from some far country.


“Where did you come from?”


“Before this? I was on ops in the New Kingdom, in Egypt…no, I’d better start at the beginning.” With no further hesitation, he began devouring the food. Then he glanced at Miyo. “You’d best keep this to yourself.”


“I intend to.”


“I come from a world 2,300 years in the future. But not your future. My journey spans many timestreams that are doomed to disappear.”


Miyo held her breath and settled back to listen.