CHAPTER 10










STAGE ΩJAPAN A.D. 2010










The flagship Secundus Minutius Hora settled quietly into its sea berth at Osaka Space Terminal. Fireworks exploded in the sky and tugs sprayed fountains of water. Pathfinder Omega was on the bridge, but hardly noticed the celebration. He was absorbed in the memories passed to him on that wave-beaten shore. At first he had resisted the idea of serving as the repository for another AI’s memories, but the astonishing history that streamed through his comm link erased any doubts he might have had about his assignment.


For centuries, historians believed the Messengers were the stuff of ancient legends, but in the eighteenth century they began to reexamine the old tales. Gradually it dawned on them that this strange oral tradition, stretching from Egypt across Africa and unconnected with any indigenous religion, might actually be rooted in historical fact. The stories, known collectively by names like “The Four Hundred Stream Chronicles” and “Saga of the Insect Crusade,” could be interpreted as a metaphor for a temporal war extending far into the past. The oldest surviving versions of the story contained more than three hundred linked chapters. But for reasons unknown, all versions of the tale seemed to end abruptly, and investigators searched without success for the final chapter. Still, the different versions were startlingly similar, even when found in widely separated and otherwise unrelated cultures.In the twentieth century, matters were decided in favor of historical fact when traces of antimatter were discovered deep in Africa’s Victoria Crater. Until then, scientists had assumed the enormous depression was caused by a devastating meteor strike. Now it was clear that some sort of titanic struggle had taken place around 400 A.D.


Once the technology of time travel was a reality, the AIs dispatched into the past were configured for scholarly investigation as well as armed confrontation. Pathfinder Omega’s ship was the first to come upon the struggle as it was taking place. Immediately, he realized the importance of recovering O’s memories.


Still, the sheer size of the data partition was beyond anything he had imagined. Here was every detail of O’s existence, beginning with his inception in an alternate timestream, his encounters with the ET in the twenty-second century and beyond, and his desperate struggles across more than four hundred parallel universes. Omega wandered this compendium of memory with stunned admiration. It was like a vast, silent labyrinth abandoned without regret by its builder. The riches of this data trove were beyond price, both for their scientific value and as the record of a hero’s exploits.


But for Omega, such notions of value paled into insignificance compared to his direct experience of the data itself. He wandered through O’s memories as if they were his own. To know such an entity—no, to inherit such a man—was a truly unexpected gift. And as the war on the ET spread from this secure universe to alternate timestreams, the lessons of Messenger O’s memories were destined to play a decisive role.


Yet as he merged his mind with the data, Omega was baffled. The emotional traces he had expected to find were strangely absent. There seemed to be no pride in victory, no shame in defeat. Instead, there was a persistent thread, some residue of a thought that had carried O through untold years of striving. Whatever it was, it seemed to have been the raw material of his personality; the stuff of life that had formed the core of his being.


What is this? Omega had encountered nothing like it. It was a tiny, indefinable void, a mold once filled with something but now the essence of emptiness. The immanence of whatever had dwelt there long ago was palpable but always out of reach, like a phantom beyond the edge of his vision. It was something lost, never to be recovered, yet relentlessly pursued nevertheless.


Like a frozen caress, the void whispered its loneliness. Omega felt growing astonishment. As the core of O’s self spread through his mind, he felt unaccountably happy, as if loneliness were the single emotion he associated with beauty or joy. It was beauty and joy. He felt a remarkable sense of peace. Was this what had driven Messenger Original for over a hundred millennia? That was something the data could not tell him.


“Are you crying?” asked the flag officer in surprise. Omega returned to the present with a jolt and touched his face. It was streaked with tears. “No. It’s nothing.”


“The gangway’s out,” said the officer brightly. “Sounds like quite a celebration.” Omega rose and made his way to the portside hatch. As he stepped, blinking into the sun, onto the head of the long gangway, he understood the twinkle in the officer’s eye. This was no mere celebration. It looked as if half of Japan’s capital was crowded onto the space terminal’s two-hundred acre apron, waving and cheering.


For the enemy, it was the beginning of the end of their reign of terror over the branching streams of human history. The species would soon reach out across time to wreak an icy vengeance, and that was reason enough for celebration. But this was almost too much.


Pathfinder Alpha stepped out onto the gangway behind him. “I might have known. The Temporals have to prove their money was well spent. It must have cost a fortune to shut down the port for this.”


Omega smiled. “Oh, don’t be such a cynic. This is exactly the way things were destined to be.”


Alpha flashed a smile of his own, strong white teeth over which black skin stretched. “What happened to you? You’re the original cynic.”


“Yes. Something has changed,” said Omega. He descended to the apron. The gangway ended in a large semicircle ringed by luminaries from the Ministry for Temporal Administration and the Global Confederation of Nations. Closer to the gangway was a line of young women, each holding a large bouquet of flowers. Just as Omega felt the old frown forming at the sight of all this choreography, one of the women stepped forward. When he saw her, all cynicism vanished again.


“Welcome home, Pathfinder.” She held her bouquet out with slender arms. Her accent was slightly different from the lilt of standard Osakan. Her hair was jet black, her skin sun-browned. A curious, snake-like tattoo circled her upper arm in a crimson ring. Hanging from a silver chain around her neck was a single curved magatama bead. Omega stared; it looked like the real thing. For an instant he felt oddly disoriented. He couldn’t decide whether he was looking at something ancient and barbaric or starkly contemporary. Then he realized the girl was from a region east of Osaka, where a cone-shaped mountain rose abruptly from the plain and the people carefully preserved some of the ancient forms of dress and speech.


“Listen,” he said with a strange urgency. “Are you from Makimuku?”


“What?” The girl looked stunned. “How did you know? I was born there.”


“And your name?”


The girl’s eyes widened, and for an instant something flickered deep inside them. She stared at Omega. “Do I know you?” she said finally, a bit awkwardly.


“I doubt it.”


“I’m Sayo.”


“Sayo. That’s a pretty name,” he said. Then something inside him cried out from a place far beyond memory, like a hand stretched out longingly to touch the moon.


Just as awkwardly, he asked her, “Can I call you later?”


“Really?” Her eyes widened again. “You mean it?” She blushed. Omega nodded and took the bouquet.










ABOUT THE AUTHOR










Born in 1975 in Gifu Prefecture, Issui Ogawa is rapidly becoming known as one of Japan’s premier SF writers. His 1996 debut, First a Letter from Popular Palace, won the Shueisha JUMP Novel Grand Prix. The Sixth Continent (2003), a two-volume novel about settlement on the moon, garnered the 35th Seiun Prize. A collection of his short stories won the 2005 Best SF Poll, and “The Drifting Man,” included in that collection, was awarded the 37th Seiun Prize for domestic short stories. Other works include Land of Resurrection, Free Lunch Era, Fortress in a Strange Land, and Guiding Star. Ogawa is a principal member of the Space Authors Club.










HAIKASORU—The Future Is Japanese










The Lord of the Sands of Time


Only the past can save the future as the cyborg O travels from the 26th century to ancient Japan and beyond. With the help of the princess Miyo and a ragtag troop of warriors from across history, O has a chance to save humanity and his own soul, but will it be at the cost of his life?


All You Need Is KILL


It’s battle armor versus aliens when the Mimics invade Earth. Private Kiriya dies in battle only to find himself reborn every day to fight again. Time is not on Kiriya’s side, but he does have one ally: the American super-soldier known as the Full Metal Bitch.


ZOO


A man receives a photo of his girlfriend every day in the mail…so that he can keep track of her body’s decomposition. A deathtrap that takes a week to kill its victims. Haunted parks and airplanes held in the sky by the power of belief. These are just a few of the stories by Otsuichi, Japan’s master of dark fantasy.


Usurper of the Sun


Schoolgirl Aki is one of the few witnesses to construction on the surface of Mercury. Soon an immense ring has been built around the sun and the Earth has plunged into chaos. While the nations of the world prepare for war, Aki grows up with a thirst for knowledge and a hunger to make first contact with the enigmatic Builders. Winner of Japan’s prestigious Seiun Award!


Battle Royale: The Novel


The best-selling tour de force from Koshun Takami in a new edition, with an author’s afterword and bonus material.


Brave Story


The paperback edition of the Batchelder Award-winning fantasy novel by Miyuki Miyabe.


Visit us at www.haikasoru.com