CHAPTER


4 The Wandering Age










As I recall of this, half a century has come to pass. Twenty years ago our path crossed Pluto's orbit. Earth had left the solar system for good, continuing its journey in the cold vastness of outer space alone.


I last visited the surface more than a dozen years ago accompanied by my son and daughter-in-law, a blond haired, blue-eyed girl. She was heavily pregnant then.


After arriving on the surface, the first thing I noticed was that I could not see the Earth Engines' massive beams even though I knew they were all running at full power. The Earth's atmosphere had disappeared, leaving nothing for the plasma's glow to diffract against. I saw strange translucent yellow and green crystals scattered across the Earth's surface. They were made of solid oxygen and nitrogen; our frozen atmosphere.


Interestingly enough, the atmosphere had not frozen evenly across the Earth's surface. Instead, it had formed irregular bulges, like small translucent hills. On the frozen, once flat ocean they gave birth to a new and alien landscape. Above, the stars of the Milky Way stretched unmoving across the sky. They too seemed frozen. Their light, however, was bright enough to dazzle the eyes, if one looked long enough.


The Earth Engines will now run for 500 years without interruption, accelerating the Earth to 0.5 percent of the speed of light. The Earth will then cruise, shooting through space at this incredible speed for 1,300 years. Then, when the Earth has completed two-thirds of its journey, we will again turn the direction of the Earth Engines and the Earth will begin its 500-year deceleration. After 2,400 years of travel the Earth will finally reach its new home, Proxima Centauri. Over the course of a century it will be docked into orbit around the star, becoming its planet.






In time, I will be gone,


So far our voyage wandering,


But call me at the dawn


When the East glows in light rising.


In time, I will be gone,


So long past the journey began,


But call me at the dawn


When the sky above shines blue again.


In time, I will be gone,


So distant our solar story,


But call me at the dawn


When the trees bloom with fresh glory…








Every time I hear that song, warmth flows through my stiff, aging body and my dry, old eyes moisten once more. Before my mind's eye the three suns of Alpha Centauri rise in procession, bathing life in their warm light. The solid atmosphere has melted, once again rising as blue sky. Two-thousand-year-old seeds are reborn from the thawed soil, covering the Earth in green. I see my great-grandchildren, a hundred generations removed, laugh and play in these green fields. Clear streams cross the grassland, giving home to small silver fishes… I see Kayoko, running towards me across the green Earth; she is young and beautiful, like an angel…






Oh, Earth, my wandering Earth…






(END)








More Wonderful Works of Liu Cixin are available on the Kindle store, free to borrow for prime clients. Check out the author's Amazon page: http://www.amazon.com/Cixin-Liu/e/B007JP96JU






We want to hear from you! We welcome all your comments, suggestions, criticisms and ideas!


As a Chinese publisher, we are very interested in the opinions of our Western readers and the author welcomes your feedback and the opportunity to improve his work. We are happy to offer anyone who reviews one of our stories and tells us about - and anyone who just sends us some feedback - another science-fiction story free of charge.






We also appreciate recommendations and feedback on Twitter, Facebook, forums or other channels. A free story can also be yours if you notify us of such contributions by email. This free story can be yours in addition to the one we offer for a review!