18


MIELI AND THE JEWELLED CHAIN






Mieli pilots the Leblanc to Saturn through a Sobornost storm.


The ship is an extension of her mind, and flying it is like soaring in a dream. The EM spectrum is a warm glow on her skin. The engines are her blazing wings.


In a boiling space of gamma ray lasers and raion swarms, it is almost not enough.


With a relentless burn of the Hawking drive, she swings the ship in a trajectory orthogonal to the giant planet’s orbital plane, away from where the hottest battle rages. But the Sobornost are everywhere. In an eyeblink, she passes through a metacloaked raion grid, lying in wait like a fishing net in water. They shoot after her, short-lived strangelet engines firing, a hundred war raions made to survive the duration of the battle and no longer. She screams Sobornost Friend-or-Foe protocols at them at the top of her EM lungs, but it does not fool them: they know her ship, and want to taste it.


She gives her gogols access to the Leblanc’s picotech processors. They grind possible trajectories through Nash engines, and come up with nothing that leads out of the tight cone of raion vectors around her.


Nanomissiles hit, a tingle on her skin, dump their viral code payloads into the Leblanc’s systems. She sheds the outer layer of the ship’s armour to get rid of them: it feels like tearing off a scab. It floats around the ship, an expanding cloud of dust. A bigger target: another volley of Gödel bombs and kinetic needles flashes through it. One hyperdense projectile passes right through the ship, uncomfortably close to the Hawking containment sphere.


She catalogues the ship’s weapons. Anti-meteorite lasers, thoughtwisp launchers, q-dot emitters. No antimatter, strangelets or nanomissiles. Mieli imagines new weapons, tells the ship to grow them, but it is going to take too long. The heaviest armament she has is the micro-singularity of the engine and its needle of gamma rays, but it’s no good against the raions: it’s too slow to aim, and using it would introduce a new constraint into the optimisation problem of escaping. The Leblanc is built for speed, not for battle, and even that is not enough.


Another volley comes, but this time, she is ready: a delicate flick of the Hawking drive diverts the ship slightly in the microsecond before they hit. Still not fast enough.


She runs a mass reduction scenario, stripping the ship down to essentials, into barely more than the drive sphere itself. Even so, Saturn is too far. There is no escape from the cold hand of Newton. She could take them with her, detonate the Hawking drive. But that would serve no purpose at all.


Then it hits her. I’m still thinking like the Mieli who flew Perhonen. But I am not her. The atoms of my body were disassembled by a picotech gate, duplicated as qubits inside the Leblanc’s Realm. My thoughts are quantum information in a photonic crystal made of artificial atoms.


I need to be someone else.


‘Nearest router,’ she hisses at the ship’s cat. ‘Now.’


A lone zoku router near the orbit of Phoebe has survived the invasion unscathed, a kilometre-long glass wedding bouquet, glinting and spinning in the reflected light of the war of the gods. When the Leblanc reaches it, it is barely more than an eggshell around the Hawking drive. To avoid the third barrage of missiles, she transforms the ship into a distributed configuration, free-floating modules tethered to the drive. She derives some pleasure from ejecting the thief’s treasures into the void. He can always steal new ones.


The Sobornost squadron knows what she is doing now. Another shoal of raions is coming. They twinkle like meteors in the night sky: the flashes of a nanomissile cloud, firing.


She takes a deep breath and sends a command to the router, praying that the zoku volition system is working again. The router responds and unfolds, revealing the giant Realmgate within, like the stamen of a flower.


‘You have served your master well,’ she tells the cat. ‘Die with honour.’


The cat bows and tips its feathered hat at her.


Then she thinks a zoku trueform for herself, shapes it into a foglet wedge with her jewels nested inside, and fires it at the Realmgate.


Behind her, the Hawking containment sphere collapses. A black hole turns white. With one hot photon breath, it burns the raions, the router, the Leblanc – and all the secrets of Jean le Flambeur.


Mieli races through Realms. The volition system is back online, and she feels the gentle pull of the Great Game jewel again, even if nearly all her carefully won entanglement within has evaporated with the mini-Collapse that the thief created.


There is war in the Realms, too. Weaponised gogols in hated quantum shells invade the zokus’ imaginary realities in waves, each generation spawned by a guberniya, trying to adapt to the counterintuitive rules of the virtual battlefields. There, at least, the zoku are holding their own. But it cannot be long before the physical infrastructure of the Realms is compromised.


She joins the battle, briefly, under the red sky of an ancient imaginary planet where green men wielding blades with four arms try to hold the tide of buzzing gogols in the form of great white apes. As they fall beneath her Realm-knife, her Great Game jewel starts to fill and hum with entanglement again. She levels up again, and then again, into a Level Six Man In Black. Then she forms a wish and casts it at the jewel. Another gate opens and takes her into the Invisible Realm.


The Great Game Realm is in chaos. The thought-threads are a tangled web, and each bead burns with images of death. The zoku voices are a chorus of panic that is so dense Mieli has to shut them out.


She turns away from the thought labyrinth and qupts Zinda, heart pounding. Where are you?


Even in the quicktime of the Invisible Realm, the next moments feel like an eternity. The furious qupts of the thought-game around her blend into a distant thunder. Let her be safe.


When the answer comes, it feels like summer rain.


Mieli?


Zinda? Where are you?


Again, a few heartbeats of agonising delay.


In a Realm running on reversible computation near the metallic hydrogen layer inside Saturn. It’s very slow here. We are trying to set up a guerrilla operation.


There is not going to be an occupation! I told you, the All-Defector is coming.


What happened to you?


There is no time to explain. Mieli pauses. I need you. She lets her fear and longing from the deck of the Provence to filter down the qupt, and feels a sudden stab of anxiety, as if something precious just slipped through her fingers.


And then Zinda is there, in her green dress, beautiful against the labyrinth of the thought-web, smiling a little sadly.


‘What do you want me to do, Mieli?’


‘What you did on the mountain. I want you to save me.’ She kisses the zoku girl fiercely, until neither of them can breathe. Finally, Mieli lets go.


‘And to forgive me,’ she says.


They find one of the meeting rooms, away from the frantic qupt chatter. Mieli explains the thief’s plan to Zinda.


She frowns. ‘I don’t know anything about the Planck brane, or how to get entangled with it. It would have to be something only the Elders know about. My level is simply not high enough. The only one I know is Barbicane, and I doubt he would be willing to help you, even now. All the entanglement I have is yours, but it’s not going to help you very much. I lost most of it when the volition system collapsed, like everybody else.’


Mieli frowns. ‘Can you have a look at this?’ She hands Zinda the huge complex qupt the thief gave her. The zoku girl’s eyes widen as she takes it all in.


‘Mieli, do you know what this is?’ she says. ‘It’s a viral zoku. It’s a giant twinking machine.’


Then she grins. ‘If there is ever a time to do forbidden things, it’s at the end of the world!’


It is Zinda who sends out the qupt, carefully crafted according to the Kaminari template, with the precision and speed of an experienced party organiser.


Twink the Liquorice-zoku if you want to save Supra City and to slay the Sleeper.


It spreads from Great Game member to Great Game member, even through the chaos of battle.


‘We have to be fast,’ Zinda says. ‘The Elders are going to notice, and reset everybody’s entanglement. But we might have time for one quick volition request, so be ready.’


It starts slowly. But little by little, the twinks start coming in, all the EPR qubits the zoku armies are earning by slaying the enemies of Supra City. In a few moments, the trickle is a flood. The connection to the zoku hums inside Mieli’s mind, and suddenly the Great Game jewel feels like a part of her brain, something that has always been there, a true q-self.


‘Now!’ Zinda breathes. ‘Do it quickly!’


Mieli casts the thought they crafted together at the Great Game jewel. Give me Planck tanglematter from the Spooky-zoku. The entire zoku rings with her volition. ‘I bet they are going to notice that,’ Mieli says. And sure enough, a moment later, the feeling of omnipotence disappears, replaced by a sense of almost complete emptiness.


Twinking is against the zoku rules, an angry qupt comes through her jewel. You are now back at Level One. Mieli’s heart sinks, but then she catches herself. It’s just a game, she thinks, smiling to herself.


Then the tanglematter package arrives with a pop, carried to their small corner of the Invisible Realm by quantum teleportation protocols. A grey dull sphere with a simple volition interface, a dense data spime wrapped around it. Mieli glances at it, but is immediately lost – EPR states distilled from neutralinos using the entire mass of Saturn as a detector, entangled with supersymmetric matter on the Planck brane. Whatever it is, it is the key to sending her and the thief to the hiding place of the Kaminari jewel.


‘It looks terribly boring!’ Zinda says. ‘Are you sure this is what we need?’


Mieli smiles. ‘No. But I … trust the man who said it is.’


Mieli frowns, looking at the Great Game intel spime. With the sudden drop in her entanglement level, she can’t see most of the battle anymore. But she can monitor the specific vectors that the thief said he and Matjek would use when escaping the guberniya in a thoughtwisp. Where are they? It should have only taken them minutes in our frame.


‘What do we do now?’ Zinda asks.


‘The only thing there is to do before the last battle,’ Mieli says. ‘We wait.’