8 The Team




                        Mon, 14 Dec 2020, 21:09 -0800 (2020-12-15T05:09 GMT)


Western Days Hotel, Seattle




                        When the Chevy loaded with their bags and luggage passed beneath an elevated city railway, Kazumi saw a strangely familiar tower brightly lit up ahead of them.


                        “Windows 8!” cried Akari in excitement from the backseat, and Kazumi suddenly remembered where he’d seen the tower before. It had appeared on the wallpaper of the PC he’d used in college. In the image, it seemed to be standing by the shore for some reason, though they were now quite a distance from the ocean.


                        “You got it,” said Daryl. “It’s called the Space Needle. Our hotel is at the base. I hope you’ll forgive me for booking at a cheap one.”


                        Against a pitch-black sky dancing with powder snow, the illuminated Space Needle drew closer. This served as a vivid reminder for Kazumi that he had indeed come all the way to America. As planned, Daryl took a right when they reached the base of the Space Needle, passed through a gate labeled Western Days, and drove into the rotary. When the Chevy proceeded farther, shaking green leaves dusted with snow as it passed, two staff dashed out from the lobby to meet them: a bellboy in a blue jacket with a white belt strapped diagonally across, and a large black man in a white jacket.


                        “Well, this is odd,” said Daryl, looking perplexed. “We seem to be getting the royal treatment.”


                        The uniformed bellboy came around to the driver’s seat and stood up straight, facing in the direction of the car’s rear. The jacketed black man came around to the shotgun seat where Kazumi was sitting, smoothed out the handkerchief in his pocket that had gotten ruffled when he ran over, bowed deeply, and said in a loud voice, “Welcome to Western Days, Mr. David, Mr. and Mrs. Chan. We have come to greet you as representatives of this hotel.”


                        “That is not us,” said Kazumi, the English that came hurriedly to his lips seeming unnatural even to him. He was worried that even if the man had heard him, he wouldn’t understand what he’d said, and Kazumi shook his head and hands to indicate that there had been a mistake. But keeping his head down, the man made big obvious motions with his thick lips and said, in a voice that was barely audible inside the car, “We know.”


                        The man then glanced inside the car. “Woo-wee. That sure is a lot of luggage. Even a bicycle. Well, we’ll carry it all for you, so please feel free to make your way directly into the hotel.”


                        When the man whistled and raised his arm, several other staff members dashed out of the hotel and made a line that ran to the revolving doors at the entrance. Wearing tense expressions, they all stared intently in the direction of the outside of the rotary and the road that ran alongside the hotel.


                        With a sigh, Daryl unlocked the car doors and said, “So the jig is up … We don’t hold a candle to them.”


                        “What is wrong?” asked Kazumi.


                        “Let’s go right on in,” said Daryl. “I don’t want to be a nuisance to the hotel staff.”


                        Once the man saw that the car was unlocked, he opened the door and stood in a position that would block Kazumi from view of the road. He then led him behind the line of staff and went back to let out Daryl and Akari, shunting all three to the entrance.


                        “Welcome to Western Days,” he whispered to Daryl and Kazumi. “The woman who arrived before you instructed us to provide our best hospitality and protection. Please enjoy a relaxing stay at our hotel.”


                        Gently but firmly with his strong arms, the man pushed them one by one through the slowly revolving doors, first Akari, then Kazumi, and finally Daryl. On the other side, Kazumi was disgorged into a toasty-warm lobby filled with the faint scent of roses. Akari, with her hand on her freshly shaved, hatless head, swept her gaze around the room in apparent wonderment.


                        The space inside wasn’t so different from the hotel lobbies Kazumi was used to seeing in Japan. Though it lacked the elegance of the Nippon Grand Hotel, there were rows of low sofas big enough to sleep on under the glow of evenly placed ambient lights, and he could see the flame of a fireplace enclosed by a brass screen in one wall. From the huge speakers that resembled spaceships installed in each of the four corners of the lobby came the sound of stringed instruments.


                        When Daryl came in through the revolving door, a suited lady stood up from the sofa where she’d been sitting in the back. Her perfectly set blond hair reflected the light of the fire and took on beautiful orange highlights.


                        “Just as I thought,” Daryl muttered.


                        “You’re late, Daryl,” said the lady. “But good work picking these two up.” She walked over and extended her right hand. “Mr. Kimura and Ms. Numata, I presume. You must be tired after your twelve-hour flight. My name is Chris Ferguson. Please call me Chris.”


                        The lady squeezed Kazumi’s hand with more strength than he would’ve imagined she possessed. “Welcome to the United States.”


                        Kazumi got off an elevator that went directly to the seventh floor and realized that there was only one room there. Daryl pushed open the door to the room, glanced inside, and gave a whistle. “Ladies first,” he said, inviting Akari in, but she dithered for a moment and Chris stepped inside. Peeking into the room after her, Akari muttered in awkward English, “Another suite.”


                        If she was going to talk to herself, Kazumi thought, she might as well be using Japanese, but she seemed determined to get by with English as much as she could.


                        “There are not enough seats,” said Akari. “If I had been told it was this spacious, I would have bought more things.”


                        “What you going to use that silver stuff for?” asked Chris.


                        “For a darkroom. I will explain later.”


                        “All right.”


                        Kazumi was taken aback by the interior, which was decorated in the same way as the lobby but was much more spacious. A chandelier hung from a round cove in the ceiling. There was a real fire going in the fireplace between two large balcony windows. The carpet was so plush it seemed to be absorbing the legs of the table and sofa. While this room might have been a suite like the one at the Nippon Grand Hotel, it struck a far better balance between refinement and calmness.


                        Ahead of the others, Chris stood in front of a brand-new table with legs still in plastic wrap. It was oval shaped and big enough for about ten people to hold conference. Around it were placed six high-quality business chairs the likes of which Kazumi had only ever seen in catalogs. Beyond the table was a giant whiteboard that was also so brand-new you could tell at a glance and a glass partition with adhesive tape stuck to it like the squares of a go board. On the upper part of the partition, five digital clocks displayed the time in different cities around the world in red shining digits, and below them hung the Geeple Rod from God article.


                        “This is our operations center,” said Chris. “We haven’t brought in the computers yet, but you’ve picked up a few things too, haven’t you, Daryl?”


                        “Yes, I’ve purchased some of the materials we’ll need.”


                        “That’s my seat over there,” said Chris. “Can I have you connect me with wired Internet?” She pointed to a big, hefty desk placed in a spot near the entrance from which you could view the entire room. It was the sort of desk that might appear in a drawing of “the boss’s seat.” Her open laptop was on top. “Kazumi and Akari, you’ll be sleeping in the two bedrooms to the left. Please rest assured that both of them have been disinfected.”


                        In the direction that Chris pointed were two doors. When a CIA agent like Chris said “disinfected,” Kazumi supposed that it meant they had checked for bugs.


                        “You’re lucky I came, Akari,” said Chris. “Daryl’s superior thought that you and Kazumi would sleep together in the same room.”


                        “What? He was wrong about that?” said Daryl in surprise.


                        “We’re just business partners,” Akari replied.


                        “Yes. No. It’s not like that,” said Kazumi.


                        Chris laughed warmly at Kazumi’s confusion about how to use “yes” and “no.” “There’s no need to worry about English mistakes, Kazumi,” she said. “If you start talking the way Akari does, you’ll get used to it right away. Japanese reserve is a vice in America.”


                        Chris stood up tall and walked toward the whiteboard. “It’s going to take some time for hotel security to check our luggage. In the meantime, I’d like to talk to you all about something.”


                        Kazumi noticed that Chris was suddenly gripping a whiteboard marker in her hand. Daryl’s brisk movements had been surprising enough, but Chris’s deft efficiency was of a different sort altogether. If Kazumi had to compare her to someone, it would be Sekiguchi at the Nippon Grand Hotel. He looked into her gray pupils sparkling beneath her perfectly set blond hair and thought, So this is what a real CIA operative is like.


                        Chris did one lap, pacing back and forth in front of the whiteboard. Then, turning her focus on Daryl, Kazumi, and Akari, who were all staring at her, she slowly took the cap off her pen. Then she wrote “mission” in big, spaced-out letters so that the two Japanese could read it clearly, swiftly underlined it, and turned to face the three of them.


                        Rule number one: if you want to command your audience’s attention, never speak with your back to them. Chris knew how to write on a whiteboard behind her while facing straight ahead, but she was aware that this was not the time or place to use such parlor tricks. Surprise can only get an audience interested once. The three of them were bewildered by the shifting situation. Now was the time to hold sway over them with a strong will.


                        “We need to clarify our mission,” she said.


                        “Yes, ma’am,” said Daryl, standing with his feet at shoulder width and his hands together behind his back. He seemed to have decided that he was now acting under Chris’s authority. But she wanted him to lose the military decorum. It was too stiff and constricting for their two private citizens, Kazumi and Akari, not to mention Chris herself.


                        “Please sit and be at ease,” she said. Chris recognized that she had to be careful how she dealt with the two Japanese. They were new to America, and if she was too pushy with them in seeking their obedience, they might withdraw into their shells like turtles.


                        Judging by the email sent by the JAXA official, Kurosaki, she could tell that the information these two had gathered was of exceedingly high quality. Particularly impressive was how Akari had exposed the translation-engine contamination that allowed them to determine North Korea’s involvement, as well as the shadow-ware ad hack technique. If the CIA extended the hand of friendship to her, then they could investigate in a different way than the by-the-book headquarters team.


                        The unknown quantity was Kazumi. He had been the first to draw out the existence of the tethercraft using the observational data uploaded on Ozzy’s blog and had even received the academic paper of Jamshed Jahanshah in Tehran. Everything he had achieved up to that point, including writing the report attached to Kurosaki’s email, was remarkable, but what role Kazumi might play now was a different story. They had no need for an amateur who had enjoyed one lucky break, and she wondered how useful he would be in unraveling the true nature of the mysterious tether-driven spacecraft.


                        “Kazumi,” said Chris, “I’m throwing in my chips with your tethercraft hypothesis.”


                        Daryl held his breath, and Kazumi nodded slowly.


                        “Thank you,” said Kazumi.


                        Chris chose her words carefully, so as not to put pressure on Kazumi, who had just entered the country a few hours ago and who, moreover, had no experience traveling abroad.


                        “There’s no need to thank me. What’s important here is that I’m starting up a team to follow the tethercraft. I’ll be reporting this to CIA headquarters. I need to get the government of the United States to trust in what you amateurs have to say.”


                        Chris noticed that this drew Kazumi’s frown.


                        “Is it necessary for us to write up a report?” he asked.


                        “I’ll take care of that,” said Chris with a shake of her head. “What you should concern yourself with instead is convincing me of your hypothesis. I said my chips are on you, but that’s only because we don’t have any better ideas to work with.”


                        Daryl went to stand up, but Chris raised her hand for him to sit back down and stared into Kazumi’s dark-brown eyes.


                        “I’d like to hear about it directly from you, Kazumi.”


                        Kazumi looked to Akari and Daryl, then took a deep breath and stood up.


                        “Akari, can you get out the projector?” he said, walking up to the whiteboard and receiving the pen from Chris.


                        After giving over the stage to Kazumi, Chris took her seat. As Kazumi followed her with his eyes, he was showered with light from atop the table. It was from a small projector that Akari had set up. Akari, who was now wearing display glasses and a special ops keyboard on her left arm, was beaming the presentation onto the whiteboard.


                        “The materials available to me are limited,” Kazumi began. “The only facts we have so far are Mr. Cunningham’s observational data. Everything else I’m about to tell you still needs to be verified. That task is what I’d like to ask for everyone’s help with.” A schematic diagram of the tethercraft was overlaid on Kazumi’s body. “The tethercraft is a never-before-seen spacecraft conceptualized by an astronautical engineer in Tehran, Dr. Jamshed Jahanshah.”


                        Kazumi began with simple English but a commanding presence. Chris admired how he could describe an unprecedented technology as though he had held it in his very hand. She was now convinced that they had found a mind that would be as useful for their analysis as Daryl’s, if not more so.










Mon, 14 Dec 2020, 21:50 -0800 (2020-12-15T05:50 GMT)


Pier 37 Warehouse, Seattle




                        Shiraishi’s pure-white breath rose into the air as he flung himself into bed. Then, taking off his glasses, he massaged the space between his eyebrows.


                        “It’s over,” he said.


                        “It’s great that our proposal was accepted,” said Chance.


                        “You never know what you can get by asking, huh? You have to give dictatorships credit. They sure make decisions fast.”


                        They were in the Pier 37 warehouse control room. On the television screen, lines of digits were displayed. Chance couldn’t parse what they signified, but she knew that all their arrangements for the “implementation” they had approached the North Korean military officer about and the mission to bring the second stage of SAFIR 3 close to the orbital hotel were now complete.


                        Shiraishi removed his fingers from his brow and looked at the television.


                        “So it took ten hours,” he said. “Can you draw up the anticipated questions and answers?”


                        “Yes, no problem. They’ll no doubt respond like a broken tape recorder anyways.”


                        “It would be good to coach UN ambassador Young Nam on his part. Tell him to say it with his usual sulky face.”


                        Shiraishi reached for Chance’s breasts. Now that one task was complete, he was in a jovial mood.


                        Chance brushed away his hands. “What about Japan?” she said. “I mean Kazumi and the rest.”


                        Shiraishi pointed to a small map that floated on the edge of the television and said, “Don’t worry. I’ve been watching them the whole time. The smartphones of those bureaucrats, Kurosaki and Sekiguchi, are still in the Nippon Grand Hotel. They haven’t sent any messages or made any calls. I bet they’re in there cowering in fear.” Shiraishi sat up and put on his glasses. “I expected Kurosaki and co. to have more backbone than that though.”


                        Shiraishi regularly accessed the JAXA MDM system with his old account, still active long after he had quit—you couldn’t get any more careless than that—but there were no indications that anyone was onto him yet.


                        “I checked the advertisements, and none of the other space experts have figured out about the tethercraft,” said Shiraishi. “What about Afro?”


                        Chance shrugged. She still hadn’t pinned down the identity of the person with the Afro who had been with Kazumi. They had posted three agents near Fool’s Launchpad and had them check the vicinity, but none of them had spotted anyone who fit that description. Most likely she was with Kazumi in the Nippon Grand Hotel.


                        “I see.” Shiraishi reached into the pocket where he kept his cigarettes.


                        “That’s not allowed.”


                        “But we just wrapped up a big job.”


                        “This place is nonsmoking to begin with. Also, no fire as of today. Our move is on Thursday.”


                        Shiraishi let out a big sigh and pointed to some piping squirming against the wall of the room. “Is there gasoline in there already?”


                        “Of course not. I only put it in the tank of the fire cistern. I’ll get a smoke detector tomorrow.”


                        “Sterilization” of the hideout they had prepared downtown was finally finished. On Thursday, they would be able to move out of the warehouse room that Shiraishi had been living in for five long years. The plan was to leave with only their basic personal belongings and then burn down the entire warehouse.


                        “I stacked our inventory of the D-Fis that Sound Technica returned on the first floor of the warehouse,” said Chance. “I’ll burn them all together.”


                        “I think I’d like to watch. Those cables give off the fragrance of roses when you heat them up.”


                        “Quit joking around. It makes me want to leave Seattle altogether.”


                        Shiraishi reached for his thermos. “I never want to leave a city where you can drink coffee this good,” he said. “Why don’t you have a cup yourself? Then we can watch the video of Earth taken by the tethers together.”


                        Video, by tethers? Chance was confused. “What are you talking about?”


                        “I took a recording with the cameras on the space tethers.”


                        “… You never told me about that.”


                        “Don’t get mad. I was just rolling with what was already there.” Shiraishi winked at Chance as white steam rose from the coffee he was pouring. “I reappropriated the substrate of a smartphone to use as the sensor for the tethers—actually, they are smartphones. They have a radio, compass, gyro sensor, GPS, and a powerful CPU that operates on minimal energy with a high-performance battery. These days, they even contain atomic clocks. Jahanshah used smartphones for his paper, so I decided to borrow his idea.”


                        “Of course, Professor Analog may have thought it up, but he never actually realized it,” Shiraishi added with a smirk. “Obviously smartphones are equipped with cameras too, so there was no way I could resist.” Shiraishi’s sinuous finger stroked his tablet. “I just finished making a program that stitches together all the recordings. I’m talking about an orbital video taken by the world’s biggest camera. Behold!”


                        Chance caught her breath. An image of Earth against the blackness of space appeared on the screen. The POV appeared to be straight above the continent of Africa. Sunlight beaming down diagonally into a great valley cast sharp shadows. Far back along the shoreline visible on the far right were rows of thunderheads swelling up from the Indian Ocean. Looking closely, Chance could see the clouds moving. But that meant—


                        “It’s real-time,” said Shiraishi. “So beautiful.”


                        “But this … video is—”


                        “Incredible isn’t it? This goes far beyond even what I myself was imagining.”


                        Shiraishi spoke with feverish intensity as he stared fixedly at the screen. Apparently, the video taken by the cameras installed in the terminal apparatus pair of each space tether was being transmitted continuously to the Earth’s surface along with coordinates, attitude, and other telemetric variables. The feed from each camera was low quality, but by synthesizing the data sent down by a cloud of forty thousand tethers spread over an area three hundred kilometers long and twenty kilometers wide and coloring in space, a high-resolution 3-D model was created. Shiraishi had divided the structural units of the video-stitching program and contracted them out to freelancers around the world.


                        “It cost less than $1,000 in total. I was able to make this with my own pocket money.” Shiraishi stroked his tablet and rotated the Earth on the screen for Chance. “Do you see the spot in the middle? It’s still rough, but that’s the Wyvern Orbital Hotel.”


                        “Hold on a second,” said Chance. “You’re sending video from the tethers? All that extra data from orbit in addition to the telemetry … What are you going to do if it’s exposed?”


                        “It’ll be fine.” With the tablet on his lap, Shiraishi grabbed his right arm in his left hand. With all his strength, he squeezed the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation tattooed on his arm through his jacket sleeve. “I wanted to see it! I wanted to see the Earth!”


                        Hearing Shiraishi speak in this tone for the first time, Chance looked closely at him. In his expression at that moment, absorbed with sparkling eyes as he was in the video of the Earth, the disdainful sneer he always wore was gone.


                        “Isn’t the view marvelous?” he said.










Tue, 15 Dec 2020, 01:56 -0700 (2020-12-15T08:56 GMT)


Buffalo Café, Colorado Springs




                        “To the stratosphere! Cheers!” shouted Ricky, feeling strange to be making such an odd toast, and tipped back his mug of India pale ale. Apparently, it was a local beer brewed in the back of the bar, and the piercing bitterness was like nothing else. Second Lieutenant Madu Abbot, who piloted the F-22 Raptor that would serve alongside Ricky as an observation aircraft in Operation Seed Pod, was at the counter with him taking a shot of tequila.


                        They had come to the Buffalo Café to celebrate their transfer to USNORTHCOM, and although it was the middle of the night the place was full of life.


                        “We’ll be seeing stars during the daytime,” said Ricky. “Isn’t that incredible?”


                        “You can see the same thing without going all the way to the stratosphere if the atmospheric conditions are right,” said Madu, with just as much cheek as she showed when sober, and took another shot. Ricky had been planning to drink her under the table, but that wasn’t looking likely at this point.


                        “I told you already! Quit getting so hung up on the details,” said Ricky. “Instead, let’s celebrate our transfer and the new record we’re going to set.”


                        The mission had been placed in the hands of Major Sylvester Fernandez, and USNORTHCOM was now fully aware of Ricky’s plan to try for a new altitude record. Ricky’s new superior was Colonel Daniel Waabboy, and when Ricky went to report his transfer to the colonel, the first thing Waabboy had said to him was, “Going to top seventy thousand feet, are you? Best of luck, Captain!”


                        Waabboy had also been informed that Ricky wasn’t the only one aiming to break an in-mission record: Madu would try for the same with the F-22 Raptor. Since this jet was no longer being procured, if she managed to rise into the stratosphere as planned, it would probably be a long while before anyone topped her. Nonetheless, while Madu listened to Waabboy’s advice and instructions, Ricky had watched as she shrugged her shoulders in annoyance.


                        “You can have the record all to yourself,” said Madu. “I’ll be sticking to my observations.”


                        “Show at least a bit of excitement,” said Ricky. “Your name is going to go down in history.”


                        The F-15 Eagle was in the process of being decommissioned and would never set a new record after this. Such military records would undoubtedly appear on the websites of fans of the Eagle and most likely on Wikipedia as well. This meant that the name of Captain Ricky McGillis would survive forever beside that of the twentieth century’s strongest fighter jet.


                        “So, Madu. Want to know the Eagle’s kill ratio? It’s one hundred to nothing,” said Ricky, unable to contain himself in his excitement. “How about the Raptor’s?”


                        “It shot down a number of Anjians in the Middle East,” she replied. “You didn’t hear about that?”


                        “You idiot! Don’t try to put drones on the same level. Anjians are just tools for killing farmers, right? That’s not what I mean. I’m talking about kills on fighter planes flown by pilots trying to kill one of us— Hey! What are you looking at?”


                        “You! Drunkard!” Madu shouted to someone in back of the counter. “Don’t change the channel!”


                        “What’s the matter?” asked Ricky.


                        “It’s game time,” said Madu. “They’ve made their move.”


                        Ricky followed Madu’s gaze to the television above the counter. On the screen appeared the white room that had been all over the media the past few days. Inside, two people were hovering just above the floor: the two Smarks. In the top right was a “Live” icon and in the bottom-right corner a video of what appeared to be a studio.


                        When Ricky read the caption at the bottom of the screen, he clenched his fists. “Rod from God? Mysterious Orbital Weapon in Range of Wyvern Orbital Hotel!” Damn terrorist nation! he thought. So that’s their plan! Ricky had never suspected that he would come to learn the Rod from God’s movements off base. On the program, the Smarks were about to be interviewed now that they were targets in orbit, and Ricky was determined not to miss a single moment of it.


                        “A report has come in from an amateur astronomer that a mysterious object is closing in on the orbital hotel where you two are staying,” said the voice of the interviewer. “Were you aware of the situation?”


                        “We had no idea,” said Ronnie with a shrug. “Can you please provide the details?”


                        As the station’s narration explained, an object thought to be a Rod from God was about to enter a rendezvous orbit with the orbital hotel. Ronnie and Judy nodded with apparent fascination as they listened, and Ricky found the way their bodies shook with the motion intriguing. At the same time, he deplored the fact that the report had come from amateurs. What had happened to NORAD?


                        “There’s also a rumor that the object approaching your hotel is an orbital weapon referred to as the Rod from God. What are your thoughts on the situation?”


                        Ronnie gave the stubble covering his cheeks a stroke with his hand and his handsome, round eyes twinkled like those of a mischievous child.


                        Isn’t he scared? wondered Ricky, gripping his stool and adjusting his position on it. Suddenly a nightmare came back to him. A warning sound rang continuously in the cockpit as he flew through the skies above Kosovo in 1999. The scope of the Tactical Electronic Warfare System displayed a radar source in a location so close it almost overlapped with his aircraft and warned him that a gun had sighted him. I’m going to be killed! Ricky had thought. It was the first time he had felt the intent to kill directed at him, and he was so afraid that he wet his pilot suit. The alarm turned out to be nothing more than a phantom produced by a glitch in the TEWS. But even assuming that a real MiG-29 had locked on to him, there was still a chance, however small, that he could have survived. The Smarks appearing on the television at that moment were in a far worse predicament. How could Ronnie be smiling like that?


                        “It’s not that I have nothing to say, but we’ve brought our PR person all the way from Earth, so I’d rather she spoke on our behalf. Over to you, Judy,” said Ronnie with a wink.


                        He pushed Judy, who was still attached to the floor or the wall or whatever it was, gently on the back, and she was sent floating off to the side of the screen by the recoil. They were in a place free from the reign of gravity. Outside the wall that Ronnie clung to, there was no atmosphere. If even a tiny hole opened up in it, their lives would likely be over. There was no way they could be unaware of this fact, and yet they took it all in stride. After Ronnie had pushed her, Judy had straightened up as she approached the camera, and Ricky thought he saw her lips tremble for a moment, but she maintained an expression of grim composure. He had heard that the two Smarks had lived together up until she was ten, but clearly a remarkable woman such as her could only be the daughter of Ronnie Smark.


                        The hubbub at the Buffalo Café had settled into quiet. All of the patrons were gathered around the bar waiting to hear what Judy had to say. With their glasses on the tables, they all faced the TV.


                        “We aren’t going to let unconfirmed reports disturb us,” said Judy. “Project Wyvern will continue to facilitate our orbital stay according to schedule. The day after tomorrow, we expect to rendezvous and dock with the ISS.”


                        “Good for you!” Over Judy’s subdued voice, the patrons at the bar began to call out their praise for her.


                        On the screen, Judy took a breath and was about to continue when Ronnie shouted, “Cut!” and crossed his arms into an X in the corner of the screen. “Judy, say it in your own words! This is a live broadcast, after all. This sort of thing just won’t get across unless you speak from the gut.”


                        Apparently this had not been part of their preplanned script because Judy went wide-eyed and said, “Quit joking around, Dad,” with a dismissive wave of her hand before turning back toward the camera. Her eyes were sparkling as the tension slipped from her face. As Ricky watched Ronnie nod to his daughter in approval, he suddenly realized something: Ronnie was trying to show the world watching them that they were just a father and daughter in orbit and that this was no big deal at all.


                        Judy spread her hands out in front of her chest and took another breath. No longer was she just someone handling PR but a human being standing there in the air before them with the trust of her father.


                        “Beyond this one foot of wall is the vacuum of space. If even the smallest hole were to open up, we would be in big trouble. So to be perfectly honest, having some unknown object approaching us is … scary. But let me tell you something.”


                        Silence fell on the bar again and only the voice of Judy could be heard as if she were right there with them. Slowly, Judy raised her index finger to point it at the camera.


                        “I don’t know who or what is behind this ridiculous scheme, but stop it. Let the world know who you are. Drop that metal piece of trash out of orbit immediately. If there’s an accident because of this, you’ll make all of humankind your enemy.”


                        Judy’s body began to glow from around her feet as a bright light shone into the room straight from her right side. Immediately it illuminated her from head to toe. The sun beaming in through the hotel window. Not even squinting in the glare, Judy reached her hand out toward the camera and said, “Did you really think such despicable intimidation would make us compromise our ambition? Did you really think we’d come down from orbit just like that? That we’d say ‘Space is no place for civilians, please forgive us for trying’ and just give up in tears? As if! I’ll never forgive you for spreading terror through space!”


                        Ricky squeezed his fist resting on the counter with all his might. Heat rose up inside him, a feeling surging up from the pit of his stomach that was fundamentally different from what he felt when he was ordered into combat.


                        Judy raised her quivering middle finger and thrust it toward the camera. “If you’ve got a problem with us,” she said, “then bring it on!”


                        The bar was enveloped in cheers, and glasses were raised high all around. Ricky stood up with the crowd and dove into the pandemonium with mug in hand. She’s right, he thought. We can’t let these people off the hook. So hold on, Judy and Ronnie. Ricky’s coming to take that thing out for you.










Tue, 15 Dec 01:14 -0800 (2020-12-15T09:14 GMT)


Western Days Hotel




                        Despite the lateness of the hour, the suite filled with the sound of Chris, Daryl, Kazumi, and Akari clapping. Chris was impressed with Judy Smark’s courage. It was an incredibly rare sort of person who could speak out so defiantly when in the line of fire, especially in the vacuum of space where staying alive was a tightrope walk to begin with. Chris felt certain that the many viewers who’d tuned in to the live broadcast from around the world had found it as moving as she had.


                        “Judy’s incredible,” said Chris. “But she’s just putting on a strong face, which I guess you’ve all noticed already.”


                        Kazumi, Akari, and Daryl nodded.


                        If they could prove Kazumi’s tethercraft hypothesis, the two orbital hotel guests would inevitably learn that the Rod from God weapon was a feint, a phantom that didn’t actually exist. Chris wished that clearing up this confusion for the Smarks might bring them relief, but she and her team were certain that this would not be the case.


                        “Chris,” said Daryl, “you don’t seriously think that Seed Pod—”


                        “Let’s talk about that later,” said Chris.


                        Today, the second stage of SAFIR 3 had entered a rendezvous orbit with the orbital hotel, meaning that Operation Seed Pod would move into action. Chris didn’t want the team to know about this, as the operation was based on assumptions that were directly contrary to their hypothesis. Seeing it implemented could have an impact on their motivation. Instead, she thought it was crucial that the team stay out of Seed Pod altogether. Their job was to figure out what the swarm of space tethers’ next move would be once it had kicked the SAFIR 3 along in orbit and brought it into rendezvous position.


                        “Kazumi,” said Chris. “If the tethers were to attack the orbital hotel directly, what do you think would happen?”


                        “They would rip it to shreds,” Kazumi replied after a short pause. He explained that the terminal apparatuses were moving many times faster than a bullet from a rifle and could easily pierce the outer shell of the hotel. “The same thing would happen to the ISS or Tiangong-2.”


                        “If we wanted to stop them … where would be the best place to start?”


                        Chris pointed to the whiteboard. After their three-hour-long meeting earlier, it was covered in a list of various tasks. In addition to items proposed by Kazumi such as “Investigate potential of space tethers,” “Examine Prof. Jahanshah’s paper,” and “Observe actual space tethers,” the list also included a mission proposed by Akari: “Seek identity of terrorists.”


                        “Is it really okay for me to decide?” asked Kazumi.


                        “Just say what you think,” said Daryl, patting Kazumi on the shoulder. “Then we’ll decide after that. Let’s be grateful we have a boss to take care of us now.” Daryl pointed at Chris with his thumb.


                        Chris found herself smiling wryly. Daryl wasn’t exactly showing the disciplined attitude of a soldier, but he was helping to lighten the mood.


                        Kazumi laughed and pointed to a section of the whiteboard. “Understood,” he said. “In that case, I think we should start by making observations.”


                        “I agree with Kazumi,” said Daryl with a nod. “However, we haven’t succeeded in making observations with NORAD’s radar.”


                        “But Mr. Cunningham was able to observe them at his observatory, right?” said Kazumi.


                        Daryl leaned forward. “Yes,” he said. “That’s exactly what I don’t understand. Why can’t we see those guys? In case you didn’t know, NORAD’s radars are used to observe debris as well. It’s a solid network.”


                        “Hmm …” said Kazumi.


                        “Would it help to know what equipment Ozzy Cunningham uses?” asked Chris. She jerked her chin toward her desk. “Akari, can you connect my computer to the projector?”


                        Akari stood up and connected a palm-sized substrate to Chris’s laptop. Immediately, her screen was projected onto the whiteboard. If Chris remembered correctly, the tiny device was a single-function computer kit called a Raspberry Pi. During their meeting, Akari had finished configuring several of the many that she had purchased so that they would function as display repeaters. Chris wondered where she’d acquired such astounding engineering proficiency.


                        “We haven’t signed an official contract,” said Chris, “but please don’t disclose anything you learn during this operation. If you leak anything, you could serve up to twenty-five years in prison.”


                        Chris opened a list of the Desnoeufs Island observational equipment extracted from the emails of Ozzy and his equipment suppliers. She caught Akari muttering “PRISM” and said, “This is just a taste,” with a wink. In order to read Ozzy’s emails, Chris was fairly certain that the PRISM information-gathering project leaked by Edward Snowden was being used. Not even Chris knew the full extent of the national surveillance network created by the CIA and NSA, however.


                        Daryl glanced at the screen and cried, “A Sampson-5!” kicking his chair as he got to his feet. “That’s no radio telescope. It’s a military-spec air defense radar!”


                        “Cunningham is a major investor in the manufacturer,” said Chris. “He even received one of their test models.”


                        “This isn’t the sort of thing that civilians should have in their possession,” said Daryl. “I hope he knows how to use it correctly. If you make a mistake, it has enough output to burn someone to death.”


                        Chris explained that on the island of Desnoeufs that Ozzy owned, he was deploying a Sampson-5 multifunction active phased array radar on a flat surface. Though often mounted on Aegis-equipped ships and ground radar sites, Ozzy used it to track orbital objects.


                        “This is supposed to be for his hobby?” said Daryl when he’d heard all this, resting his head in his hands. “Unbelievable …”


                        “A man named Johansson Ashleigh is in charge of operating the radar. Cunningham calls him ‘Friday.’ Another amateur.”


                        “Mr. Cunningham didn’t specify a threshold, huh?” said Kazumi.


                        “For what?” asked Chris.


                        “Size,” Kazumi replied. “NORAD’s debris-monitoring radars use noise reduction, right?”


                        “… So that’s it!” said Daryl. “Good point. They’re configured them not to detect anything 10 cm in length or less in low Earth orbit. With the Sampson-5 set to its performance limit, it can track objects as short as 2 cm from 2,000 km away. Usually it’s not operated like that, because it would just get cluttered with noise.”


                        “Is it possible to turn off the noise reduction on the NORAD radars?” asked Kazumi.


                        “Not right away,” said Daryl with a shake of his head. “That would interfere with management of air traffic control and air defense networks.”


                        Now is the time to show them what the CIA can do, thought Chris and, putting on an air of nonchalance, raised her hand. “In that case, what if we borrow Mr. Cunningham’s radar?”


                        “We could do that?” asked Daryl.


                        “I’ll ask nicely. So when should we get going on our observations?”


                        “Fantastic! Still, processing observational data filled with noise will take time.”


                        Akari raised her hand. “Leave that to me,” she said. “If we’re talking about Cunningham’s data, I can process it in real time. I thought we might need parallel processing, so I bought lots of the higher-powered Raspberry Pis, the FPGA model. I can track any number of those things in the tens of thousands.”


                        “Great,” Daryl muttered, and returned to his seat where he woke up his desktop.


                        Already, Akari had connected up a virtual private network with NORAD. Chris could sense sure signs that the team had begun to work organically.


                        “The observation date and time—” Daryl was just about to input some numbers, but suddenly his hands stopped and he looked in the direction of Kazumi. “Did you say something?”


                        Kazumi was holding his index finger out in front of his body and swaying it. With his eyes half-closed, murmurings of Japanese leaked from between his barely open lips. Like Daryl, Chris found herself unable to peel her eyes away from this odd behavior.


                        “The orbital hotel … To make the inclination thirty-four degrees … Before, wrong. No tether has such propulsion …”


                        Noticing their puzzled looks, Akari whispered, “He’s doing calculations.”


                        Kazumi opened his eyes wide and put his finger on Daryl’s display. “Tomorrow, starting at twelve o’clock our time, 1600 GMT, SAFIR 3 will pass over Cunningham’s island. It should be surrounded by space tethers.”


                        Still staring at Kazumi, Daryl managed to squeeze out the words, “What’s that?”


                        “SAFIR 3 will rise from west-northwest in pursuit of the hotel. Let’s have Ozzy make an observation there.”


                        “Can I just confirm that?” said Daryl. When he right-clicked on a globe and input the time, two overlapping lines revolved around the Earth, cutting across the Indian Ocean from diagonally above. “… His guess is right on. The orbital hotel will indeed cross the Indian Ocean tomorrow afternoon.”


                        “Great,” said Kazumi, leaning back against his seat.


                        Taking note of Kazumi’s reaction, Daryl swiveled his chair and looked at Chris. “Chris, please allow me to be Kazumi’s assistant. He can fly orbital objects in his head. I’ve never met anyone who can do anything like this. If we’re going to follow this unknown spacecraft, we’re going to need Kazumi’s ability. I’ll do my best to utilize it to its fullest potential.”


                        “Okay, Daryl,” said Chris. “You’re his assistant now.”


                        Flashing a white smile, Daryl patted Kazumi on the shoulder and gripped his hand. “Kazumi, from now on all you need to do are approximate calculations. I’ll take care of checking them over and dealing with other technological considerations. Just leave it to me!”


                        We’re truly blessed, thought Chris. She was stunned by Kazumi’s ability to do orbital calculus in his head, but more than that she was glad of his rare personality, which allowed him to earn Daryl’s trust even though they had only just met that day.


                        Watching Kazumi and Daryl shake hands, Akari turned to Chris and said, “The CIA’s power is amazing. I mean, you can just borrow someone’s telescope like that.”


                        “I’m relying on Kazumi and you to persuade him. Of course, I’ll step in if he gives us any trouble.”


                        “I see. In that case, can you help me with my ‘observation’ too?”


                        “What’s that, dear?” said Chris, and immediately regretted responding in a tone of voice one might use for a child. She blamed it on Akari’s boyish, shaved-head look and awkward English. But Chris knew she shouldn’t let appearances throw her off. Akari was a full-grown woman and a master engineer.


                        Akari did some maneuvers on her keyboard and sent a message to Chris’s laptop containing a phone number, an IP address, and a MAC address for a network card.


                        “This is the phone number and other information used by the terrorists. I acquired it in Tokyo,” explained Akari. “I figured out that they’re using China Mobility roaming SIM cards and a Fu Wen portable Wi-Fi hotspot. My guess is that they throw away the SIMs when they’re done with them.” Behind her display glasses, Akari’s eyes sparkled keenly.


                        Akari could see right into the criminal agents’ way of life. SIM cards and devices used under contract with cell phone companies such as AT&T were easy enough to track down. A smart method to avoid that risk was to use roaming cards sold by foreign cell phone companies and dispose of them periodically.


                        “I want the geographic data showing where those signals were sent,” said Akari. “I wonder if the CIA would have access to that.”


                        “Suppose you had that information,” said Chris. “What would you do with it?”


                        “Start a war.”


                        “A war?”


                        “I’m very sorry. Vocabulary—words, I didn’t use enough of them. I want to perform wardriving. I’ll lay honeypots in the city. Seattle is too big. I want to narrow it down.”


                        Akari’s strategy rendered Chris speechless. Wardriving. A hacking method where you roamed the streets scouting out wireless networks. The goal was to seek out portable Wi-Fi hotspots with specific network names. Now Chris saw why Akari had bought the bicycle: to cruise around the city. And Chris agreed that it would be more efficient to focus the search around the location where the phone was used.


                        “Kazumi will be looking for the space tethers, right?” said Akari. “I am going to expose the terrorists.”


                        Here was the second blessing. Akari was even more of a find than Chris had imagined. When Bruce arrived from Los Angeles tomorrow, Chris decided, she would make him Akari’s assistant.


                        “Okay. I’ll have CIA headquarters look into it. Akari, you have free reign to do as you will.”


                        Unbelievable that these two, Kazumi and Akari, have been reduced to doing contract web design, thought Chris. What’s happened to Japan?










2020-12-15T10:00 GMT


Project Wyvern




                        Today I had my first shower in three days. Incredibly, in this hotel we can even have hot showers. The Wyvern Orbital Hotel has been fitted up with thousands of unprecedented bells and whistles, but this is the one that I like best.


                        In free fall (is it okay to say “without gravity”?), water becomes a very strange sort of animal. If you let it out slowly, it gloms around the showerhead due to its surface tension. If you turn up the tap, droplets remain floating in the air. Anyone who entered such a room would drown.


                        Thankfully, the Project Wyvern engineers came up with a method to solve this problem. Introducing the “Showerpot”! Get inside a pot like a steel drum with your head sticking out and wash your body with the hot water that comes shooting out inside. Then, when it’s over, use pressurized air to blow away the water and a hairdryer to dry off. Finis.


                        After waiting three whole days, it was the greatest shower I’d ever had. I’m looking forward to using the “Shampoopot” tomorrow.


                        What I’m getting at here is that a stay on the Wyvern Orbital Hotel is very natural. Compared to the astronauts working away on other space stations, this is an environment of true luxury.


                        Yes, luxury indeed. I’m fully aware of the implications.


                        Take measures to combat global warming, or medicine, or agriculture, for instance. I wonder how many people in need could have been helped with the money used to bring me here. Even I had my doubts about the project when I heard that the Showerpot, whose sole purpose is to provide comfort during our stay, cost $200,000 to develop (wow, is that all?) and $450 each time we use it. In the end, though, my heart was swayed by Ronnie’s vision of spending time in space just as we normally do on Earth—of showing the world that this is possible—so I decided to set out on this trip with him, even though we hadn’t spoken in fifteen years.


                        Did the Apollo program prevent famine? Did a shuttle? Maybe not directly.


                        But the portrait of the Earth, Earthrise, that we imagine when we think about our planet was a photograph taken by Apollo 8 as they made their way to the moon. In the Cold War era, when we were at each other’s throats with nuclear weapons, that frail image of our home in the solar system floating in the blackness of space had the power to bring us all together.


                        Earthrise was taken by a soldier. The privilege of conveying the beauty of the Earth floating in emptiness was reserved for an astronaut who had taken many years of special training. If many more regular people came to see the Earth with their own eyes, then think how much easier it might be for us to consider the good of all.


                        Everyone, come to space!


                        I feel much better after writing this. Though I kind of regret giving the finger during that television broadcast.


                        Just when I thought everyone was beginning to forget me as a slobbering zombie during the launch, I did an image search for “Judy Smark” just a moment ago, and all I got were pictures of me with my middle finger up. Ronnie liked it so much he had them stick it on the top page of Project Wyvern’s site.


                        To everyone writing articles, you can download an official press kit from this blog.


                        Judy Smark, sophisticated lady despite appearances