2 A Proclamation




                        Fri, 11 Dec 2020, 03:23 -0800 (2020-12-11T11:23 GMT)


Pier 37 Warehouse, Seattle




                        Beneath the Alaskan Way Viaduct cutting north-south along Seattle’s coastline, Chance parked her Porsche Cayenne, checked to make sure that no one was around, and then headed for the warehouse at Pier 37 where Shiraishi was lying low. The very location revealed how incompetent the previous Chances had been. An East Asian person walking around in such a sparsely populated warehouse district was bound to stand out. To make matters worse, just past the warehouse was an office of the United States Coast Guard. A pier crawling with guardsmen 24/7 was simply the worst spot imaginable for a hideout.


                        As she climbed the warehouse’s exterior stairs, Chance’s thoughts turned to the progress being made on the construction of their new hideout downtown. They had secured the second floor of an office building right in the center of the city, and its “sterilization” would be finished within the week. Replacement of the wallpaper with material that blocked electromagnetic waves was still under way, but they could probably move in next week, though perhaps not start working there just yet. Chance raised her left hand, implanted with an RFID chip, to open the electronic lock beside the door. From inside the room, she heard Shiraishi’s fluent but strongly Russian-accented English. Chance opened the door a crack. In a room lit only by a single bare bulb, Shiraishi was seated on a bed facing a television, in the middle of a videoconference. Under the wavering light, she could see Shiraishi exhale white breath with every word he spoke. In this season, the unheated warehouse control room they used could drop below freezing. Thinking of Shiraishi holed up in these atrocious conditions for five long years, Chance felt renewed admiration for his devotion.


                        “That is right, Jose,” said Shiraishi. “X-Man prefers them Syd Mead–style. I have no doubt that he will choose the illustration you made based on my sketch. So let us get that thousand dollars, yes.”


                        “Thanks so much for your help, Kirilo,” said the man on the television screen. “But this satellite plan … Where did you get it? It’s uncannily realistic.”


                        “My father drew up the plan himself. He used to design Soviet communication satellites. I just added a little touch of my own to make it more like the Rod from God.”


                        Chance confirmed with some relief that Kirilo, the name Shiraishi was using, was from a zombie profile prepared by the Cyber Front. The real Kirilo Panchenko, a Ukrainian design drafter born in 1979, was already dead. It was no longer wise to use a made-up identity for illegal activities in the present age, when people could perform background checks online.


                        Chance went behind the television so as not to enter the frame of the camera. Shiraishi continued his conversation with the man he had called Jose without even glancing at her. His lengthy time spent in hiding had taught him to dissemble flawlessly in this way. It amazed Chance that he had learned so much under the wing of such incompetent handlers.


                        Shiraishi smiled brightly with his whole face as he spoke facing the camera. He had never smiled for Chance in that way. He seemed to be having a great time pretending to be someone else.


                        “We have little time, Jose. Now is the time to get moving, is it not?”


                        “You’re absolutely right. Speak to you soon then.”


                        The television went dark, and the bare bulb overhead shaded Shiraishi’s face with thick shadows. “Thanks for the drawing, Chance,” he said. “I just took the liberty of using it. Well, aren’t you looking pissed? Is something wrong?”


                        Chance came around to the front of the television and checked the videoconference log still displayed on the screen. Shiraishi had been talking with a man named Jose Juarez in East LA. His profile listed his job as “conceptual artist.” Probably working around Hollywood, she supposed.


                        The source of the communication was listed as “University of Ukraine.” It was one of the many computers that had been seized by the Cyber Front, which were collectively referred to as “Sleeping Gun.” There was no shortage of computers in the world with laxly managed security. The Cyber Front’s particular target was devices in poor countries unable to update to the latest version of Windows. Shiraishi used these sitting ducks to route his conference calls.


                        “You seem to have concealed the communication properly,” said Chance. “But exposing your face was a mistake.”


                        “Relax. I took care of that.”


                        “How exactly? Don’t underestimate the CIA and NSA. They can’t follow each and every transmission, but everything gets recorded.”


                        Though nearly every communication over a network, including videoconferences, was encrypted, government organizations also held the encryption/decryption key for major services. Shiraishi’s connection to Ukraine would therefore remain encrypted (though even this could likely be cracked within eight hours or so), but the video signal received by the illustrator in Hollywood would be saved in CIA servers as nonencrypted video.


                        “I know. That’s why I altered my face,” said Shiraishi, pointing to his eyes. He explained that he had used an intermediary program that randomly changed the angle and position of his mouth and eyes, which were used as recognition criteria by the facial-recognition engines of the software companies that supplied the CIA. He had also run his voice through a program that simulated the mouth and voice box to throw off voiceprint recognition as well. “The machines won’t even recognize it as a person’s face. The CIA’s continuously recording hundreds of terabytes every day. There’s no way they’d check videoconferences where no humans even appear.”


                        “But that guy saw your face.”


                        “True, I guess,” said Shiraishi with a shrug.


                        “Never do that again. If you ever need to do another videoconference I can sit in for you.”


                        “Okay. I’ll ask you next time.”


                        Chance sighed. It wasn’t as if Shiraishi would ever keep such promises.


                        Chance passed him two thermoses full of coffee. Shiraishi thanked her and poured some coffee into his cup.


                        “So how’s the script for the Supreme Leader and the advertising account coming along?” asked Shiraishi.


                        “I merged your account with the advertising sponsor. The cat food manufacturer Kitten Master. Payments come from the president’s Amex.”


                        Chance forwarded information about Kitten Master from her smartphone to the television. It was a rapidly expanding manufacturer of cat food made from organic ingredients specifically for kittens. The Cyber Front had got their hands on the president’s lost smartphone and had stolen all the passwords for his accounts, including email, social networks, and advertising.


                        “What’s the limit?” asked Shiraishi.


                        “It doesn’t seem to have one. You could probably use it up to around $1 million.”


                        Shiraishi whistled. “Poor guy. And all because of you, Chance.”


                        “His fault for not looking after it,” she said, curtly ending their discussion of the advertisement before explaining that she’d already received permission to switch the Supreme Leader’s speech. The rehearsal and recording were to be conducted in Pyongyang at 9:00 p.m.


                        “At 9:00 p.m. today?” Shiraishi said, half-closing his eyes and lowering his head slightly for a moment, as though thinking hard about something. “That means it’ll be starting soon.”


                        “What?”


                        “The rehearsal.”


                        “Did you memorize all the time zones?”


                        “You think I’d waste my time doing that? I just shine a light on a globe I imagine in my head and correct for economic blocs, that’s all. I’d never do something so stupid as memorize each and every one.” Shiraishi patted the sleeping bag he’d laid out on top of the bed. “Take a seat, why don’t you? Let’s have a gander at the princeling’s speech.”










Fri, 11 Dec 2020, 12:15 -0700 (2020-12-11T19:15 GMT)


Peterson Air Force Base




                        “Come in.”


                        Hearing the knock on his open door, Colonel Claude Lintz rolled up the mouth of the paper bag he’d had his nose in and put it behind his computer display. He’d never live it down if rumors spread that the reason he’d been late for work was that he’d gone to buy one of the organic wheat Danishes that Starbucks had started selling this year.


                        Looking up at the door, he saw Staff Sergeant Daryl Freeman standing there holding a tablet.


                        “Colonel Lintz. I’ve come to report on SAFIR 3,” said Freeman.


                        “Ah yes. The incident from yesterday,” said Lintz. “Shouldn’t you be reporting that to Major Fernandez?”


                        “I was told to report directly to you, sir. Let’s leave the ‘space stuff,’ as they put it, up to the colonel.”


                        “First I’ve heard of that. But he made the right call.” Lintz urged Freeman to take a seat. Someone like Sylvester who had started out as a pilot would be in over their head when it came to orbital objects. There was also something he wanted to ask Freeman. “I hate to do this when you’re the one who came to see me, but let me ask you something first. This story is about SAFIR 3, correct?”


                        Lintz took a three-page document from his “undecided” tray and put it on the table. It was an article from Geeple with the headline “ROD from GOD attacks ISS!” The article had been contributed by X-Man, and the banner featured an illustration credited to Jose Juarez.


                        “What do you think?” asked Lintz.


                        Dragging his chair over, Freeman took one glance at the headline and frowned doubtfully with his thick eyebrows. “That’s the article from yesterday, isn’t it? I read it earlier, but this is my first time seeing the illustration. Do you mind?” he asked, picking up the printout and briefly looking it over. “This is very well done. There’s a swiveling solar array wing, and to prevent that from throwing off the center of gravity there’s a projectile serving as a counterweight. You can also tell that the containment truss has been duralumin welded. Every individual element is outdated, but it’s well thought out overall. Like a design from the nineties … no, I’d say late eighties.”


                        “And what about the author of the article?”


                        Freeman flipped through the papers and then put them back on the desk. “It’s just some geek’s wild speculation, sir. I’m pretty sure there was a B movie with the same title. He just stole that and put it together with some stuff he picked off Wikipedia. It’s amazing that someone could draw such a realistic rendering of the Rod from God with only an article like this as their guide. This Jose really knows his stuff. He might have gotten advice from someone in the industry.”


                        In an age when private citizens were visiting the ISS on their own rockets, it wasn’t out of the question that a space-development professional might work on the illustration for a tabloid article.


                        “I completely agree. Let’s report it just like that. Can I add your name to say you verified the report, Sergeant?”


                        “That would be fine, but did you get a request for a report from somewhere?” Freeman crooked his neck quizzically.


                        “Yup. And guess where from? Our friends next door at USNORTHCOM. From what I hear, the aeronautics people and political people are fretting like mad over this issue. They’re even asking if we can deploy the ASM-140, experimental stage or not. Space experts like us have got to keep our cool when we deal with this. So tell me about SAFIR 3.”


                        Lintz wrote “checked by Sgt. Freeman” on a Post-it note and stuck it on the document before tossing it back into the tray.


                        “Thank you, sir. I’m here to report the results of last night’s observations.” Freeman woke up his tablet and looked down at it. Lintz caught a sparkle of stubble on his chin that hadn’t been there yesterday.


                        “You’re fast, Sergeant. Did you stay there overnight?”


                        “Yes, sir. SAFIR 3 made an overhead pass just last night, so I watched it on the monitor at the Oregon site. I wanted to avoid the heavy daytime air traffic around there by going late and …”


                        Stopping his words short, Freeman looked down at the tablet again, as though he was searching for some kind of error.


                        “What’s the matter?”


                        At Lintz’s question, Freeman straightened up and looked him in the eye. “The second stage of SAFIR 3 is accelerating,” he said.


                        “Are you sure?”


                        Freeman swept the tablet to the side and put his hands together on top of the table. “There’s no mistake. I double-checked. With an optical telescope, I could even see the light that X-Man claims is the thruster.”


                        Lintz took out the printout that he’d returned to the paper tray. He turned over the first page with the illustration on it and looked carefully at the sequential photographs with the caption “Moment of acceleration” for the Rod from God.


                        Freeman slid the tablet across the table. “This is a high-resolution image from X-Man’s site.”


                        On the screen was a photograph of a cylindrical object tilted diagonally. Its three-dimensional contours appeared in sharp relief against the blackish-blue sky.


                        “Where was this taken?”


                        “At 7.67 degrees south, 52.68 degrees east. That’s where X-Man runs his Seychelles Eye, an observatory located on the Indian Ocean.”


                        “It’s been asleep for quite a while … It can’t actually still be rotating?” said Lintz, pointing at the photograph.


                        The rocket had been launched December 1. The idea that the cylinder might still be angled on its side after ten days was crazy. A long, thin object with a heavy engine on one end should’ve been standing up by now under the influence of tidal-rising power.


                        “That’s one problem,” said Freeman, “but the more important issue is its acceleration.”


                        Lintz couldn’t have agreed more and urged Freeman to continue.


                        “On its two accelerations, SAFIR 3 increased its orbital velocity by 2.4 and 3.2 meters per second respectively.”


                        “So it still had some gas left?”


                        Freeman shook his head. “The acceleration occurred within one hundredth of a second.”


                        “What’s that?” Lintz’s gut told him this was impossible. In his head, he made a simple formula. For a four thousand–kilogram object to increase its velocity by 3.2 meters a second in one hundredth of a second would require 1,280,000 newtons of thrust. Only a few rockets had that kind of power, such as—


                        “You’re telling me it’s on par with the Space Shuttle? The Energia?”


                        “Well, we’ve only made two observations so far, sir, but …” Freeman nodded.


                        As Lintz stared at him, he felt a certain heat deep in his sinuses that he hadn’t felt in ages—not since the bunker beneath Cheyenne Mountain. In a shelter four hundred meters below ground, through 1.6 kilometers of tunnel, protected by two twenty-five-ton explosive resistant doors, he’d sat wondering whether an unidentified blip floating in Russian airspace was a passenger plane or a bomber or maybe an ICBM, nervously watching for indications of all-out nuclear war.


                        “Sergeant, that’s …” Lintz stopped himself. He wanted to work with Freeman to solve the mystery of this object. But, unfortunately, the job was outside his domain of authority. NORAD was no longer the main player in orbital monitoring. If SAFIR 3’s second stage was an orbital weapon as X-Man claimed, Lintz was supposed to report it to USNORTHCOM, and if it was debris, to the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee established in 1993. Both of these organizations were surely following the Rod from God story, which had even been taken up by the popular media site Geeple. They would probably be grateful for observational data from NORAD, but, Lintz realized, offering a hypothesis that was largely subjective would not be a wise move. “Sorry, but I’m going to handle this myself.”


                        Freeman’s lips tensed ever so slightly. Lintz wondered if he’d crushed the young man’s hopes. A spent rocket was displaying obviously erratic behavior, and here was some incompetent commander trying to shelve the whole thing. If that was how he took it, well, too bad. Though it might be best to have Freeman continue his observations and—


                        “Colonel! Your hotline isn’t connecting.” A deep voice overlapped with Lintz’s thoughts. Captain Jasmine Harrison was standing in the doorway with her hands on her hips. “Your BlackBerry’s out of batteries, isn’t it? Maybe you would have remembered if you hadn’t been fooling around at Starbucks!”


                        Jasmine’s round black finger pointed below Lintz’s belly. Tucked somewhere down there was his BlackBerry, which he used for important official communications. The cell phone was ancient, having been issued to Lintz fifteen years ago, and its battery had to be replaced twice daily, as Jasmine had implied.


                        “Sorry.” Noting his hefty flab, Lintz inserted his hand beneath his belly and withdrew his BlackBerry from his belt case. The battery still had 30 percent left, but as he watched, the signal indicator switched from out of service to searching.


                        “I’ve heard that fat blocks reception, you know,” said Jasmine. “Since you refuse to diet, please strap it to your arm or somewhere more appropriate. Major Fernandez got in touch while he was on lunch.”


                        “I’m really sorry. I’ll be more careful. So what was the major contacting us about?”


                        “This is a matter for field officers and above. If you’ll excuse us, Sergeant Freeman.” Jasmine pointed to the doorway and gave Freeman a wink. At this polite dismissal, Freeman stood up.


                        “Hold on there, Sergeant,” said Lintz. “You have my permission to continue with your observations. If you learn anything, report directly to me. Understood?”


                        “Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”


                        After watching Freeman leave, Jasmine approached Lintz’s desk and pointed to a message that had been blinking in the corner of his display.


                        “The major requested that you watch a video. It’s a speech from the Supreme Leader of North Korea set to be broadcast in twelve hours. Since it’s critical of American space development, the video has been passed on to us for verification. The CIA found it uploaded to a YouTube account and sent it here.”


                        “Thank you for coming to let me know.”


                        “You’re welcome. There’s anything you need, just let me know.” Promptly turning her plump body around, Jasmine was about to step out the doorway when she looked back over her shoulder. “What sort of mission are you going to say you were on when you went to Starbucks for that Danish? I’ll leave the pleasure of that little secret all to you. Your office just reeks of pastries.”


                        The door closed with a bang.










Sat, 12 Dec 2020, 10:15 +0900 (2020-12-12T01:15 GMT)


Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency’s Tokyo Office,


Solar City, Ochanomizu




                        Surrender space, America!


                        A man in an olive-colored outfit that wasn’t quite a military uniform and wasn’t quite a work suit raised his fist into the air and smashed it down on a press conference–style table.


                        Daiki Kurosaki was watching the man give a speech in a thirty-person capacity room on a one hundred–inch display used for meetings. With him was a coworker under his supervision, Makoto Sekiguchi. They were both taking notes while nibbling on junky snack foods.


                        A report that North Korea would be giving an “important” speech on space development had reached Kurosaki at six o’clock that morning. The JAXA International Relations Department, to which Kurosaki belonged, had to provide their “space experts’ opinion” to the minister of science and education and the minister of space policy. A Japanese space-development official had brought him on board and gotten him up to speed, but apparently the original intelligence had come from America. A country that listened in on all communications was on a whole different playing field.


                        As he was thinking all this, Kurosaki followed the machine-translated English subtitles superimposed over the chest of North Korea’s leader, without which he would have been unable to follow the speech.


                        The steady march of our space program has been impeded again and again by the superpowers. The test launches of our rockets intended for peaceful use are called missiles, and mere observational satellites are seen as orbital weapons. Why are such iniquities allowed to prevail?


                        Kurosaki couldn’t understand the audio at all, but YouTube’s machine translation was smooth, if a bit wordy. And the same sentences kept looping over and over.


                        “That’s the third time he said that,” muttered Sekiguchi in the seat across from Kurosaki.


                        Looking over, Kurosaki saw him poking at his tablet with his elbow on the table. “You look really bored,” he said.


                        “Yeah, because he just keeps repeating the same thing.”


                        “Hmm. So he does.” Following Sekiguchi, Kurosaki pushed his pen and pad to the side and reached into a bag of potato chips. The speech was the usual vitriol dressed up in courageous language. “We’ll be watching this recording a few times more anyways. So let’s try to enjoy it as regular viewers this time around. Like, just look at the kid. He’s completely transformed.”


                        In the eight years since the Supreme Leader had been inaugurated, his eerily glossy skin and frequently trembling voice had begun to settle into maturity, and he was giving speeches to the people more frequently. The careful choreography of following in the footsteps of his grandfather rather than those of his more reticent father had probably forced him to grow up, thought Kurosaki.


                        “Is there something different about him?” asked Sekiguchi.


                        “Sure. He’s a big boy now. Before he was so obviously a child.”


                        Give back space! The leader’s voice and the sound of him punching the table rang out together.


                        “No way, Kurosaki-san. That’s a little kid right there if I ever saw one.” Sekiguchi pointed to the screen with his straw and laughed, showing a flash of white teeth. Being in his midtwenties, Sekiguchi probably didn’t know how bumbling and green the Supreme Leader had been at the time of his inauguration. That would’ve been when Sekiguchi was in high school.


                        “I’d watch what you say there. Child or not, this is the ruler of a nation we’re talking about. But, man, is this long. The guys making the official Japanese translation must be in tears. Poor suckers.”


                        “If all we needed was English, this machine translation looks like it would do the trick. It’s just scary how smooth it is … Huh?”


                        Sekiguchi cocked his head to the side quizzically and looked at the English subtitles on the screen in bewilderment.


                        At this juncture, we of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have decided to strike the iron hammer of justice upon those symbols of American supremacy and imperialism—space stations.


                        “What’s up?” asked Kurosaki.


                        “The speech and the subtitles don’t match.”


                        “You can speak Korean too?”


                        “Just a touch. It’s not as good as my Chinese.”


                        Sekiguchi gave Kurosaki a wink through a thin slit he created between his index finger and thumb. A career bureaucrat on temporary assignment from the Ministry of Science and Education, Sekiguchi’s language abilities had been recognized by JAXA, who’d assigned him to the Department of International Affairs. He’d told Kurosaki he only had “a smattering” of foreign languages, but as it had turned out, he was proficient in English, French, German, and Chinese, and now a fifth language had been added. If he suddenly starting speaking Arabic next, Kurosaki wouldn’t have been surprised at all.


                        “There it is again.” Sekiguchi pointed at the screen.


                        “You mean the bit where he says ‘iron hammer’ or whatever?”


                        “Yeah. You hear where he says cheolgwon. That means ‘clenched fist,’ but the English subtitles say ‘strike the iron hammer.’ He’s not saying anything about any space station at all. If you put it together in context and translate it roughly into Japanese, it’s something like ‘American space development will come up against our powerful fist-like will.’ The fact that YouTube’s machine translation has been this smooth is just weird to begin with.”


                        “I don’t really get it, but … This is no good.”


                        “What isn’t?”


                        “It’s the minister.” Kurosaki turned over the paper on which he’d been taking notes and handed it to Sekiguchi. Printed on the back were the schedules of the minister of science and education and the minister of space policy. The former could be set aside because he was currently traveling abroad, but the problem was the space minister, who was known for frequent gaffes. “He loves English—actually, that’s about all he has going for him—so he should be able to read these subtitles himself. Then he’ll jump to mad conclusions about the speech.”


                        The minister of space policy was set to have an interview that evening and then make an appearance later that night on the online media site Piyo Live. It was up to them to make sure he didn’t say anything stupid.


                        “Oh boy. Piyo Live, is it?” said Sekiguchi. “Journalists doing the Japanese version of Geeple will be there too. Did you hear the news? The headline in English was ‘ROD from GOD attacks ISS!’ I’m pretty sure there was a Japanese—ah, here it is.”


                        Sekiguchi turned his tablet to show the screen to Kurosaki. Above what could only be called random nonsense about orbital weapons was an all-too-well-realized illustration. Annoyingly, a kitten leaped out of an advertisement for cat food and ran across the article.


                        “Take a look at the comments. Someone is posting from their Facebook account that North Korea’s ‘iron hammer’ from the speech is the Rod from God.”


                        “Who? What idiot would write something as irresponsible—”


                        “An ex-NASA engineer, apparently.” When Sekiguchi opened the link for the comment, a Facebook account appeared. After staring at it for a while, he said, “This is weird.”


                        “What’s wrong?”


                        “If this is a real ex-NASA engineer’s profile, I’m Neil Armstrong.”


                        “A prank, huh? Oh boy.”


                        Kurosaki pressed the sides of his eyes. If the minister improperly understood the subtitles of the leader’s speech and then heard from a journalist that a NASA engineer had stated that the ‘iron hammer’ was the Rod from God, he’d probably be seized by the idea that North Korea was using orbital weaponry to keep America in check. Kurosaki was reminded of what an old friend had once told him: “People are most certain about the things they discover for themselves.” The minister simply lacked the familiarity with space-development technology to tell how preposterous the Rod from God theory was.


                        Sekiguchi was tapping on his tablet like crazy.


                        “What are you doing?” Kurosaki asked.


                        “Translating the North Korean speech into Japanese. Ugh, this sucks. And I thought I’d be home by evening.” Sekiguchi was smiling. By nature, he liked to be the one to resolve a crisis.


                        “I see. Well, I’ll send in a report that says the so-called Rod from God is not a plausible weapon. If we can get the minister some information that’ll make him feel more in the know than the journalists, that should stop him from loosing his lips.”


                        Kurosaki remembered his friend. If he’d been here in this situation, what kind of report would he write? Just like Sekiguchi smiling there before him as he rushed in to put out the fire, he’d surely have …










Shambe, 22 Azar 1399, 09:02 +0430 (2020-12-12T05:32 GMT)


Tehran Institute of Technology, Aviation Research Building




                        A spider descended from the ceiling on a thread and landed on a drafting table that stood on the edge of a grubby desk. Jamshed Jahanshah swept the cuff of his loose work suit over the paper resting on the drafting table and tried to knock the eight-legged intruder that had interrupted his calculations onto the floor. The dangling thread’s movements defied Jamshed’s predictions, and with a soft flutter, it tangled itself into his mustache. The cause of this little incident was that someone had opened the door.


                        Wiping off the thread, Jamshed turned around in his chair. There, in the dim laboratory doorway, stood Alef Kadiba, a friend of his enrolled in the Department of Law.


                        “Here you are,” said Alef. Wearing brand-new jeans, a warm-looking sweater, and a North Pole mountain parka, he carried a tablet in a yellow case under his arm. An American model owned only by a select few at Tehran IT, it was even fitted with a SIM that let him access the websites of America and the EU. Such service contracts were usually reserved for foreigners, but he was able to acquire the privilege because his father ran a trading company.


                        The cuff of Jamshed’s cotton work suit was all black now, so he stripped down to his regular clothes underneath and slung the suit over the back of his chair. Another draft came in, and the threads hanging from the ceiling began to sway about erratically.


                        “I’m surprised to see you too. What are you doing up so early in the morning, Alef, and all the way out here?”


                        Alef frowned with his shapely eyebrows, brushed off the thread that had made contact with his nose, and looked up at the web-covered ceiling. “This room is just incredible.”


                        “I’ve got no funding. No tea to offer you. No students even.” Jamshed beckoned his friend over.


                        The exterior of the Department of Astronautical Engineering research building looked impressive, but everything else about it was sorely lacking. The electricity was insufficient, to say nothing of the computer network. The walls were uninsulated and the ceiling bare of panels. Power cables and the absolute minimum number of Ethernet cables ran along the rungs of wiring racks that spanned exposed beams down to an array of computers directly below them, and countless spiders had made nests in the cracks. The computers, too, left much to be desired, all of them outdated models connected to bulbous cathode-ray tube displays. Even Jamshed, the head of the research center, had been reduced to applying a Chinese-made update to a pirated version of Windows XP and was nursing that along carefully.


                        “I found an interesting news clip,” said Alef. “It has to do with Korea.”


                        “You mean Professor Ryu?”


                        In the Department of Astronautical Engineering, if you said “Korea,” it meant “Professor Ryu,” sent there from North Korea on a technological exchange program. He’d been sold as an engineer involved in the important task of constructing the Taepodong-2 missile, but the professor was not exactly pleasing to the eye and had garnered little respect. Rumor had it that he had been demoted for failing at some project or perhaps inciting the displeasure of the upper echelons. Saying they were exchanging personnel and technology made great PR, but the program was also being used by both countries to foist incompetent rejects on each other.


                        “No, I mean North Korea. The professor’s home country. Those guys are really going for it. You should take a look for yourself, Jamshed.”


                        “I couldn’t care less what North Korea is doing. Underdeveloped countries have no bearing on my research.”


                        “You mean like those balloons you sent up? How did that go, by the way? You don’t seem to be working on it much these days.”


                        “Oh, I’m working on it,” said Jamshed, glowering at Alef. He had finished a paper summarizing his experiments dropping homemade devices from a balloon, but Hamed, his advisor, had been demoted to a post in North Korea without ever understanding its real significance. His demotion had come about because the SAFIR 2 he had helped to design had failed to release its satellite. “There’s no way I’d stop this research. The experimentation stage is over. All that’s left is to do calculations on paper.”


                        “Well, keep on it, then,” said Alef, pulling a sheaf of papers piled on the desk toward him and propping up his tablet against it before pressing play on a video. “This is a speech given by the leader of North Korea that was broadcast earlier today, but did you hear that thing he just said, ‘iron hammer’? I thought you might be interested in seeing the real thing.”


                        Looking proud of himself, Alef stroked the screen and brought up an English article entitled “ROD from GOD attacks ISS!”


                        “This is from Geeple, right?” Even Jamshed, who was unable to connect to America and the EU through the Internet, had heard of the online tabloid Geeple. That was because the Japanese service Meteor News occasionally pointed out Geeple’s mistakes in their paid newsletter. The subscription fee of two euros a month was a lot for Jamshed, but he was grateful to have access to the service, as it provided glimpses of the outside world.


                        “I know this site is full of hoaxes, but it all depends on the article. This one seems legit. There’s even an illustration to go with it. Have you heard of the Rod from God? It’s an orbital weapon that uses connected energy to smash a token project into the Earth.”


                        Jamshed skimmed through. The article was filled with hyperbole and text in all caps, so he could kind of understand Alef’s mistakes, but still … “Hey, Alef. I know this article might be a tough read, but it says the weapon drops tungsten projectiles on the Earth with kinetic energy.”


                        “Oh. What does that mean?”


                        Jamshed sighed. “To put it plainly, all it says is ‘drop a metal rod from orbit onto the Earth using gravity.’ ”


                        “Wow, that’s amaz—”


                        “Sure, but hold on,” Jamshed interrupted, trying to think how he was going to explain this to his friend, whose major was law, so that he would actually understand.


                        “Smacking an orbital object into the Earth is much harder than you’d imagine.” Jamshed flipped to a fresh page on the drafting board and drew two concentric circles. On the outer circle he also drew an arrow.


                        “The inner circle is Earth, and the outer circle is the orbit followed by satellites. Got it?”


                        Alef, hand to his chin, nodded.


                        “Satellites with the altitude, for example, of the International Space Station fly at a velocity of 7.7 kilometers per second.” Jamshed added an X to the outer circle and wrote 7.7 km/s. “Now imagine we were to release a metal rod here. What do you think would happen?”


                        “It would fall to Earth.”


                        “Nope. The inertial motion of 7.7 km/s isn’t going to just disappear. It would keep flying along the same orbit.” Jamshed drew a curving line from the X along the outside of the outer circle and added another arrow.


                        “The only way to make it fall to Earth is to whack it in the opposite direction.” Jamshed added a short arrow above the X going in the opposite direction of the previous one.


                        “When disposing of satellites, reverse thrust is used in this way to bring them down to a lower orbit, where they come in contact with the atmosphere and burn up.” Jamshed drew a straight line from the X toward the perimeter of the inner circle, the surface of the Earth. “To do something like what’s described in that article, you would have to eliminate the weapon’s orbital velocity all at once. But you’ve got no brakes or anything like that to work with. The only way is to accelerate against the direction of motion.”


                        “So you’d need something like a rocket engine, I guess.”


                        “Exactly. And there would have to be fuel in the engine. So say we wanted to knock ten tons of metal from the altitude of the ISS on a course directly perpendicular to the ground. Well, the gravitational acceleration is a bit small, but if we were the SAFIR’s engine …” Jamshed wrote 10exp(7700/350/8.7) on the margin of a piece of paper. He was using the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation. Formulated more than one hundred years ago in 1898, the equation remained valid even today, obeyed by all rockets that flew by expulsion of propellants. Jamshed tapped on a scientific calculator with the numbers worn off and completed his calculation.


                        “It looks like one hundred … and twenty-five tons of fuel would be required. Keep in mind this is an extreme example.”


                        “One hundred twenty-five tons to drop ten tons …”


                        “And to get that up into orbit, you would need an immense amount of fuel as well. Just to put it in perspective, the object we used SAFIR 3 to send up only weighed 100 kg.”


                        Alef looked back and forth between Jamshed’s face and the numbers at his fingertips, his mouth agape.


                        “You didn’t get your PhD with only pencil and paper for nothing.”


                        “Are you being sarcastic?”


                        Alef opened his eyes wide, looked up at the ceiling, and clicked his tongue. A gesture that meant “no.”


                        “Fine, whatever. You’re right that no one does calculations like these in their head these days. But paper and a calculator”—Jamshed crumpled up the piece of paper with the circles on it and threw it in the garbage bin—“are the only tools I’ve got. Only the students working on the SAFIR get computers.”


                        “Sorry, Jamshed. I was out of line. So anyways, this ‘iron hammer’ …”


                        “It has to be North Korea. Just another one of their bluffs probably. Putting weapons in orbit and attacking orbital objects are prohibited by international treaties to begin with. And America isn’t going to stay quiet about this. I’m guessing China will make the first move. If North Koreans start playing with fire in orbit where their inhabited space station, Tiangong-2, is, China will bring down the ‘iron hammer’ of a food embargo.”


                        “But they could just hide it, couldn’t they? Like, they could break it down into small parts, launch them one by one, and assemble the whole thing in orbit or—”


                        “Not going to happen. A debris defense system has been constructed up there. There’s no chance it would miss a weapon that large. Even private services can tell you the location of debris only a few centimeters in length.”


                        Jamshed spun his chair so he was facing the computer on his desk and opened Meteor News’s “Debris Corner” to show Alef. Some hundreds of thousands of pieces of debris were indicated with small green dots, and the ones with some likelihood of falling into the atmosphere were highlighted red.


                        “This is an online service from Japan. See how much you can learn even with just the information that’s been made public? There’s just no way an object big enough to smash into the Earth would go undetected.”


                        “Wow, that’s incredible. I can’t believe this is all done by a private company …”


                        Jamshed was about to point out that it was, in fact, done by an individual, but then he noticed how intensely Alef was staring at the 3-D display on Meteor News and was reminded of how remarkable it was. With every single piece of debris and satellite on one screen, the amount of information was surely immense, but it was never tiring to look at, and following a particular orbital object that interested you was almost effortless. The service was so well designed it wasn’t surprising that Alef would assume it was a much bigger operation than it actually was.


                        “This service depends a lot on the Internet too, doesn’t it?”


                        “It must,” Jamshed replied, an instant before realizing the direction in which Alef wanted to steer the conversation. He braced himself.


                        “You need Internet too, Jamshed. Why don’t you come to the rally next week? We—”


                        “It’s got nothing to do with me.”


                        “Don’t just brush me off like that. Having no access to American sites is just as big a problem for you as the rest of us. Not even the guys in the architecture department are using calculators and paper anymore. I’m sure there are countless free tools online for you space people too.”


                        “We can’t connect, and that’s just the way it is. I’ll find a way to work around it. There were no computers a hundred years ago, and space hasn’t changed a bit since then. You’re the one who should be concerned. You must’ve heard that some tricky characters are going to be there.”


                        Jamshed had heard that several antigovernmental organizations were planning to co-opt the demonstration that Alef was promoting, “Azadi Interanet. Internet Freedom.” It was unlikely that such rumors had failed to reach Alef’s ears, but it was difficult for someone with the sort of privileged upbringing Alef had enjoyed to wrap his head around the possibility of such malignant intentions.


                        Whether he had grasped Jamshed’s concerns or not, Alef stroked his neat mustache and smiled. “It’ll be fine. What we’re after isn’t so outrageous. Just free Internet access of the kind already enjoyed by foreign companies expanding their business in Iran. Democracy and Islam are highly compatible in essence. If our imams were to see the Internet too—”


                        Jamshed waved his hand dismissively with a fed-up smile to show he was tired of hearing this.


                        “I want you to be there, Jamshed. You may not realize this, but the students really respect you.”


                        “Yeah, right.”


                        “They say you have a backbone. They say if you joined us, then even a few of the guys from the astronautical engineering department, who think about nothing but ‘the jump’ or ‘the leap,’ or whatever it is, might join us too.”


                        “A few? If it’s just a few, then what’s the point? And it’s like I told you earlier. My research is coming along. So you take care of your business and I’ll take care of mine.”


                        “How disappointing to hear you say that, Jamshed. We’ll be at the student center if you change your mind.”


                        Jamshed watched Alef brush aside threads of spiderweb as he made his way toward the exit and then shifted his gaze to the drafting board. To the blueprint and formula. The laws that govern the universe might not have changed, but if only he had free rein to use computers, this calculation would be done in an instant. If only he could read the latest academic articles … The manager of Meteor News mentioned again and again in various articles that he wasn’t a specialist. Jamshed guessed he was just being modest but was still amazed that an individual could create a service of such quality. Without a doubt, the total quantity of knowledge buried in the Internet was just incredible.


                        Jamshed sighed deeply and added a new line to his drawing. Just how far advanced were the people on the outside?










Sat, 12 Dec 2020, 15:00 +0900 (2020-12-12T06:00 GMT)


Shibuya, Fool’s Launchpad




                         … In closing, thanks for your honest words.


                        Regards,


                        Kazumi Kimura


                        Meteor News


                        Kazumi hesitated for a moment, wondering if his English was okay, and then pressed Send. The English specialist at Fool’s Launchpad, Mary, to whom everyone outsourced their language queries, had messed up a translation. Her bottom-of-the-barrel prices were attractive—¥30,000 monthly retainer and ¥3,000 per translation into Japanese—but her translations frequently caused problems because she knew little about IT.


                        Akari was spreading out her equipment beside Kazumi when she heard him sigh and asked, “What’s wrong?”


                        “Our English whiz screwed me over. Want to a have a look? It’s pretty long.”


                        Kazumi chat messaged Akari an email sent to him by someone named Ozzy Cunningham along with Mary’s translation of it. The message’s subject, “Fuckin TLE!” had been rendered as “Splendid telephone!” and three full screens of biting sarcasm had transformed into a fan letter. Ozzy’s mail wasn’t just long, it was crammed with technical words related to astronomy and IT jargon. So hardly an easy read, but Kazumi wished Mary would lay off on her stream-of-consciousness translations informed by limited understanding.


                        By the time she had finished reading the message, Akari’s shoulders were shaking with laughter. “Kimura-san. You should take care of English yourself. Mary’s is junior high level at best.”


                        Without thinking, Kazumi swept his gaze around the room. Many of his office mates at Fool’s Launchpad trusted the services provided by Mary. Akari, with her bizarre style and spectacular skills, had developed enough of a reputation in the office for her strong sense of individuality that she could get away with saying such things, probably even to Mary herself. But Kazumi didn’t like the idea of being made her accomplice. Kazumi sighed. Aside from him and Akari, only a handful of their colleagues were present, racing the clock to finish a web creation project. All of them wore headphones and were fully absorbed in their tasks. Luckily, it seemed, there was little chance anyone had overheard the conversation.


                        “What’s the mistake this Cunningham guy’s on about?” asked Akari.


                        “That the TLEs on Meteor News are wrong. According to him, there’s something fishy about the ones for SAFIR 3.” Kazumi clicked the link in the signature at the bottom of Ozzy’s email and the home page for Seychelles Eye appeared on the screen. “Oh. I know this guy. He’s famous.” Kazumi realized this as soon as he saw the orbital-weapon illustration at the top. The Ozzy Cunningham who was complaining to Meteor News was X-Man, the guy who had contributed the Rod from God article to Geeple that was making a stir. Kazumi had had no idea he was a paying subscriber to Meteor News.


                        “Wow. Can I have a look too?” said Akari.


                        “Of course,” Kazumi replied, messaging her the URL for Seychelles Eye and then taking a close look at the article. If Meteor News is being slandered here, we’ll have to make a complaint of our own, Kazumi thought as he began to read the article, but he soon found himself enthralled by the many beautiful photographs. Their resolution was phenomenal. Definitely taken with an optical telescope in the meter class. Their metadata said that they had been taken at Seychelles Eye, surely the eponymous location used as the blog’s title. This meant that X-Man no doubt personally owned observatory-quality astronomical devices.


                        As Kazumi was concentrating on reading the article, orange fingernails leaped in front of the screen. Without his noticing, Akari had come around behind him.


                        “Kimura-san. Are you listening to me? What’s this about ‘observational data’?”


                        Her fingernail, painted to match her hair, was pointing at a bunch of numbers near the end of the article. Kazumi immediately clicked the link without thinking, and the browser window filled with numerals broken up by commas.


                        “If you don’t close the tab, your browser’s going to crash. I’m downloading it by cURL, but there has to be 150 gigs there—about three hundred million lines.”


                        Kazumi hurriedly closed the browser.


                        “Here’s the data I have so far,” said Akari, and put her tablet beside Kazumi. The screen was completely filled with text, each line containing five pieces of data broken up by commas:


                        00001, 01:55:02.0201 GMT Friday 11 Dec, 2103020.135308, 4.782202, 0.003021


                        00002, 01:55:02.0201 GMT Friday 11 Dec, 2106932.396025, 4.782674, 0.014942


                        00003, 01:55:02.0201 GMT Friday 11 Dec, 2101959.492682, 4.784925, 0.023065


                        00004, 01:55:02.0201 GMT Friday 11 Dec, …


                        “Hmm. What could this be?” Kazumi wondered. “The number at the beginning definitely indicates the sequence, and the next is the time.”


                        “I got that much. But what about the three pieces of data after that?”


                        “I have no idea. Hold on a second. I think there’s a guide to reading X-Man’s data somewhere.”


                        Kazumi tried searching within the Seychelles Eye blog. In an entry submitted by an account called “Friday,” he found something that said “radar observation data,” but technical words were used in an amateurish way throughout the site, so he knew better than to take this description at face value. “I think this data is from observations made with a radio telescope. But there doesn’t seem to be a guide to interpreting it. If he’s going to put this up online, he should at least tell us how to—”


                        “Data from a telescope, you say? Sounds like fun. Do you think it’s okay to read this however we like?” Akari’s eyes were positively sparkling. Apparently there were some things in this world that even she found exciting. Kazumi was amazed.


                        “It’s posted on his blog for everyone to see, so I’m sure it’s fine, but what are you thinking?”


                        “Pattern analysis. The parameter that you said is the sequence number goes up to 1,024 before repeating. It’s a 10-bit number. And the time moves forward by one thousandth of a second every time the sequence repeats. That tells me this data has to represent successive changes in a set of values. I want to feed the rest of the data through this little guy.”


                        Akari took a palm-sized electronic substrate from her pocket and dangled it from her fingertips. Kazumi could see USB and Ethernet connectors on a chip wrapped in clear plastic. It was the mysterious device that she had tossed on the table the day before.


                        “This is the latest Raspberry. It’s a miniature Linux machine with a built-in programmable chip. I want to try out parallel computing with him. I won’t understand what the data means even after the analysis is finished, so I’d appreciate if you could help me out at that point.”


                        In other words, she had acquired a new toy and wanted to play with it. Kazumi supposed that this was how Akari had cultivated her matchless skills.


                        “Okay. Just let me know when the analysis is finished. This site has tons of data just like this. We might find something to write about for Meteor News in here,” Kazumi said, pointing at the Seychelles Eye page. Suddenly an animated kitten appeared on top of the illustration for the Rod from God. It was an overlay advertisement of the kind growing popular of late.


                        Akari shrugged. “I see the Kitten Master is here too. It’s been on our site ever since yesterday.”


                        “Wha-what? Are you … sure?”


                        “Kimura-san. Don’t tell me you only ever look at the site in administrator mode with the advertisements off. There should be a good amount of money coming in from those ads for the past few days.”


                        “Sorry. I’ll check right now.”


                        Kazumi clicked on his bookmark for the ad management page. On the control panel was a number higher than he’d ever seen there: ¥300,000.


                        “See,” said Akari. “It’s already over ¥300,000 just from yesterday.”


                        “Huh?”


                        “It looks like Kitten Master has hijacked the pay-per-click advertisements on sites related to the Rod from God. I’ll try clicking once, so just tell me how the ad revenue changes.”


                        When Akari brought Meteor News up on her tablet and tapped on the kitten banner, a cat food retail site appeared. It sold a new product marketed as non-GMO and organic. The price was thirty dollars for one hundred ounces, about 3 kg. Not having a cat, Kazumi had no idea if this was a good deal or not. When he saw the number added to the ad revenue, he gasped.


                        “Five thousand … yen?”


                        This made no sense to him at all. An advertisement that offered ¥5,000 for every click in order to sell cat food for ¥3,000 a pop was inconceivable. The issue of how to post an ad on the web often came up during the AMX hosted by Watanabe, and according to him, a rough target for the conversion rate, representing the ratio of the number of people who clicked on the advertisement to the portion of those people who bought the product, was 3 percent. This meant that to recoup on an advertisement paying ¥5,000, the product should cost approximately ¥1,700,000.


                        Moreover, this cat had been appearing on Geeple too, which was supposed to get something like 1,500,000 pageviews daily. If 1 percent of the visitors clicked the banner by mistake, the advertiser would have to pay out ¥75 million per day.


                        “Someone must have made a mistake with the advertisement settings,” said Kazumi, “but if you add in the amount for Geeple, it has to run to … 100 million—what’s wrong?”


                        Akari was frowning and glowering at the advertisement account displayed on Kazumi’s screen, lightly biting her lip. Only then did Kazumi realize she was wearing lipstick of the same orange as her manicure and Afro.


                        “Numata-san,” Kazumi addressed Akari. “Do you know anything about this?”


                        “… No, it’s nothing. Nice to get an unexpected bonus.” Akari shook her head and smiled at Kazumi. He could now see that she was absolutely right. The ¥300,000 was income for Meteor News, of which Akari would take 20 percent.


                        “It looks like that data is finished downloading,” she said. “I’m going to start the analysis.”


                        Returning to the seat across from Kazumi, Akari picked up a monocular display from among the gadgets on her desk, mounted it on her head, and twisted earphones into her ears. With gadgets growing out from her orange Afro and all sorts of devices like the bare substrate in front of her, she looked like a character from an old science fiction movie.


                        “While you’re dealing with that, I’m going to ask if anyone on the Meteor News blog knows how to read this,” said Kazumi. “We can’t count on Cunningham-san and … Are you coming in tomorrow too? It’s Sunday, you know.”


                        “Of course. The only time I can lay out all my devices like this is when no one’s here, you know.” Akari put a small keyboard on her left upper arm and strapped it on. “Also, getting fully decked out like this is way over the top. I can’t let anyone see me like this.”










Fri, 11 Dec 2020, 23:35 -0500 (2020-12-12T04:35 GMT)


Project Wyvern




                        Wind dripping with Gulf Stream humidity flutters my hood and blows toward the pure-white rocket lit up by countless LEDs. Am I moved or afraid? Before I know it, I’m hugging my own shoulders.


                        Seeing me shiver, my father, Ronnie Smark, puts a parka over me. “Behold, Judy. See how far humankind has come!”


                        Nice literary way to start off, don’t you think? No? Okay. I know, I know. But seeing that rocket just moments before takeoff, I just had to write it, though I know I’m no novelist. If only I had Tiptree Jr.’s talent.


                        Tomorrow, the white tower looming thirty meters tall before me will shake off gravity to carry my father and me to a height of 350 kilometers.


                        Have you ever tried to imagine such a great distance? I’m five foot eight, and when I stand on the beach looking out to sea, the distance to the farthest visible horizon is a mere 4.5 km. If I were to stand at the highest point on Earth, the peak


of Mount Everest, the horizon would be 356 km away. In other words, it is the farthest distance you can see on the surface of the Earth. Can you picture it? Try to see that distance going straight up. That’s where I’m going.


                        I’m sorry my units of measurement are all mixed up. The Project Wyvern space people refuse to count the distance for me in the miles and yards that I’m familiar with. In this blog, I’m hoping to give you a sense of what it’s actually like being here.


                        I have one more thing to apologize for. I’ve taken some dramatic liberties with the words of my father in the introduction. Father forgot I was even there, and raising his hands to the sky, he screamed, “Look! See how far the power of the market has come.”


                        Which goes to show you how each person gets excited about something different. But I want you all to understand the miracle that occurred in that moment. When my father screamed, the fuel-replenishment hose pouring in LNG made from shale gas came loose, creating a small cloud of liquefied fuel. Then Loki 9, raising its head above the cloud, seemed to me like a monument standing in a dream. It was a spectacular scene.


                        Father held his breath, as transfixed by the rocket as I was, and then immediately squeezed his hand into a fist, saying, “Orbit is just down the street, but I’m going to leave this whole neighborhood behind.”


                        Father has reached almost the pinnacle of success as a financier, blessed with incredible luck and the vision to see just a bit further than anyone else, but he intends to go further yet—much further. How much of this is empty boasting? Might he make it to the moon? Mars? I guess both would probably be impossible during our lifetime, but the next generation might go.


                        I can see that the possibility of that one day coming true rests on the success of tomorrow’s launch and our sojourn in space.


                        I must rest up.


                        Though I’m sure I’ll be too excited to sleep.


                        —Judy Smark and Father