11 Unity




                        Chaharshambe, 26 Azar 1399, 12:43 +0330


(2020-12-16T09:13 GMT)


Tehran Institute of Technology




                        Tumbling into a van, Kurosaki rolled up the flag and stuffed it in his bag. Alef had said earlier that he wanted to keep the flag as a symbol of their friendship, but they couldn’t leave any evidence and were planning instead, with much reluctance, to cut up their talisman from a moment earlier and toss it.


                        Once Sekiguchi had given some kind of instructions to the driver, the engine started and the car began to roll over the rough pavement. Kurosaki felt the rumble of the pebbles scattered all over the road coming up through the creaking suspension.


                        “What a day,” said Sekiguchi, passing Kurosaki a quilted field coat from the back of the van.


                        Putting his arms through the sleeves, Kurosaki felt the blood run to his fingertips and an itchy sensation climbing his skin. Considering the low temperature outside, they should have been dressed this warmly to begin with. But Kurosaki believed they had made the right move in deciding to wear only their suits, as this had allowed them to pose as out-of-place NPO members unfamiliar with the environment. Still, the tension moments earlier had made Kurosaki sweat heavily, draining his body completely of heat.


                        Every time the two men breathed, the windows fogged up white inside. Wiping the one closest to him, Kurosaki saw the parking circle in front of the institute rush by in the spaces between buildings. For just a moment, he glimpsed soldiers pointing their automatic rifles to the sky. Remembering how his back had been exposed to those barrels, Kurosaki felt a tremor rise from the base of his spine and reflexively hugged himself tight.


                        “… Sorry. I seem to be tired.”


                        “Of course, Kurosaki-san.”


                        Sekiguchi flipped up the collar of his suit to cover his throat and began to zip up the coat he was wearing over it. His fingers moved supplely as he went on to button up the flap that covered the zipper, from bottom to top. Tracking Sekiguchi’s motions with his eyes, Kurosaki arrived at his face and saw that his expression was just like always. Even though he had been in the line of fire just as Kurosaki had …


                        Questions welled up in Kurosaki’s mind one after the other. Over the past few days, Sekiguchi’s actions had gone far beyond what might be called simply “capable.” He had clued in to the North Korean agents at Fool’s Launchpad, slipped into the Nippon Grand Hotel used by Chinese spies, and even chartered a helicopter. Then, when he’d learned that JAXA’s MDM had been hacked, he had turned this against the hackers by leaving behind his JAXA-issued device, activating a rather fishy app that sent blank messages. Everything up to that point could be put up to his inborn intelligence and the fact that he had a colleague in the NSC.


                        But the Iridiums were a different story. Though he claimed to have had them sent from Singapore, there was no way that importing equipment capable of bypassing the government’s Internet barriers and censorship could be as easy as he had made it seem. How could he have gotten them through customs? Then there was the information about the demonstration. After meeting Alef and the students in person, Kurosaki was surprised to learn how small their movement was. Their demonstration wasn’t exactly going to shake the nation the way the Arab Spring had. He hated to put it so harshly, but it was more like a game played by students with an inferiority complex toward the English-speaking world. If it hadn’t been co-opted by the rebel groups, it never would have been so well attended that it was difficult to even enter the campus, and Kurosaki doubted that the intelligence agencies of Japan, which had fallen sorely behind the times, would have known who the organizer of such an insignificant protest was.


                        And when exactly did Sekiguchi come up with the strategy of securing their network access indirectly by giving the students Iridiums? The army had been called in because Hamas had tried to co-opt the demo, but somehow Sekiguchi had known about both the rebel involvement and the army’s mobilization before they had even left Japan …


                        “Let’s toast our success,” said Sekiguchi, raising a pink plastic bag in his hand. “I had the driver go buy this for us. Just some water.”


                        Sekiguchi scrunched the two plastic bottles together in one hand, opened the caps, and proffered one to Kurosaki.


                        “Thanks,” said Kurosaki. “This time you—”


                        “Cheers,” Sekiguchi interrupted, and lifted his bottle to take a gulp. “It was pretty cold out there, but only because we were sweating. The air is dry too. Go ahead, Kurosaki-san.”


                        Urged on by Sekiguchi, Kurosaki took a sip. It felt good to have this liquid soak into the pasty membranes throughout his mouth. Once again he tipped back the bottle and gulped down more refreshment.


                        “How about a smoke to go with that? I had him pick up some cigarettes too,” said Sekiguchi, opening the seal on the pack adroitly and offering one to Kurosaki. “I bet you’re dying to try shisha, though, since we’re in Iran and all.”


                        “You’ve done that before.”


                        “Huh?”


                        “The cigarette. You don’t smoke, right? The way you passed it over was pretty slick.”


                        “That’s because I was working for an organization with connections to China until last year. Members of the Communist Party still smoke like chimneys in their seats at conferences.”


                        When Kurosaki lit the cigarette and took a puff, the heavy smoke clung to his freshly lubricated throat and he broke out coughing.


                        “… This stuff is kind of harsh. I’m going to smoke the cigarettes I brought. So you were in China?”


                        Sekiguchi shrugged and thrust the pack of cigarettes he’d been playing around with into his coat pocket. “Yes, another country with no free access to the Internet.”


                        “Were there demonstrations like this over there?”


                        “Sporadically, yes. But, boy, am I jealous.” Sekiguchi put his lips to his bottle.


                        “Of what?”


                        “Of Kadiba and those students. They’re incredibly unruly, but see how they’re willing to risk their lives? Printing posters, searching the student body for people who believe in their cause, giving speeches. I doubt they expect things to change immediately, but I envy the fact that they’re dedicating themselves to something. All I do is complain all the time.”


                        Sekiguchi wiped the window with the sleeve of his coat.


                        At some point, the disturbance around the rotary had faded behind them, and office buildings came into view. Electric bikes began to fill the spaces between rows of cars as traffic thickened. The signs written only in Persian had disappeared, and Kurosaki could now see the logos of international corporations everywhere.


                        “The situation is the same in China,” said Sekiguchi, “except here foreign companies that come hunting for oil have special permission to access the Internet without restrictions. So when people see this, of course they would—Kurosaki-san, are you okay?”


                        Listening to Sekiguchi, Kurosaki had suddenly been overcome with sleepiness. “Sorry,” he said.


                        “Hang in there. Looks like a traffic jam is on its way. The hotel—is thirty minutes—away.”


                        Sekiguchi’s voice began to break up. Kurosaki struggled to keep his eyes open. Something rubbing against the back of his coat. Feeling tipsy. He closed his eyes slowly.


                        “Please take a nice, long rest. But before that—”


                        Kurosaki felt a cool hand on his cheek and then a thumb on the nape of his neck. When he opened his eyes, he realized that he was lying on his side across the backseat. Sekiguchi’s face warped as it peered down from over him.


                        “Have you heard the phrase ‘Great Leap’?”


                        “… What the? No— Wait, the commander of the moon landing … but that was ‘giant leap.’ ”


                        “I see you’ve never heard of it. Then can I ask you the next question?”


                        Kurosaki found himself nodding.


                        “How about the Hashimoto-san who works at the Satellite Intelligence Center?”


                        “Good guy. I think he—smoked Larks …”


                        Hashimoto had applied to JAXA, after being impressed by their CubeSat miniaturized satellites. But they were forcing him to babysit the Information Gathering Satellites—


                        Sekiguchi was nodding. Vaguely gazing at him, Kurosaki continued to talk about Hashimoto. Before Kurosaki realized it, Sekiguchi was asking him about something else: his colleague who had abandoned Japan, Shiraishi. As he tried to pull together the memories of his friend, Shiraishi’s face, which he hadn’t recalled in years, flashed in his mind’s eye.


                        “Kurosaki-san, please take a nice, long rest.”


                        The hand came away from his cheek, and Sekiguchi’s face receded. Kurosaki heard the sound of a car door opening, and air began to blow in from outside. Looking in the direction of the sound, he saw Sekiguchi get out with an Iridium case.










Wed, 16 Dec 2020, 18:52 +0900 (2020-12-16T09:52 GMT)


Diet Members’ Office Building, Tokyo




                        Takanori Hashimoto stared at the threadbare carpet in the Diet Members’ Office Building and tried to think how he could get the reprimand he had been undergoing for a full thirty minutes now to stop. The minister of space policy standing over him and berating him had already exhausted his repertoire of abusive language and was beginning to repeat himself.


                        “Hashimoto-kun, you do realize the gravity of the situation! If we can’t get in touch with JAXA at a time like this, we’re screwed!”


                        If anyone was screwed, it was Hashimoto. While commuting to the Cabinet Satellite Intelligence Center in Shinjuku, he had received a report that communications with the Optical 7 Information Gathering Satellite had been cut off, and had been called to the Diet Members’ Office Building, where they had shut him up in this room. Almost immediately after, a report had come in that IGS-Radar 5 and 6 had gone silent. Then he’d watched as his laptop suddenly shut down. Following a notification of a forced logout, his computer had restarted and now would only display a pitch-black screen. He had tried toggling the power button, but this had been useless. His computer was now effectively a paperweight, doing nothing but occasionally spinning its fan.


                        Hashimoto later realized that his JAXA-issued smartphone and tablet had stopped working at the same moment as well. Their power had still been on, but the screens had remained black, and they had continued to give off heat as though processing something until their batteries had died about an hour ago.


                        Borrowing a phone from one of the secretaries, Hashimoto had contacted the JAXA help desk but was transferred to a busy reception number. He tried calling all the phone numbers that he could remember, but the result was the same in each case. JAXA’s IT system had completely blacked out.


                        “Hashimoto-kun! Forty billion yen. You know what that is?”


                        This was the third time the minister had asked him this in the last thirty minutes.


                        “JAXA’s budget for the entire IGS project.”


                        Given the present circumstances, Hashimoto was wise enough to refrain from adding “five years ago.” This year’s budget actually exceeded ¥60 billion, an amount so large it was set to reach one-third of JAXA’s annually shrinking total budget.


                        “So you do know, huh? That’s exactly right. The problem is your failure to grasp how you’ve betrayed the Japanese people by causing a system crash in spite of their generosity.”


                        That funding was used exclusively for IGS launches. JAXA was able to use it to improve the HIIA that conducted orbital insertion, but the rest of their budget, the money they could use for their original organizational goals of space development and operations, was shrinking every year.


                        “Your salary comes out of that too, dammit!”


                        “Yes, sir. I understand that, sir.” Hashimoto had raised his head slowly so the minster wouldn’t notice, but now he lowered it several centimeters. He couldn’t go on groveling like this forever.


                        “If you have enough time to make a PowerPoint that says nothing but ‘don’t know,’ ‘cause unclear,’ ‘we’ll investigate,’ then how about you go run over to JAXA yourself and come back and tell us what’s going on?! What do you expect us to do if North Korea launches a Taepodong?”


                        In preparation for that risk, Japan has one of the world’s best missile-defense systems. You didn’t know that? Hashimoto wanted to say, but held his tongue. The system was operated by the Ministry of Defense and worked independently of the IGS program. Hashimoto had already advised the minister that in a situation where every minute and second counted, satellites like the IGS units that only passed over the Korean Peninsula four or five times a day were completely useless. But Hashimoto had given up on his efforts to provide accurate information to this minister, who couldn’t even visualize a sun-synchronous orbit no matter how many times he explained it.


                        “In your report, you claim that you lost communication with three groups consisting of five satellites—but according to the information we’ve received here, four groups consisting of eight satellites, which makes up the entire IGS fleet. And they’ve all fallen into the same condition. How the hell do you explain this?!”


                        The last time Hashimoto had managed to contact the Satellite Intelligence Center in Shinjuku was at five in the evening, and he was now cut off from all sources of information. Since then, the situation had worsened, and, pathetically, the minister was now in possession of fresher news than he was.


                        “Eight satellites went down at the same damn time, so this must be JAXA’s fault, no?!”


                        Hashimoto wasn’t sure how that conclusion followed but found himself bowing his head automatically.


                        “I’ve been studying up on this too, you know. The hardware of the satellites may be outsourced to private manufacturers, but JAXA is surely involved with the software, operation, and control.”


                        Wrong. That’s what had been written in the original proposal ten years ago. In actuality, operation of the IGS was conducted exclusively by the Cabinet Satellite Intelligence Center. JAXA was only in charge of launches and operational observation, nothing more than what Hashimoto was doing right then. His position had been created in the first place because of how terrible communications were between the center, commanded by a man straight out of the Self-Defense Forces, and the manufacturers, who constantly waved about their technical jargon.


                        From what Hashimoto had heard, the man named Shiraishi who’d originally had his job had been demoted for an explosive rant directed at the previous minister of space policy. Later, he’d abandoned Japan after being headhunted by a Chinese space-development company—and he wasn’t the only one. All the technicians who had been taken off astronautics for whatever reason—whether due to budget cuts, project cancellation, or transfer to an ailing project—had chosen a similar path.


                        Hashimoto was in his fourth year since being appointed as liaison for the IGS, and attractive offers had been coming his way too. A space-development venture with its head office in the Cayman Islands wanted him to serve as manager for a small-scale satellite project revolving around something called the “Great Leap.” Recently, he’d heard about a headhunter inside JAXA as well, and there was talk of a space-development venture in Hong Kong gathering personnel. While such overseas contracts might offer poor job security, many of Hashimoto’s colleagues had chosen them anyway, rather than serve as specialists who had to bow down to laymen all the time.


                        “What’s that look on your face about?”


                        Hashimoto forced down both his head and the discontent that rose all the way up to his throat as he stared at the carpet again. “My actions are inexcusable, sir,” he said. “I’ll look into the connection with JAXA as well. I’m going to visit headquarters in Ochanomizu and the Satellite Intelligence Center in Shinjuku. By first thing in the morning, I expect there should be some devel—”


                        “Yes! Tomorrow morning! Here at eight o’clock sharp! Washio, keep my schedule open!”


                        “Certainly, sir,” said the minister’s secretary, interrupting her typing of the meeting minutes long enough to move her mouse and click audibly several times.


                        Suddenly, Hashimoto felt the attraction of his two offers, Hong Kong and the Great Leap in the Caymans, surge in his chest.










Wed, 16 Dec 2020, 02:12 -0800 (2020-12-16T10:12 GMT)


Western Days Hotel




                        “Kazumi, wake up.”


                        Along with someone calling out to him in English, Kazumi felt the slap of a soft palm on his cheek. Raising his sleep-glued eyelids, he saw dragon-patterned embroidery leap front and center into his field of vision. In gold thread that bulged from red linen, it was lit up from the base and appeared to stand before him in three dimensions.


                        Turning his head to look around, he saw a broad ceiling and then a man with thick eyebrows—NORAD serviceman Daryl Freeman. At last he remembered where he was and what was happening. He was in the bedroom of a hotel in Seattle, Western Days. Light came pouring from the adjacent lounge they were using as an operations center. Kazumi had been consigned to the bedroom, where he’d hurriedly changed and crawled into bed.


                        “It’s 2 a.m.,” said Daryl. “I’m sorry to disturb you when you’ve just gone to bed, but there’s a call for you.”


                        He pointed toward the open door, through which Kazumi could see walls covered haphazardly in silver sheets. Since Chris had wrapped up the meeting just before midnight, Kazumi calculated, he had been asleep for about two hours.


                        “Okay. I’ll be right there.” Kazumi sat up and put on the jeans and sweater he’d rolled up on the bedside table. Sitting on the edge of the bed to put on his shoes, he was reminded again that he wasn’t in Japan, where wearing shoes indoors like this was unimaginable. He stepped into the gleaming silver operations center and looked back at the wall where the adjacent bedrooms were.


                        “Time to wake up, Kazumi,” said Bruce. “I know it’s a bit early, but we have a videoconference and we can’t start without you.”


                        “Akari is already in her seat,” said Chris from somewhere behind him.


                        Looking back, Kazumi saw Daryl and Akari sitting at the table, an empty seat between them. Bruce sat off to one side, pointing at the whiteboard he was using in place of his display. There, Kazumi saw a face he hadn’t seen in what felt like a long while: Jamshed. In a room filled with filaments of sunlight, the Iranian scientist reached out his hand and adjusted the angle of the camera. The sunbeams behind him wavered, blocked here and there by countless strips of yellow paper hanging from the ceiling.


                        Jamshed retracted his hand from the camera, raised it, and said in somewhat stiff English, “Hey, Kazumi. I introduced myself to be Jay. I am Jamshed Jahanshah.” Jamshed scratched his cheek, flashed a white smile from beneath his mustache, and added, “Technically, I have my doctorate now. I am happy we can speak again immediately.”


                        “It has been—” Kazumi recalled the day Jamshed had contacted him for the videoconference with the poor connection. They had spoken while Kazumi was watching the launch for Loki 9, which had been on Sunday. “Three days. I am in Seattle now.”


                        Kazumi was grateful that his limited English ability had prevented him from coming up with the phrase “three whole days.” For Jamshed, it had been only three days. But Kazumi felt as though he had been in Seattle for a week even though they had just arrived the evening before last.


                        “Bruce told me already. Seattle is a city at America. And seems the NORAD and even CIA were waiting for me.” Jamshed put a hand to his breast and laughed. “Is like I am the important person. Make me nervous.”


                        Chris raised her hand, and she became enlarged in the preview window for the video they were sending to Jamshed. “Dr. Jahanshah, you are without a doubt an important person. I am honored to be able to invite you, a genius scientist who conceived an incredibly unique spacecraft all by yourself, on to our team.” Chris spoke even more slowly, with longer pauses between words, than when she was talking to Kazumi and Akari. “The CIA would like to hire you as a consultant on the space tethers. Please provide us with an estimate of the compensation you would like to receive.”


                        “Compensation … I had not thought of that. Is not much I could use it for at Tehran.” Jamshed touched his mustache and relaxed his cheeks.


                        “It doesn’t necessarily have to be money. If your wish is to come to America, then please just let us know.”


                        Hearing Chris’s words, Kazumi’s breath stopped. America. The country that had given birth to Ronnie Smark. Where passionate and talented individuals like Daryl went so far as to join the army there just for a chance to build up their careers. This remarkable place was where Chris was inviting Jamshed. When Kazumi saw the wide-eyed expression on the doctor’s face, he asked himself for the first time: If I were to leave Japan, would I have what it takes to succeed?


                        “Wonderful … That is attractive proposal. Please let me think about it.”


                        “Just let us know,” said Chris and wrote question in big block letters on the whiteboard. “I’m sorry to have to write this for you by hand. Can you read it?”


                        “It is fine,” said Jamshed. “English of these level is no problem. Screen is easy to see too.”


                        A separate camera dedicated to displaying the whiteboard was sending its feed to Jamshed using a different account. Akari had set this up for them before Kazumi had even noticed.


                        “I wasn’t expecting to be able to speak with you so quickly, Dr. Jahanshah, so we haven’t prepared our questions yet,” said Chris. “Over there right now … I guess it’s shortly after noon. I’m very sorry to say this after you went through all the trouble of connecting us, but it’s two in the morning here. Do you mind if we finish this up within about an hour? I’ll arrange for us to have another meeting right away.”


                        “Excuse me. I am thinking Kazumi is in Tokyo. How about we is have our next meeting at seven hours? Time difference is eleven and the half hours. When is night here is morning there.”


                        “Well, you space people sure are good with time zones. Even CIA agents like us who are active around the world can’t hold a candle,” said Chris, and without any hesitation wrote Scheduled Conference: 09:00 (Tehran 20:30) on the whiteboard.


                        “How shall we begin?” Chris looked around at the members in their seats, and Akari immediately raised her hand.


                        “I’d like to know the communication format,” she said. “If you were to design the space tethers yourself, Doctor, how would you design the application transfer interface? Also, what would be a good choice for the physical layer?” Akari began to enumerate the redundancies that would eliminate bit loss so as to secure a robust signal in a poor environment. “Once we have this information in hand, the CIA can root out the nodes transmitting and receiving the data.”


                        Jamshed’s eyes swam. “… Sorry, but I do not understand meaning. Application’s layer?”


                        “That was just computer jargon,” said Daryl, waving his hand with a laugh. “What she wants to ask you about is the communications protocol and so on for the space tethers. In particular, the method for transmitting telemetric data to base stations on Earth, the radio frequency and the data that signal carries. How would you standardize this?”


                        “So that is what she means. I guess everything is about computers over there.”


                        “Not entirely. Kazumi uses a special sense to fly space tethers in his head.”


                        “Then he might be kind of like me.” Jamshed stretched his arm out behind him and pulled one of the sheets of hanging paper toward himself. It was covered in scribbled lines, numbers, Persian letters, and in a few places some English. “My computer is this and calculator. Anyways, about communication method and content. That is all on my paper.”


                        “You must mean the section ‘Robust Communication.’ I saw it in the table of contents. Only part of the body of your essay has reached us.”


                        “After our meeting I will send it once more. Space tethers do not need complicated information for their telemetry. That is one of advantages of space tether. According to my paper, all you is need is serial numbers, spatial coordinates guided by GPS, and motion vectors for terminal apparatuses.”


                        “Can you read it?” asked Jamshed, writing the three figures on a piece of paper and holding it up beside his face. “To command a particular space tether to transfer from one orbit to another, all you have to do is send TLEs that will serve as their destination. With approximately three thousand steps of computational logic if you use Fortran, you can derive timing for activate Lorentz force required to shift from present position to that of destination TLEs.”


                        Akari frowned faintly. Most likely she saw the programming language Fortran as a relic of the previous century. Kazumi felt the same way. Though he could follow Jamshed’s line of thinking, it struck him as terribly out-of-date. At the same time, he found the simplicity of his system beautiful.


                        All you have to do is send TLEs that will serve as their destination. Kazumi ruminated on Jamshed’s words. His space tethers had been equipped with the essentially unstable element of ballast that moved along the wire, and this allowed them to use their thrust in any direction. Based on feedback regarding whether they were approaching their target or not, the space tethers themselves could calculate the correct timing to accelerate and fire electrons from the electron guns in their terminal apparatuses in order to transfer to the correct orbit. It was a straightforward and robust system.


                        “Of course, this only applies at time I wrote paper,” Jamshed continued, now looking toward Daryl. “But I imagine the type of programming language, processor, and sensors being used are more advanced than what I am familiar with. I have no way of knowing because I cannot connect to the Internet.”


                        “How about when you send commands to multiple space tethers?” asked Daryl.


                        “All you do is send serial numbers followed by TLEs. If you vary slightly each command, then they will fly in mass formation.”


                        “Dr. Jahanshah,” said Kazumi, deciding to ask the question on his mind. “It doesn’t seem to me that the space tethers kicking the SAFIR 3 along in orbit are being controlled by the method you just described. They appear to be moving according to a faster, more refined program.”


                        “The TLEs are not absolutely necessary. Is possible to send timing to activate the Lorentz force as something like musical note. In that case, they would move more efficiently. Theoretically, their thrust would be multiplied four or five times.”


                        “Would you be able to carry out such operations, Doctor?”


                        “No. I said ‘theoretically,’ didn’t I?”


                        Jamshed turned around again and drew another piece of paper toward himself. On it was a diagrammatic map of the world with numerous arrows and numbers scrawled here and there all over it. Lined up densely at the bottom were different times alongside a zero and a one. Kazumi supposed that the arrows represented the “footholds” of the space tethers, namely geomagnetism, while the zeros and ones represented on/off states for the Lorentz force.


                        Jamshed compared the angle of the revolving space tethers to the direction of Earth’s magnetic field and calculated the timing to activate the Lorentz force. None of the calculations were particularly difficult on their own, but their large quantity taken together presented a serious challenge—and here he was doing it all on paper.


                        “You have to think about space tethers’ rotation, direction of geomagnetism, and the intensity all together. Since space tethers rotate in high velocity, their clocks would need to be accurate to millisecond, and their geomagnetism database would need to be in arc seconds.”


                        Jamshed patted the paper with the back of his hand and puffed out his chest proudly. Being able to do such calculations by hand was indeed impressive, and Kazumi thought that Jamshed must have cultivated the same sense that he used when conducting his “ritual.”


                        “However, I am only speaking theoretically. I can show you calculations, but I am not think is possible to realize these in practice.”


                        Kazumi noticed Bruce and Daryl fidgeting uncomfortably. They seem to be wavering about whether to tell Jamshed that the practical problems he saw could be solved easily. The coordination of the clocks, the geomagnetism database, and the massive amount of calculations he had mentioned would not be problematic at all. The times sent by GPS satellites were so precise they needed relativistic corrections. For the geomagnetism database, they could also consult a map through NASA a hundred times more accurate than the one Jamshed wanted. And as for the size of the calculations, well, that would just be a matter of—


                        “Let me just try to put it together,” Akari muttered in Japanese, and began to tap at the keyboard on her left wrist with her arms still crossed.










Wed, 16 Dec 2020, 02:25 -0800 (2020-12-16T10:25 GMT)


Pier 37 Warehouse, Seattle




                        Typing on the keyboard on his lap, Shiraishi listened to the sound of the increasingly heavy snowfall tapping the metal-framed window. A blizzard was approaching.


                        Facing the window as she spoke on the phone, Chance said something in Korean and hung up.


                        “It’s done,” she said. “Leaving it up to the Cyber Front was the right choice. They may have gone a bit overboard, but they found Kurosaki and Sekiguchi.”


                        Shiraishi took one final look at the code he was in the middle of writing and put the screen of his tablet to sleep. The Cyber Front agents had used Shiraishi’s account to access JAXA from all over the world, completely trashing their whole system. They had failed to break into the computers related to JAXA’s development arm but had got their hands on all of the data contained in the regular office servers, computers, and smartphones, along with other mobile devices.


                        “They finally deleted your account.”


                        “… Oh.” Shiraishi pushed his glasses up onto his nose and exhaled a long breath into the shelter of his palm, fogging up his visual field.


                        The last thing that had connected him to JAXA and Japan was now gone. The thirty-two-letter password and eight-letter ID that he could not bring himself to completely forget, even after abandoning the organization and his own country, were now just a string of meaningless characters. All he had brought with him from Japan was his body and a pair of bent glasses.


                        It seemed to him as though he were floating above the floor. What emotion was this? The same sense of loss he’d experienced when he’d realized that the satellite he’d designed for the China National Space Administration in Shanghai had been a mere reproduction of a project already realized by America and the EU? Or when the scout from North Korea had brought him to Pyongyang and they had shredded his Japanese passport? No. It was different. He had merely gained another kind of freedom.


                        His fogged-up glasses cleared. Beyond his sinewy hand, he could see Chance staring at her smartphone.


                        “So where did those two go, then?”


                        “Kurosaki and Sekiguchi are in Tehran. According to an application to travel abroad that we pulled from a photocopier cache, they departed the day before yesterday. To meet with Dr. Jahanshah.” Chance explained that they had most likely gone to pick up the remainder of Jamshed’s paper, and Shiraishi nodded.


                        “Do you think Kazumi and his team can find a way to stop the space tethers?” asked Chance.


                        “Even if they figure out how they work, stopping them is impossible.”


                        Since the space tethers consisted of little more than tiny terminal apparatuses, removing them from orbit would be an incredible challenge. They would only appear as something like debris on radar, making it difficult to pinpoint their precise locations, and even if a device capable of deorbiting them could make a successful rendezvous, the tethers would come flying in at three kilometers per second. There was simply no safe way to stop them.


                        Blocking their communication pathways to the base stations would also fail to solve the problem because the tethers had what Jamshed described in his paper as a “survival instinct.” In other words, they were installed with a program that autonomously alternated between maintaining their orbits and generating their energy, so even if communications with the ground were cut off, they would in all likelihood remain in the same orbit for some time.


                        “I can’t even think of a way to remove them from orbit myself,” said Shiraishi.


                        “So you’re saying you’ve put things up there that can’t be cleaned up later. Headquarters will have a fit when they hear that.”


                        “That’s why I’m developing a web application that even those guys can use. When the Cloud completes its job, all they have to do is use the app to increase their altitude.” Shiraishi tapped his tablet with the back of his hand.


                        “When will you give it to us?”


                        “If I can work on it tomorrow, I’ll give it to you by nighttime …”


                        “We’re moving tomorrow. Can you have it ready the day after that? I want you to hurry on this. The more approaches we have to work with, the better. Maybe there’s nothing that you and Kazumi can do about it, but NORAD and NASA might still find a way to stop us.”


                        “NORAD?”


                        “When we were rummaging through the JAXA servers, we found an email that Kurosaki sent to NORAD’s Colonel Lintz. The body was encrypted with PGP, but we were able to read the subject. ‘Urgent: Unusual SAFIR 3 Orbit Caused by North Korea.’ ”


                        “When?”


                        “The day before yesterday. This means that the American government, in the form of NORAD, has been in touch with Kazumi, who’s read Dr. Jahanshah’s paper.”


                        “… I see.” Shiraishi looked up at the ceiling. He’d never thought that they could keep their scheme secret forever, but things were developing much faster than he’d anticipated. Clearly, Kazumi had gathered some highly accurate information if he had succeeded in getting these usually plodding bureaucracies to move with such speed.


                        “We’ve been … found out. They know about the Cloud and the space tethers too.”


                        “That’s not necessarily true. However, I’m going to report to headquarters in the North about the possibility they’ve been exposed, so let me know if there’s anything you’d like me to add.”


                        “Don’t be naive, Chance! The Orbital Cloud is out in the open now! Put that in your report!” Shiraishi closed his eyes and filled his lungs with the dusty warehouse air. The time had come at last. “Tell the Supreme Leader we’re proceeding to a stage in which we can spread even greater terror. We’re going to change the situation before Kazumi Kimura’s voice becomes influential.”


                        Chance’s body tensed up, and she raised her index finger to her forehead. She was preparing to make a mental map of Shiraishi’s explanation.


                        “You don’t need to do that,” said Shiraishi. “It’s easy to remember. First of all, the orbital hotel. While the majority still believes that the second stage of SAFIR 3 is the Rod from God, we’ll bring it even closer. So close that the Smarks can see it with their naked eyes.”


                        “Good idea. That should buy us some time.”


                        “Exactly. For a while, anyway.”


                        Chance opened her eyes wide as though she’d suddenly sensed something. “If we lay on that much pressure,” she said, “the American military will probably try to intercept the Rod from God immediately.”


                        Shiraishi felt his lips curling up into a sneer. “But their target is just an empty rocket body. They’ll fall right into our trap. The American army will be a laughingstock. And right in in front of the eyes of those panicking fools—” Shiraishi stared with intensity into Chance’s eyes. “We’ll conduct a massacre in low Earth orbit. I was planning to take my time and make it look like an accident, but the situation has changed. We can’t give them time to think up a countermeasure. Instead, we’ll send in all forty thousand of the space tethers and simultaneously knock all of the two thousand satellites in LEO down to Earth!”


                        “Wait. That’s …” Mouth gaping, Chance’s pale eyes quivered.


                        Yes, that’s the face, thought Shiraishi. That’s the expression I’m going to stamp on all humankind.


                        “Are you afraid, Chance?” Shiraishi curled the edge of his mouth up even farther. His dry lips split open, and the pain amped up his tension. “We’re going to start a war.”


                        Shiraishi imagined the hordes of tethers that composed the Cloud scattering in different directions and swarming on the satellites. The satellites would be struck by the terminal apparatuses of the space tethers at low relative velocity and cease to function or even spin out of control, dragging a tail of plasma with them as they fell into the atmosphere. Space stations, telescopes, GPS, communications satellites, weather observation satellites, reconnaissance satellites. All of the orbital infrastructure that humankind had come to depend on would be obliterated in an instant, and radioactive-material-filled satellites would cause widespread chaos when they rained down on the Earth. So be it.


                        Humankind would just have to start over. Enterprises involved with orbit had grown bloated, vulnerable to the slightest mistake, and the efforts of the have-nots had been frustrated by more than seventy years of space domination by the world powers. Better to start again from scratch than to try to fix such a system, with all its high-altitude satellites, space stations, accumulated debris, and complex tangle of rights and interests.


                        “There’s no need to declare war. All of a sudden, one day, all of the satellites will just disappear. In the wake of the terror this will cause, the nations carrying out the Great Leap will be able to monopolize space development for the first time!”


                        “… But if we do that, low Earth orbit will become an ocean of debris. You can hardly call that a Great Leap.”


                        “I’m not going to sully the springboard for the Great Leap. I’m going to carefully knock each man-made object one by one into the atmosphere.” Shiraishi stepped close to Chance as she stood by the window. “Contact them immediately!”


                        “North Korea doesn’t have the courage for that.”


                        “You sure about that?” Shiraishi moved in so close to Chance that his forehead pressed against hers. “What if we make someone a scapegoat and blame them for everything?”


                        Chance frowned. You don’t get it? thought Shiraishi. There’s only one person who could knock down every low-orbit object in a flash and show the way toward a new future. Someone who would never again stand on center stage—


                        “Me.”










Wed, 16 Dec 2020, 03:21 -0800 (2020-12-16T11:21 GMT)


Western Days Hotel




                        The discussion with Jamshed shifted to how they might remove the space tethers from orbit. Kazumi and Daryl would shower Jamshed with questions, Jamshed would answer, and Akari would jump in with an observation from time to time.


                        Bruce followed what the four of them were saying and took notes. These he planned to send to the George Bush Center for Intelligence in Langley once the discussion was finished, so that the CIA could evaluate and substantiate their information before their next meeting first thing in the morning. This approach had been decided on by Chris, as she didn’t want to burden the team with such chores.


                        “I am devoted one chapter of my paper to what I called the space tethers’ ‘survival instinct.’ Space tethers can autonomously alternate between generating energy and using their thrust while waiting in orbit for a new destination. I am also proposed Fortran program for this that could be realized in approximately two thousand steps.”


                        “Do you think the space tethers flying up there right now are equipped with this survival instinct?” asked Kazumi.


                        “I do not know. I cannot tell how carefully North Korean engineer is following my paper,” said Jamshed in a joking voice. “My paper is poorly put together. My academic advisor would not read it, so there are some calculation errors and other problems.”


                        Bruce thought it would probably be better to ask the protégé of the suspected mastermind. “What do you think, Akari?” he said.


                        “You mean about this so-called instinct? If it were me, I’d install it. The term ‘autonomous’ is attractive in itself, and if I were presented with the code to make it work I can’t see why I wouldn’t use it.”


                        Chris clapped her hands together. “I’m going to make the call,” she said. “It has this survival instinct. Continue to investigate under that assumption.”


                        “That’s just my opinion,” said Akari, looking surprised. “Are you sure?”


                        “Yes. We have to decide either one way or the other. What do you think, Doctor?”


                        “If your objective is to make them inoperative, I think that is good way.”


                        Something about what Jamshed said gave Bruce pause. He listened closely to what Jamshed said next.


                        “I am talking about method of stopping them. Most effective way would be seizing base stations operated by North Korea or seize transmission themselves and take control of tethers.”


                        Daryl sunk into his chair. “I guess our only option is to search for the base stations after all,” he said.


                        A similar supposition had been offered once before, but now that they’d heard the tangible idea of the survival instinct from Jamshed’s lips, it was settled.


                        “Doctor, can you tell me the communication formula one more time?” Akari cut in. “The ‘upstream’ and ‘downstream’ from the satellite—how would you order the transmissions?”


                        Jamshed smiled and picked up a pen and one of the yellow sheets of paper. He was now able to understand because Akari had stopped filling her sentences with jargon. Running the pen over the paper, he jotted down the parameters.


                        “The information going up is the space tether’s ID and TLEs, or its ID and the time to activate Lorentz force. Information coming down is its ID, its coordinates obtained from GPS, and vectors of the terminal apparatuses, in that order. If there is information from this observational devices, it would probably be tagged on afterwards.”


                        “So you can use GPS in space too?” asked Akari, nodding her head and typing on her keyboard.


                        “In low orbits, yes,” said Daryl drawing a picture of a GPS satellite on the diagram and connecting it to the space tether.


                        “What about the radio waves used for the transmission?”


                        “At my experiments, I am used AM waves. That was only kind of radio I could get my hands on. Since it only went up fifty kilometers, I was able to ignore reflection from ionosphere.” Jamshed told them about his experiments with balloons. He had used them to drop his prototype loaded with an AM transmitter that sent its coordinates and vectors as a beeping sound from the stratosphere and verified the occurrence of the Lorentz force. He then recorded this with a tape recorder and transcribed it to paper by hand. “Of course, AM attenuates and reflects in ionosphere, so I am proposed VHF wave on my paper. Was tough work. Counting my fingers in time to beep, beep. And I used 8 bits including check digit, so I had to use both hands. Might have been more efficient if had used 5 bits though.”


                        Jamshed showed them the back of his hands and extended the pinky of his left hand and the thumb, index finger, and ring finger of his right hand, smiling.


                        “Forty-three,” said Akari, reading aloud the number of bits his fingers indicated.


                        “You can read it too?!” said Jamshed, clapping his hands together with a laugh.


                        “You are very passionate about this,” said Kazumi, looking as excited as the others.


                        “Is disappointing for me that I could not bring this space tether to fruition with my own hands. I would love to meet North Korean engineer who realized it for me. I wonder what he did about this problem I could not solve. I am incredibly interested to know.”


                        Something about what Jamshed said gave Bruce pause again. What was going on in orbit right then was no test run, and—


                        “I’ve put together the code to search for the base stations,” said Akari, interrupting Bruce’s thoughts. “We can make our query with both SQL and Hadoop. Can I have you search all global communications?”


                        Bruce turned to look at Chris. Chris looked back and gave him the thumbs-up as Akari’s message arrived. It was a go.


                        “Sure,” said Bruce. “You’re really fast.”


                        First he checked to make sure that Akari’s email was formatted as a letter of request and forwarded it to headquarters. Within a few hours, the search query created by Akari, a mere civilian hacker, would run through the full CIA database that steadily accumulated nearly all global communications. This included the communications of Africa, Southeast Asia, most countries in the EU, the nations of the Pacific Rim, America, and so on, but it excluded the regular members of the UN Security Council who were exempt from surveillance by international agreement. While Bruce was doing this, Kazumi and Daryl were never short on questions, and the discussion shifted to how the space tethers were made.


                        “I am guessing you can use substrate of smartphone as this central processing unit for miniature space tether. But on this case you must be knowing better than me. Do most current smartphones have motion sensors attached?”


                        “Of course,” said Daryl. “Some are equipped with atomic clock chips and compasses.”


                        “That is incredible! I am simply astounded on the progress of technology. Not just GPS, but compass, motion vector sensor, and atomic clock … You are not going to tell me that some have radios even?”


                        “They most certainly do.”


                        “If that is true, you could make space tether with just smartphone and electron gun. All you have to do is decide the material for the tether. Several years ago, I heard that Japanese audio manufacturer had succeeded in fabricating graphene rolls—”


                        “He looks so happy,” Chris whispered in Bruce’s ear.


                        “He sure does. I bet he had no one to talk to.”


                        Jamshed had gone on theorizing all alone in a backwater, persisting with his research while cut off from information and without even getting proper attention from his academic advisor. Now he had the opportunity to talk with people like Akari and Daryl, who would gladly teach him about the technology of the future. Of course he was happy.


                        Bruce’s smartphone began to vibrate in his pocket. Under the table, unseen by the cameras in the room, he unlocked his screen and read the notification. He had to confirm whether it was something he could tell Jamshed, and maybe also Akari and Kazumi. Fortunately, the notification was related to the space tethers. Finding a gap in the lively discussion, Bruce cut in.


                        “Excuse me,” he said. “I have some news. Kazumi’s guess was correct. Japan’s IGS are down. The Wyvern return vehicle has also been hit. Apparently, a severe pressure leak was discovered. What the hell is this?”


                        The Project Wyvern blog had reported a “slight problem” with its return vehicle, but several hours ago, it had entered into an unplanned rotation. Gathering the intermittent transmissions, terrestrial bases had verified that the pressure inside the craft had reached zero moments earlier. NASA had just been informed.


                        “The space tethers,” muttered Akari.


                        Bruce chewed his lip. He had been warning NASA through the CIA, but the view that space tethers were the problem had not yet gained wide acceptance. Despite the fact that the team had known what was happening, they had been unable to do anything about it.


                        “The entire IGS fleet?” asked Daryl.


                        “Four groups, eight units, all down.”


                        “I’m going to check NORAD’s observational data. Dr. Jahanshah, please excuse me for a moment.” Daryl called up his NORAD device on his table display and entered IGS, bringing up a chart with rows of numbers. “The orbits of the IGS fleet have not changed at all since yesterday. However, the waves they reflect have gone random. This tells me the satellites are spinning. Communication with them has been cut off because their antennas are no longer pointing toward the base stations.”


                        Daryl checked up on the Wyvern return vehicle in the same way and confirmed that it was also spinning. However, he explained, NORAD’s observational data could not tell them whether or not holes had opened up in any of the objects.


                        “What’s the matter?” said Jamshed with a quizzical look.


                        After receiving permission from Chris, Daryl explained the situation to Jamshed.


                        “I see. The space tethers nudged them,” said Jamshed, when he learned that no debris was being dispersed and that Daryl had guessed that the satellites were spinning based on the reflected waves.


                        “Rotation velocity of space tethers can be controlled at will,” he explained. “Once certain velocity is reached, tether cable will never get tangled up. Terminal apparatuses can be configured freely to any velocity, from that of punch, or, depending on the material, to ten times that of the rifle bullet, ten kilometers per second. They have struck this IGS lightly and smashed Wyvern spacecraft at high velocity. What fascinating idea this engineer has come up with. Amazing that he could drive satellites into shutdown with such simple method.”


                        “It is a disappointment,” said Kazumi. “Space tethers could do so much more than that.”


                        “Maybe so. But even a space tether without any unnecessary equipment can work simply by being in orbit.”


                        Bruce felt like Jamshed and Kazumi were having two conversations that didn’t quite match up. Though he suspected that part of this was because neither of them were native English speakers, he also sensed that there was something more fundamental about their differences. But before he could get any further than this, Chris looked up at the clock and clapped her hands.


                        “I’m sorry, but can we wind this up for today? Thank you, Dr. Jahanshah. It’s only the third day for you, Kazumi, since you first encountered the space tethers, so I bet your head is just bursting with information. Let’s go off to sleep and be ready for our meeting tomorrow.”


                        “Kazumi, you are not tether-propulsion-system specialist?” asked Jamshed, with a look of surprise.


                        “Unfortunately, no. I’m not.” Scratching his head, Kazumi explained that he was an amateur and that his only connection to space was through Meteor News. “Even though I’ve had three whole days since we rushed off from Japan, we’ve been busy with all kinds of things, and I haven’t had a chance to properly read your paper. I’m very sorry.”


                        “An amateur … incredible. You are actually telling me that you have come to these level of understanding on only three days?”


                        “Two days,” said Daryl. “Keep in mind that Kazumi was on the move and caught up in all sorts of trouble. I’ve been on this for only one day, and my head is jam-packed. The time I’ve spent on this has been truly stimulating. Thank you for joining us today, Doctor.”


                        “You too … Well, I better not let myself fall behind. I will take a look at data you have all gathered. Let us meet again in five hours,” said Jamshed, and with that the conference was over.


                        “Bedtime, kids,” Chris called out, and Kazumi and Akari made their way to their bedrooms, Daryl to the bathroom.










                        “You think the professor’s all right?” said Bruce, facing Chris.


                        “Take care with him,” said Chris with a frown. “We’ll be in trouble if he gets discouraged.”


                        Bruce nodded. Jamshed had spent years developing this technology. This was his first time meeting engineers who could wield it as smoothly as if it were their own arms and legs. At the moment, he had to be merely surprised, but if the situation continued, he would probably begin to feel that he himself was outdated. They couldn’t let that happen. If he could learn to use contemporary tools with the same natural ease as the others, he would likely be able to produce even better results and overcome his disadvantaged position due to being born in a have-not country.


                        “I think the professor will realize this too if he keeps up his contact with Kazumi and Akari. So I’m going to hold these meetings regular—oh, what’s wrong, Daryl?”


                        Daryl had been in the bathroom for a while and had just come out. “Permission to speak, ma’am?”


                        “Go ahead.”


                        “I noticed a moment ago when I looked at my NORAD device that SAFIR 3 has started to move.”


                        “What? How come you didn’t tell us before?”


                        “Because this involves Seed Pod, which we have yet to explain to Kazumi and Akari. If SAFIR 3 continues to accelerate at this rate, it’ll enter a one-kilometer-radius range this evening. When is Seed Pod going to be run? Operations command set it for 1700 hours if I remember correctly.”


                        Chris looked at the doors of the bedrooms Akari and Kazumi were in. “It’s been bumped up to 1300.”


                        “So … They’re actually going to do it. Have the Smarks been informed?”


                        “Orders have been sent to the orbital hotel to accelerate randomly. When Seed Pod is implemented, we’ll also have them shut down the power because it could be affected by the ASM-140’s Blackout.”


                        “Why didn’t you stop them?” said Daryl, putting his hands on the table in apparent indignation. “You must know it’s pointless. They’re just trying to distract us from the space tethers.”


                        “We’ve reported it,” said Bruce, looking up at Daryl. “But you must understand that this operation isn’t something that’ll get called off just like that. No one has taken responsibility for knocking out the IGS and Wyvern return vehicle. They’ll be treated as accidents. Not a single organization anywhere currently sees the space tethers as a threat.”


                        Daryl’s hand clenched into a fist on the table.


                        “I’m frustrated about this too,” said Bruce. “I expect Seed Pod to be a total waste. But try putting yourself in the Smarks’ shoes. From their perspective, the Wyvern return vehicle has been put out of commission by an accident with no clear cause. They have no choice but to go to the ISS, and all the while they’re being haunted by some mysterious spacecraft. Given the situation, do you have any idea how stressful it would be if they were told that organizations on Earth were doing nothing at all about it?”


                        Daryl hung his head.


                        “Our main tasks right now are to find the base stations that are communicating with the space tethers and uncover the spies using the honeypots we’ve placed all over the city. We’ll take care of sending in a thorough report on the space tethers.”


                        “Daryl,” said Chris. “Leave it up to Bruce today, and please get some sleep. We’re going to be even busier at daybreak. A mountain of information about the tether communications will arrive from the CIA. The snow’s going to get heavier too, so we’ll be working here the whole time.”


                        “Yes, ma’am. You two please get some rest too. We need you in good shape for tomorrow.” Daryl headed for the bathroom again.


                        Chris put her hand on her shoulder and rotated her neck. Taking a cue from Chris, Bruce sunk into his seat and thought back on what they’d promised Daryl. For him and Chris, the real work began now.


                        “I’m sure I don’t need to say this,” Chris said, “but please hurry up with the report. If we don’t satisfy their desire for recognition, the team’s energy will drop.”


                        Bruce rolled his shoulders and opened the report he’d started writing. He completely agreed with Chris. No matter how much motivation united the team now, it would quickly fade if their efforts weren’t recognized. In fact, the higher the motivation, the greater the risk of despair.


                        “I wanted to ask your opinion about the mastermind, but it’s this guy, right?” Bruce opened Ageha Shiraishi’s file. Serving as profile pics were images from his JAXA days and one extracted from his videoconference with Jose Juarez. Perhaps because Shiraishi wore the same glasses in the extracted picture, he didn’t seem to have changed much. The file contained information about how he had quit JAXA, given up being Japanese, gone over to China, and fallen off the map five years ago, as well as documents created by several CIA departments. In the introduction to his psychological analysis, it said “Pretend genius odd-job man.” Harsh as always, thought Bruce.


                        “Ah. So I see the profiling is complete,” said Chris.


                        “Yeah. There’s hardly any information from recent years, but there’s a fascinating analysis of his connection to North Korea.”


                        The section that Bruce indicated pointed out that the activity of North Korea’s Cyber Front had shifted to high-level operations ever since Shiraishi had disappeared from China. Until then, they had never succeeded at anything more than large-scale denial-of-service attacks, but around 2015 they had assembled a large number of enslaved computers code-named “Sleeping Gun” and had since succeeded in hacking into remote data centers and social media networks. The fact that they exploited security holes discovered by Shiraishi when he was in Japan had apparently caught the attention of the CIA analyst. These activities could then be seen as precursors to the advertisement deception and translation-engine contamination subterfuges in the current case.


                        “They really did their homework,” said Chris.


                        “Well, that’s their job. Oh yeah, we also got something about his connection to the space tether.”


                        Bruce opened the report from the psychological profiler. It hypothesized that the trigger for Shiraishi’s leaving Japan had been “the collapse of JAXA’s inductive-tether program, in which he had an emotional investment.” When Shiraishi went to North Korea and saw Jamshed’s paper, he must have decided to take another stab at realizing the failed dream from his Japan days.


                        The analysis went on to discuss his connection with North Korean astronautics as well. A few years after Shiraishi disappeared, there had been a spike in projects inserting satellites into low orbits, though most of the satellites had apparently fallen into the atmosphere. Now Bruce could see why. They had been diligently launching space tethers. There was no need to use the third stage of a rocket to insert them into a precise orbit because they could transfer between orbits using their own energy. All the North Koreans had to do was pack the high-payload second stage with them and then scatter them randomly into space. The tethers could hide out in orbit for years, until their day arrived.


                        Akari Numata and Shiraishi’s relationship had been that of uncle and niece, and did not seem to have developed beyond that of computer-engineering teacher and protégé, just as Akari had claimed. This came as a relief to both Chris and Bruce.


                        “How should we tell this to Akari?” asked Bruce. “She seems to want to believe that he was forced into it by North Korea.”


                        “… Hmm. Let’s let her believe that for now. We can discuss how to broach it again later.”


                        “Understood. Wha—another email … Oh, man.”


                        “What’s the matter?”


                        “The base station search result has come back from headquarters. Along with lots of wonderful complaints.”


                        Bruce showed his laptop screen to Chris, pointing to digits reading two hundred thousand to six hundred thousand. “This is the number of PCs sending and receiving signals that meet Akari’s specifications.”


                        The investigator had commented that desktop computers all over the world seemed to be serving as transmitters. At the cyber center in Langley, it was 6:30 in the morning and the investigator, who felt he’d wasted his time conducting a pointless search at this early hour, had sarcastically concluded, “Could you narrow it down a bit?”


                        “If one or two of them turns out to be what we’re looking for,” said Bruce, “you think we’ll still get any credit?”


                        Just downloading the search results would take two hours. They would have to consult with Akari about it.










2020-12-16T12:00 GMT


Project Wyvern




                        Today is Space Experiment Day.


                        I had Ronnie lift me up in the center of the room and gently let go, leaving me floating there with nothing to support me. What do you think would happen in a situation like this?


                        No matter how much you paddle the air, you won’t move forward. You can try kicking and stretching, but all you’ll do is keep spinning round and round in place around the center of gravity in your stomach. If you ever stay at the Wyvern, this is one thing I’d love for you to try!


                        There’s only one way to move when you’re in this state. Strip off your shirt or pants and hurl it at something. This will send your body moving in the opposite direction. It is a wonderful moment.


                        This is the principle by which spacecraft propel themselves.


                        I didn’t think I’d be writing any formulas on this blog, but let me include just one:










                        This is called the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation. It’s a rule for rockets that was set down in 1903, more than a century ago. It describes a law that all rockets using propellant follow. Want to know how much speed you can get if you shoot out propellant at a particular speed from a spacecraft of a particular weight? Weighing 58 kg, if I were to throw my 500 g pants at 3 m/s, I would reach a velocity of 0.2 m/s. So pathetic I might as well be stationary.


                        By expelling propellant at a higher velocity than this and accelerating in a horizontal direction, the hotel moves in the high orbit of the ISS (be careful to remember that it doesn’t accelerate upwards!).


                        The important point here is that in order to move an object with a lot of mass, you need a lot more propellant, or, to put it in simple terms, fuel. Once you use up all your propellant, you will continue orbiting at the same velocity. Just like me when I was left unsupported in space, you’ll become very lonesome.


                        Several spacecraft that don’t use such fuel have been conceived: a solar cell ship that propels itself by catching light, a magsail that uses the electromagnetic force of the sun, and the tether-propulsion system. All of them generate only a small amount of power, but they’re all indispensable. At Project Wyvern, we’re currently accepting applications from engineers who can make such technologies a reality.


                        Calling all people with exciting ideas!


                        To conclude, I have some news. The Wyvern return vehicle that carried up this orbital hotel will be dropped into the atmosphere. I’ll let you know when the schedule for reentry has been decided. I think there’s going to be a big shooting star. Look forward to it!


                        Little Rocket Smark