9 Great Leap




                        Tue, 15 Dec 2020 17:14 +0400 (2020-12-15T13:14 GMT)


Desnoeufs Island




                        The bluing glow of the sky outside colored the room, except for a single table lit up with dazzling brightness by a pendant light overhead. On the table was an array of plates, and on the plates was food so hot the steam still rose from it. Glancing at the clock on the wall to confirm that it was evening, Ozzy twirled a generous ball of spaghetti and sauce onto his fork and brought it to his lips. The tart taste of tomato filled his mouth. At long last, Friday had made him some pasta.


                        “Excellent!”


                        Pure-white teeth danced before him. Friday sat at the opposite end of the table, naked to the waist, hands clasped together into a two-handed fist.


                        “What?” asked Ozzy finally.


                        “That is fish, Mr. Cunningham.”


                        Ozzy lowered his gaze to his plate. There, immersed in the pasta sauce, was a familiar-looking red fish—and that white tentacle beside it was squid.


                        “What the hell are you feeding me?!” Ozzy threw his fork away.


                        “Glad to see you back to your old self. You had me worried, just lying around for so long.”


                        Friday pointed at the television on the wall. Ozzy noticed the date on the news. “The fifteenth?!” he exclaimed in surprise.


                        “Yes, two days since that phone call.”


                        “Two whole days … ?”


                        After being questioned via video call by the two CIA agents calling themselves Bruce and Chris, Ozzy had taken to his bed. He then seemed to have spent two days lying there listlessly. The fear that all of his actions were under surveillance had been too much for him.


                        “Did you know Bruce called me once more after that? ‘Tell Mr. Cunningham the truth,’ he said. Apparently they don’t want liars mixed up with this. They know everything at the CIA, eh?”


                        “The truth?”


                        “Do you remember that I am from Somalia?”


                        “Now that you mention it …”


                        Friday told Ozzy his story. Arriving in France as a refugee from the endless Somali Civil War, he had entered university and graduated with a degree in astronomy but had been unable to find work. Upon his dejected return to his home country, his education saw him raised to a position of authority within his incessantly warring tribe. He had been searching for a way to escape this illegal lifestyle when he found a billionaire who planned to live alone on a remote island: Ozzy.


                        “Somalia … ? Were you a pirate or something?”


                        “Something along those lines. But please believe me: I chose to work here because you offered me free use of the telescope. Anyway, I’m glad to see you back to your old self. It must have been the fish.”


                        “I don’t want any damn fish. I hate fish! Tentacles too!”


                        Ozzy rose to his feet and headed for the large freezer in one corner of the kitchen. Two months’ worth of hot dogs were stored inside. His intricately planned dining schedule could not be left to the capricious likes of Friday.


                        “Oh, that’s right,” Friday said. “As you instructed, I have continued to track the Rod from God. Since yesterday it has been moving somewhat mysteriously. Shall I put it up on the tele—”


                        “Forget it!” Ozzy spun around from the open freezer, silver-colored package in one hand. “Just forget it. Forget that damn Rod from God ever existed!”


                        “Are you sure?”


                        “Why should I care about that thing? It’s the reason I’m under CIA surveillance.”


                        “What about your friends?”


                        “My friends?”


                        “Ronnie and Judy Smark,” Friday explained, a look of concern on his face. “They are your friends, no? They are the target of the Rod from God.”


                        “What?!” An icy tingle ran down Ozzy’s spine, and it wasn’t just the cold air from the freezer. No way. That was ridiculous. The Rod from God was a bald-faced lie and Ozzy knew it; he had been the one who’d made it up.


                        “It’s been on the news all day. Would you like to see a recording?”


                        Friday pressed a button on the remote control and Ozzy heard a familiar voice from his past come from the television on the wall. Ozzy spun to look at the screen. There was Ronnie floating in midair. He pushed Judy forward and was sent flying backwards into the wall by the reaction. That unshaven chin, those glaring eyes, brought back memories. And how about Judy, staring at the camera without any sign of fear? Ozzy hadn’t seen her since she was a little girl.


                        “Very impressive, isn’t it?” said Friday. “One wouldn’t expect anything less from Ronnie Smark, of course.”


                        Ozzy grunted noncommittally. On the screen, he noticed Ronnie’s left eye trembling as he tried to wink. Ozzy remembered that tic. He had seen it back when Ronnie was still based in Ozzy’s warehouse, his settlement service just starting to take off. It was the day he had deleted all the accounts the Mafia used to deal drugs. Fearing reprisals, his staff had convinced Ronnie to have Ozzy put him up in Ozzy’s top-floor apartment. Ronnie had offered the same wink as today as he apologized cheerfully for the imposition. But the things he groaned in his sleep kept Ozzy awake all night.


                        Ozzy shivered as the cold air crawled up his arms. He realized that he had sat down at some point. His hands were on the floor, a package of hot dogs squashed under one palm.


                        “Mr. Cunningham, you’ll hurt your knee. Oof!”


                        Feeling Friday’s strong, warm shoulder pushing into his armpit, Ozzy struggled to his feet, still swaying. The sandals had slipped off his feet. He stepped on the hot dog package, sending a spurt of thawed ketchup across the floor.


                        If the Rod from God hit the orbital hotel, would Ronnie’s blood spread like that? Or would it be more like a freeze-dried red mist? No. Nothing of the sort was going to happen. The Rod from God was a fantasy.


                        Ozzy looked up to see Judy giving him the finger, glaring defiantly from the television screen. He’d often played with her as a child when Ronnie was too busy. She’d had the same powerful gaze back then, too.


                        “Mr. Cunningham. Mr. Cunningham!” Friday sighed. “I must clean the floor. Could I ask you to move?”


                        Friday bore Ozzy up with his shoulder again and helped him to his desk. The Aeron chair creaked as Ozzy worked his behind into it.


                        Ozzy scowled at the list of notifications on his screen. He was receiving a video-call request at that very moment. Who could that be, at this time of night? Without thinking, he hit the key to open a new window.


                        He heard the sound of the connection being established. Visual noise flooded the screen and, when he recognized it, gave him goose bumps.


                        The CIA. They had to be using an encrypted line. Those bastards. Ozzy’s terror turned to rage. They were listening to everything he said to the outside world, but they kept their own damn calls private.


                        “What do you want?” he demanded.


                        “Are we … are bothering you?” The voice that came from the speakers was unfamiliar, its English less than fluent.


                        The noise began to clear up. Ozzy saw a young Asian man, solicitous in both expression and bearing, sitting before a silvery wall.


                        “Mr. Cunningham, nice to, uh, video meet you. I am Kazumi, owner of Meteor News. Do you remember me?”


                        “Kazumi … How— Ah, forget it. The CIA, right? You got my details from them?”


                        “Yes. I’m using a CIA line to speak with you.”


                        A woman with a shaved head sat to Kazumi’s right, a dark-complexioned man with impressively bushy eyebrows to his left. All of them were staring directly at Ozzy through the camera. He was just thinking how young they all looked when a woman he recognized stepped into frame behind them.


                        “Haven’t seen you for two days, Mr. Cunningham. It’s Chris. Remember me?”


                        Ozzy glared at the camera. Bruce, the black guy, had been the one who had actually interrogated him. But this woman had been the one who had hinted that they knew about his estranged wife—that they were listening in on everything he said.


                        “No need to go on the defensive,” Chris said. “Today we want to ask you a favor. Can we borrow your Sampson-5?”


                        Kazumi leaned closer to the camera. “Mr. Cunningham, we would truly appreciate it. Please lend us the radar you use for observations.”


                        Ozzy tried to gather his thoughts. “What’s this about?”


                        “We are tracking spacecraft called space tethers. We need your radar to make observations.” Kazumi explained that these space tethers had been responsible for the unnatural motion of SAFIR 3’s second stage that Ozzy had observed.


                        Most of what Kazumi said was beyond Ozzy’s understanding, but the gist was clear enough: Kazumi wanted to prove that the Rod from God was nonsense, and to do that, he had to observe the space tethers in action.


                        “Sounds pretty crazy to me. Space tethers? Never heard of them.”


                        “Of course not. I was the one who discovered them in your observational data.”


                        “My what? Oh, you mean that data I posted to the blog. You read that?” The observational data from Sampson-5 was incomprehensible even to Ozzy. He had only included it to lend his news post some scientific gravitas.


                        “Please, Mr. Cunningham. Let us borrow your radar. Let us save Ronnie Smark and his daughter in that orbital hotel.”


                        Kazumi’s words caught in Ozzy’s chest. Ozzy had been responsible for starting the wild rumors that had Ronnie scared. But now Kazumi was saying that there was a real threat too—something else, something unknown, something he wanted to pin down and reveal to the world.


                        Saving Ronnie. Ozzy had no objection to that. He was on the verge of agreeing to the request when Chris spoke, standing with her hand on Kazumi’s shoulder.


                        “Do you understand the situation? You just need to let us log in to your control system, and we’ll take it from there. We’ll even pay you for the time we use. You don’t need to be at the controls. Just take your hands off them for a while.”


                        Ozzy looked down at his fat, round fingers. Sit there doing nothing? While Kazumi and the others were saving Ronnie? “You’re saying I should just back off?”


                        “That’s right. Just lend us the equipment. That’s all we need.”


                        “That’s not gonna work for me.”


                        “Cunningham! Do you realize what you’re getting yourself into here? Lend us your damn radar, or I’ll requisition it by force.”


                        “I’d like to see you try. I’m in the middle of the Indian Ocean, half a world away.”


                        Even through the video link, he saw Chris’s eyes narrow.


                        Kazumi brushed Chris’s hand off his shoulder.


                        “Chris, we cannot just ignore what Ozzy has to say,” he said, then turned his eyes back to the camera. “We want to save Ronnie Smark, Mr. Cunningham. Are you opposed to that?”


                        “Don’t be ridiculous. The jerk’s my best friend. Of course I want to save him.”


                        “Then let us do it together.”


                        Ozzy took a deep breath.


                        “What do you want from us, Mr. Cunningham?” Kazumi continued. He moved closer to the camera, face looming larger on Ozzy’s screen. “I am serious about unraveling the riddle of the space tether. I want to save the orbital hotel and the Smarks too.” His jet-black eyes looked directly into Ozzy’s own.


                        “What do I want from you? Well … uh …”


                        “Let me make you an offer, then. Part ownership of Meteor News.”


                        Ozzy’s eyes widened at this proposition, completely unexpected though not unlike others he had heard many times before. At the other end of the video link, the two people on either side of Kazumi looked at him with startled expressions as well.


                        Eyebrows on the left grabbed Kazumi by the arm and tried to pull him back into his seat. “Kazumi, what are you saying?” he said. “You don’t need to do that.”


                        “No, I want Mr. Cunningham involved too. And I do not have anything else to offer him.”


                        A deep nostalgia welled up within Ozzy. Would-be entrepreneurs, going from door to door with stock in hand. Tickets to a shared adventure fanned out before him.


                        “All right. You’re offering me stock? I’ll take it. Forty-nine percent, okay?”


                        “Cunningham!” Eyebrows pounded the table.


                        “Don’t misunderstand me. This is how I buy in to your mission. I’m a stakeholder now. As co-owner of Meteor News, it concerns me directly, right? So … call me Ozzy, already.” He grabbed Friday by the arm and pulled him into the frame. “This is my radar operator, Fri—uh, Johansson. If you have any questions about the Sampson-5, he’s your man. At your service whenever you need him, whatever you need him for.”


                        “Thank you, Mr. Cunningham.”


                        “I told you. Call me Ozzy.”


                        Kazumi’s face crumpled for a moment, then broke into a smile. That was it. Ozzy hadn’t seen an expression like that in a long time. Now he just wanted to see that smile on Ronnie’s face again.


                        “Thanks … Ozzy,” said Kazumi.










Tue, 15 Dec 2020 08:25 -0800 (2020-12-15T16:25 GMT)


Western Days Hotel, Seattle




                        “Chris, sorry to keep you—whoa! What’s all this about?”


                        The silvery gleam that filled the penthouse suite left Bruce lost for words as he stepped inside. Wrinkled silver picnic mats had been stapled all over the walls. On closer examination, he saw that each sheet had strands of Nichrome wire running across it. The effect was indescribably odd after walking through the chicly appointed lobby and elevator hall outside.


                        “Bruce! You’re early,” said Chris, just beside him. She was making use of the room’s original furnishings, sitting at a mahogany desk in a leather president’s chair as she worked on her laptop. Bruce frowned, noticing that her computer didn’t have a LAN cable plugged into it.


                        “Chris, what are you doing? You know that’s against regulations.”


                        “You mean the Wi-Fi? It’s fine. This room is now an anechoic chamber.” Chris swept her arm grandly, indicating the silvered walls and ceiling.


                        “The picnic mats? That’s what they’re for?”


                        “I had Daryl check how good the shielding was. Apparently the mats and Nichrome wire together create a darkroom that’s completely impenetrable to Wi-Fi and cell phone signals.”


                        Their operations center used dozens of Wi-Fi devices, and the shielding was to conceal their presence, she explained. The idea had come from Akari, the engineer who’d come along with Kazumi.


                        “We’ve gone full Geek House, then.” Bruce pulled his emergency BlackBerry from its belt case and checked the signal strength. “BlackBerry’s getting a signal,” he observed.


                        “Look more closely,” Chris said, gesturing toward the window with her chin.


                        A cell phone base station antenna! Chris explained that Daryl had been sent out to buy it. The store they’d visited earlier had carried them, but such equipment was normally raised on a pole and used on farms. Laying it on the floor inside was not an idea a normal person would have come up with.


                        “Akari had him run a wire out to the terrace this morning.”


                        “I see,” Bruce said after a beat.


                        He looked around the room more closely. The silver mats covering the walls caught the eye first, but the objects piled up on the floor were not your usual office equipment either. In the middle of the room was an oval table with a screwed-on monitor arm put together from aluminized steel. A ring of office chairs around the table completed the setup. This was standard enough for a field operations center.


                        But what was that mountain of tiny integrated circuits that lay on the other side of the table, plugged into LAN cables as thick as arteries? He could see from the twinkling LEDs that it was operational, but if this had been a movie, some kind of computer monster would be leaping out of that tangle of chips and cables at any moment.


                        “That knot of silicon is analyzing the observational data from Cunningham’s radar,” Chris said. “Apparently the space tether cluster is over Desnoeufs as we speak.”


                        “Raspberry Pis, huh? I’m always hearing how cheap and useful they are, but I’ve never seen an army of them at work like this.”


                        A fat power cable snaked into the room through the silver-covered window that looked out on to the terrace. Bruce listened closely. They were on the seventh floor, so that nearby engine noise had to be …


                        “She brought a generator in too? Big believer in DIY, huh?”


                        “Well, she’s in the US now. Land of the garage workshop. When in Rome.”


                        “If the problem is money—” Bruce said, but stopped when he saw the warning in Chris’s eyes. She glanced over toward a whiteboard. Bruce followed her gaze to see a slender arm reach up from behind it with an interior designer’s stapler and begin attaching a silver mat to the ceiling.


                        Chris lowered her voice. “Who cares if it’s homemade as long as it works? We don’t want to demotivate her.”


                        There was the sound of someone jumping off a stepladder. A moment later, a small woman with a buzz cut wearing some kind of high-tech eyewear popped out from behind the whiteboard.


                        “That’s Akari,” Chris said.


                        Bruce composed his features into a smile. “Akari!” he said, offering her his hand. “Name’s Bruce. Wish I could show your work to some of my colleagues. You sure you’re not overdoing it, though?”


                        “Overdoing it? No way. Anything we can do, they can do also. We need a sword and a shield both. Am I wrong?”


                        Her English was stiff, but her boyish face looked relaxed. If she could talk with so little reserve to people she’d just met, she’d be communicating fluently in no time.


                        “No, you’re right,” Bruce said. “Welcome to the team.” He shook her delicate hand, noticing the special-ops keyboard strapped to her other wrist.


                        “Bruce, you’ll be Akari’s support,” Chris said.


                        Bruce nodded. He had no objection. He’d received the same orders last night, and watching a civilian hacker at work would be educational.


                        “You heard the lady, Akari,” he said. “What do you need me to do first?”


                        “Go shopping,” Akari replied. She spread her arms and twirled on the spot. “I didn’t realize the room would be this … wide. There aren’t enough picnic sheets.”


                        It was true that only half of the ceiling had been covered, and expensive-looking fabric wallpaper could still be seen in places between the mats near the door. Bruce’s eyes went wide when he realized what he was seeing. There was real embroidery on that wallpaper! It must have cost thirty dollars a square foot. And Akari was stapling picnic mats to it.


                        “Also, I want to put a security camera outside the door,” Akari said. “Can you buy one of those too? A small one.”


                        Chris patted Bruce’s shoulder. “I’ve got a favor to ask, too,” she said. “This, uh, redecorating—can you talk to the hotel about it, see what they want to let it pass? Just think of it as start-up costs for the team and it’ll feel like a bargain.”


                        “No problem. What about Daryl? I don’t see Kazumi anywhere, either.”


                        “They went off to war,” said Chris. “Looks like rain tomorrow, so they want to get as far as they can today.”


                        “War? Rain?” Bruce repeated, puzzled.


                        Akari put her hands on her hips and puffed out her cheeks in pouty indignation. “Chris, tell it to him properly!” she said. “I have told you many times, it is ‘wardriving’!”


                        “Oh, wardriving.” Bruce nodded.


                        An old civilian hacker technique that amounted to driving around town looking for open Wi-Fi networks. The CIA had no need for such tactics anymore. These days they had preassembled databases of all the information you could hope for, just waiting to be searched.


                        “Sounds good,” Bruce said, and gave Akari the thumbs-up.










Tue, 15 Dec 2020 09:01 -0800 (2020-12-15T17:01 GMT)


80 Pike Place, Seattle




                        Noting the red light ahead at the foot of the hill, Kazumi reached down with his left hand to lightly engage the rear brake. As he approached the intersection, the surface of the road changed from asphalt to cobblestones that muttered under the block-patterned tires of his mountain bike. Although powdery snow covered the street, he didn’t feel the slightest danger of slipping with these tires.


                        After engaging the brake, he made a fist and held it behind him at waist level. This signaled to the cars behind him that he was stopped. Many cycling hand signals were common to the US and Japan, and Tokyo also required cyclists to ride on the road, so the only modification Kazumi had to make when riding in Seattle was to keep to the right instead of the left.


                        As he brought the bike to a halt at what looked like the correct line, the blue hood of a car with a white star printed on it slid up along his left. Daryl’s Chevy.


                        The window on the passenger’s side opened. “Kazumi,” Daryl called. “Can you go down Pike Street? The marketplace is straight ahead.”


                        “Got it.” Kazumi exhaled, releasing a pure-white cloud that thinned out through the falling snow and then dissipated. To steady his breathing, he inhaled deeply, feeling his mucus membranes dry out as the cold air streamed through his nose.


                        The marketplace began directly in front of him and stretched off to the right for maybe two blocks.


                        “You okay, Kazumi? Not getting tired?”


                        “I am fine. I will rest when I walk through the market.”


                        The two of them had been roaming Seattle’s bayside district since early morning. Akari had analyzed some cell phone call records provided by Chris and realized that the locations where the China Mobility SIM cards first came into service were concentrated near the bay. If North Korean spies were throwing away roaming cards when they were finished with them, then the area the cards were first used had to be their home ground.


                        “Make a leisurely stroll of it,” Daryl said. “Wardriving’s an interesting way to spend a day, isn’t it? I didn’t expect to find three hundred open Wi-Fi hotspots in two blocks.”


                        Warcycling in my case, thought Kazumi, as his breathing came under control. He hadn’t expected to play hacker on his trip overseas.


                        The Raspberry Pi FPGAs in Kazumi’s backpack and on Daryl’s passenger-side seat were using reprogrammable chips carrying a real-time password-cracking program of Akari’s own design. The three hundred hotspots Daryl had just mentioned were only those with security settings weak enough for the program to break into as they cruised past.


                        “I was not expecting it either,” Kazumi said. “Maybe because there are so many cafés. Only four of them are the Fu Wen spots we’re looking for, though.”


                        Kazumi looked down at the smartphone taped to his handlebars. A wardriving/cycling app whipped up by Akari counted and mapped the networks that had been detected, those that had been cracked, and Fu Wen wireless hotspots used by the North Korean spies.


                        “Anyway, it is all thanks to the antenna booster you made,” he said. “We can even reach into buildings with this.”


                        Daryl waved his hand modestly, then pointed at Kazumi’s backpack. “Do you have enough honeypots?”


                        “Seven left.”


                        The honeypots were Wi-Fi routers on Raspberry Pi hardware, able to impersonate free Wi-Fi hotspots accessed by the China Mobility roaming SIM cards. Daryl and Kazumi were placing them under trash cans and benches as they went.


                        “Okay. Put all seven somewhere on Pike Street, then. Once you’re done, hop into the car and take a break.” Daryl pointed behind Kazumi. “Could you also get me a latte? Wouldn’t be right to come to Seattle and pass up the coffee.”


                        Kazumi looked behind him to see a familiar white mermaid logo. He had never seen a brown-and-white Starbucks before. Could this be their original location?


                        “I wonder if the spies get their lattes here too,” he said.


                        Daryl slapped the steering wheel and laughed.


                        “No doubt about it,” he said. “And we have to know our enemy, right? Okay, I’m going to try that block of warehouses by the wharf. Meet you when I get back.”


                        The Chevy turned off to the left in a cloud of white exhaust.










Tue, 15 Dec 2020, 10:02 -0800 (2020-12-15T18:02 GMT)


Pier 37 Warehouse, Seattle




                        In the warehouse, Shiraishi was working in his usual position. He sat on a bed with a sleeping bag on it and typed on the tablet in his lap.


                        “Coffee and breakfast is here,” Chance said. “Are you packed?”


                        Without taking his eyes off the television, Shiraishi turned his head back over his shoulder.


                        “All on the bed,” he said. “Listen, I’m sure I can smell gasoline. Can’t you do something about it?”


                        “It’s just your imagination.”


                        Shiraishi snorted.


                        Chance placed her Boston bag on an open space on the bed. Shiraishi’s luggage was apparently nothing but a neatly folded change of clothes, a laptop, some power cables, and a large black blueprint case. The cluster of computers that controlled the swarm of orbiting space tethers ran on virtual servers in a data center somewhere. From the way North Korea had talked about Shiraishi, Chance had expected a gadget fetishist. His minimalist approach to possessions was a pleasant surprise.


                        “I’m glad you’re traveling light,” she said. “What are we doing today?”


                        “Preparing to hand this project off,” Shiraishi said. “I’m creating an interface that will allow even nontechies like you to control the Cloud freely.” He pointed at the screen. Chance saw what looked like an online data-entry form.


                        “A web app?”


                        “Yep. Looks easy, right?”


                        The app was very simple, Shiraishi explained. The Formation Settings menu let you choose the shape of the Cloud, from a sphere to a long line. The Impact Settings menu offered five levels of force to apply when the Cloud collided with something, from Contact to Annihilate. Then there was a text field for entering the TLE of your target in orbit. That was all. The intricate orbital maneuvers actually carried out by the individual space tethers were all calculated by virtual servers scattered around the globe, including the worldwide Sleeping Gun network built by the Cyber Front for intelligence operations.


                        “You enter the TLE, and then, when the estimated time for the operation to commence is displayed, just select either ‘Go’ or ‘No go.’ The order is sent from six hundred thousand base stations at once—the entire global network.”


                        Chance nodded. Shiraishi’s ideas had been invaluable in setting up the network of base stations needed to control what was, after all, a cloud of space tethers spread out in low Earth orbit.


                        Perhaps because his work was going well, Shiraishi was in a talkative mood. “Let’s say you want to take a Japanese Information Gathering Satellite offline. Choose ‘Sphere: High-density’ from the Formation Settings menu and set the impact to ‘Contact.’ Then you just enter the target TLE, and you’re done. The Japanese government thinks the IGS orbits are a secret, but TLEs for them prepared by amateurs are easy enough to find.”


                        Shiraishi was right about one thing: his app couldn’t be easier. It was amazing how simple he’d made controlling forty thousand spacecraft.


                        “I ran a simple test where I left twenty thousand space tethers around SAFIR 3 and split the rest into two subclouds of ten thousand each. All eight of Japan’s Information Gathering Satellites, along with the Wyvern’s reentry craft, will become inoperable as early as today.”


                        The edge of Shiraishi’s lip curled upwards. North Korean headquarters had suggested this program for the initial use of force. As targets for accidents of unknown cause, the IGSs were perfect.


                        “There are low-level controllers, too. A technician who can use them could reach targets forty or even fifty times farther away.” Shiraishi tapped at his tablet and a complex table appeared on the television screen. This, he said, was the spreadsheet containing what amounted to an orchestral score for the entire Cloud, calculating the correct timing for the application of Lorentz force by each of the forty thousand individual space tethers. Shiraishi opened the Help menu to show Chance how macros and formulas could be used as well, though the details were indecipherable to her.


                        “Will engineers in the North be able to use this?” she asked.


                        “Who cares? I’m not their babysitter. Anyway, this interface is for me. You think I want just anyone to be able to use it? The web app will be plenty for them.”


                        “Good. I’m relieved to see this in action at last.”


                        Shiraishi looked at Chance as she finally rose to her feet beside him. “Relieved?”


                        “There were concerns that you’d try to monopolize the Cloud.”


                        Shiraishi snorted, his breath coming out in a puff of white. “Morons,” he said. “Where would the fun be in monopolizing an obstruction? My focus is the Great Leap.”


                        “You’ve done good.” Chance gave him a short round of applause totaling three claps. The latex covers on her fingers made a hard sound.


                        “Watch yourself. It was my idea.”


                        The Cloud of space tethers would cause a gradually increasing number of accidents made to look like collisions with space debris, whittling away at the enthusiasm for space development in the nations currently operating satellites. The world’s satellites had been launched into orbit at great expense; when they broke down, budget cuts were bound to follow.


                        If North Korea then announced that it was actually expanding its investment in space development, it would be able to attract the best scientists and engineers from around the world. The great powers that had lost their appetite for orbital engineering for fear of accidents would be left behind as North Korea and its allies, including Iran, Pakistan, a few small African countries, and some movements not even recognized as nations yet, took the lead in space development. This was the Great Leap.


                        The first time Chance had heard this plan, she’d laughed at the idea that engineers would betray their home countries so easily. But learning that China had been able to poach dozens of Japanese engineers every year to work on the Tiangong-2 space station had changed her mind.


                        Chance packed Shiraishi’s luggage into her Boston bag. It all fit except for the blueprint case.


                        “Will you be carrying this?” she asked, holding the case out to him. On it she saw white lettering that read great leap for the rest of the world.


                        Shiraishi’s arm shot out and seized the case from her hands. He then cradled it against his chest with arms folded.


                        “There’s nothing in here you’d be able to understand,” he said. “You’d have to be Dr. Jahanshah himself. When are you going to bring him to meet me?”


                        “Not until the Great Leap is under way.”


                        “All right, all right. I’ll get back to my work on the app.”


                        Chance noticed Shiraishi’s left hand, the arm that held the case, tightly gripping the tattoo of the Tsiolkovsky equation on his right arm.










Seshambe, 25 Azar 1399, 23:56 +0330 (2020-12-15T20:26 GMT)


Tehran Institute of Technology, Tehran




                        This one? No, this isn’t it … That’s the one. That one hanging over there.


                        Jamshed pushed a creaking chair out of the way and pulled a yellow sheet of paper illuminated by a naked lightbulb closer. The sheet of paper was clipped to a piece of string, which hung in turn from the ladder wiring that wound across the ceiling. Diagrams and equations were scrawled across the sheet of paper in marker. On his desk sat the scientific calculator with the printing on its buttons worn away.


                        Paper, pen, and calculator: the only computer he had. He was fortunate to have plenty of paper, at least. Alef had given Jamshed the posters from the Azadi Interanet campaign he was planning.


                        At night the lab felt deserted. Perhaps because the Internet had been completely blocked for two days now, he didn’t even see any of the students who usually came in to use the computers at night. No doubt they would all be attending Alef’s demonstration tomorrow.


                        Jamshed yanked the paper out of its clip, placed it on the table, and drew a coordinate system on it.


                        “Unbelievable … It really is my exact design.”


                        The connected coordinates that made up the observational data for the unknown objects reported by Meteor News were a perfect match with the principles of propulsion at work in Jamshed’s space tether design. The randomly moving ballast implemented to fight tidal forces had been Jamshed’s own idea. The wobbles in the observational data followed the equations in Jamshed’s paper precisely.


                        While making his calculations, Jamshed had discovered a few elementary mistakes in his paper. Presumably whoever had stolen the paper had noticed these and was using an amended model.


                        “So Hamed didn’t even read it …” Jamshed sighed, recalling the sight of Professor Hamed, his advisor at the time, glancing at his paper with an obvious lack of interest. That jerk. He’d written in his name as lead author without even reading the thing properly. How stupid did you have to be to read about a spacecraft that could generate electricity and maintain its orbit without fuel and just dismiss it with a shrug?


                        Jamshed clipped the paper back onto the string and placed a new sheet of paper on his desk. He pulled the cap off his marker and tried to draw a line of moment, but the pen was dry.


                        “Already?” Jamshed threw the pen onto the floor. It wasn’t pens that he needed. It was someone to talk to.


                        Kazumi from Meteor News. He’d reacted to the tether-propulsion system, even to the words “space tether.” He’d be hundreds of times more useful than Hamed had been. Jamshed wondered what Kazumi had thought of the half of the paper that he had managed to send. He longed to talk to him about it.


                        Whoever it was who’d actually engineered the space tethers would do, too. Sure, they might have stolen his paper, but there was so much Jamshed wanted to ask them. How had they approached the problems of bringing his ideas to life? What had they used to get the devices into orbit? How were they stabilizing their rotation?


                        And then there was the problem of base stations, which Jamshed had ultimately been unable to overcome. Three hundred fifty kilometers sounded pretty high up, but compared to the size of the Earth, it was barely off the ground. A space tether in LEO was only visible from the surface within a circular area of about a two thousand–kilometer radius. To communicate with an orbiting space tether, you would need multiple bases all over the Earth. If a tether was passing over Tehran, only a few other nearby countries would have the necessary line of sight to communicate with it. To bases on the other side of the world in North Korea or the US, it would be invisible.


                        He had mentioned this in his paper as a future challenge. If you were going to build bases around the world to receive telemetry from the space tethers and send back new target orbits, ideally you would need at least a few dozen locations—and if you wanted real-time control, more like a few hundred … no, a few thousand. How had the mystery space tether engineer gotten around this problem?


                        “Maybe you don’t really need that many bases.”


                        Deciding to recalculate the necessary number of antennas, Jamshed stood up to borrow a pen from a student’s desk. Then there was a noise in the corridor outside.


                        “What’s that?”


                        He heard several voices in conversation and the sound of something heavy and metallic being dragged across the floor. Had the students come to collect some materials for their barricades?


                        “Don’t you know what time it is?” Jamshed pulled open the door to see three people passing by, illuminated by the light that spilled from his laboratory. They looked at him, clearly surprised. All three had green scarves wrapped around the lower halves of their faces and Kalashnikovs slung casually from their shoulders.


                        “Sorry,” the man at the head of the three apologized in thickly accented Persian. “We didn’t think anyone was here.”


                        They were dragging a metal case painted olive. The other two men apologized in turn, and then the three of them hoisted the heavy-looking case off the ground and disappeared into the darkness.


                        Members of your demonstration, Alef? With Kalashnikovs . . . ? No. Something was wrong here. That rectangular case, Jamshed realized, contained a surface-to-air missile launcher that had been provided to the institute to shoot down drones. But wasn’t tomorrow supposed to be a nonviolent protest?


                        “Alef … What are you planning?”










Tue, 15 Dec 2020, 14:03 -700 (2020-12-15T21:03 GMT)


Peterson Air Force Base




                        After finishing his ground-run test, Captain Ricky McGillis waited for Second Lieutenant Madu Abbot to disembark from her F-22 Raptor before returning with her to the briefing room.


                        “This pressure suit feels pretty good,” said Ricky.


                        “Make up your mind, would you?” said Madu. “I thought you were complaining that it smelled like rubber or something.”


                        “It’s the power of Gore-Tex, you know? Keeps you from getting all hot and sweaty. Wish we could have it in our regular pilot suits too.” Ricky opened the door and let Madu into the locker room ahead of him. “That clear helmet is great too,” he continued. “Nice to be able to move your head freely—whoops!”


                        Upon entering the room, Madu had stopped in place, taken a step to one side, and come to attention with her feet apart and her hands behind her back. Ricky hurried to adopt the same pose.


                        Colonel Daniel Waabboy, their commanding officer as of yesterday, was sitting on the bench. Beside him were two cream-colored cardboard folders full of papers. When Ricky saw the air force’s eagle seal and the words operation command printed in fat letters on the cover of one, he felt his fists tighten at the small of his back above his belt. Operation Seed Pod was about to begin at last.


                        Waabboy picked up the two folders and motioned to Ricky and Madu to sit down on the bench opposite him.


                        “Ground-run test?” he asked. “How’d it go?”


                        “No difficulties, sir.”


                        “The same, sir.”


                        Waabboy nodded. He was flipping through the papers in one of the folders. Ricky could make out some of the small text on the cover. No mistake: the colonel was holding the papers for Operation Seed Pod. Orders had come through at eight that morning. The decision must have been made based on Judy’s broadcast the previous night. It wasn’t often you saw a response that quick these days.


                        “Operation Seed Pod is currently scheduled to begin at 1700 hours tomorrow,” Waabboy said. “There is a possibility that our target will move, though, so you will be on standby starting tonight. We’ve included a flight plan for breaking the altitude record. Make sure you’re up to it.”


                        “Yes, sir.” Ricky thrust his chest out and pulled his chin in. This meant that he and Madu would be sleeping in the scramble waiting room next to the hangar tonight, along with the maintenance crew.


                        Waabboy clasped his hands together and leaned in closer to the two of them, lowering his voice. “I suppose you already know this, but Operation Seed Pod is in contravention of the COPUOS guidelines, to which the United States is a signatory.” He gave them a meaningful look, as if to remind them that this was a top secret mission. Ricky nodded. After a beat, Waabboy returned to his original tone of voice. “Three ASM-140s have been prepared, but you’re to get it right the first time.”


                        Waabboy extracted a weather chart from the bundle of papers and handed it to Madu. Ricky caught sight of the pressure fronts and closely packed isobars and shivered. A blizzard. By tomorrow, the whole northern end of the western seaboard would be buried in snow.


                        “The operation will take place completely in US airspace,” said Waabboy. “Actually, I’m not sure if we can call it ‘airspace,’ but above those clouds, at any rate. It’s an operation that would not be possible without your all-weather F-15 and F-22 to launch the ASM-140 out of the stratosphere. If we were to repeat this two or three times on a clear day, even an amateur might notice. The CIA’s efforts to get Russia and China to keep quiet would go to waste.”


                        Waabboy took the weather map back from Madu and returned it to its folder, then handed one of the folders to each of them.


                        “Operation Seed Pod. Your formal orders. Make sure you read them.” Waabboy’s face was grim.


                        “Is something wrong, sir?” asked Ricky.


                        Waabboy shook his head. “We’ve never been asked to knock a satellite out of orbit before. Not this base, not the whole US armed forces. There’s a lot I don’t understand in these folders.”


                        Flipping through the pages, Ricky came across the sheet about the ASM-140 antisat weapon his Eagle would carry. He gave it a quick once-over, but there were some figures he couldn’t work out. Then he realized the problem: the units of measurement. “Sir … this sheet …”


                        Waabboy flapped his hand as he rose to his feet. “It’s in metric, right? That’s one of the things I don’t understand. Go through and find everything that doesn’t make sense to you. Colonel Lintz from NORAD will be providing a separate briefing about the ASM-140 later.”


                        Waabboy left the locker room with a wave, pausing only to look back at them with a final warning: “No slacking off!”


                        Ricky and Madu rose to their feet and saluted as he left.


                        “Hey, Madu,” Ricky said, once Waabboy was gone. “You use metric in India, right?”


                        “Don’t look at me. I’m going to have my hands full operating the external photography pod. I told them the Raptor isn’t a surveillance plane, but do they listen?” Madu frowned and paged through their orders. “A seventy-degree climb, side by side, to seventy thousand feet?”


                        Madu glared at Ricky. His F-15 was supposed to have been the only one challenging the altitude record. She wasn’t happy about getting caught up in that initiative. It had been their former commander, Major Sylvester Fernandez, along with Waabboy himself, who had authored that part of the mission plans.


                        “Not my fault.”


                        “I know, I know. Listen, I’m going to visit the simulator. See whether I can actually get that high with something on the side of the plane dragging me down.” Madu started to tie her hair back. “Why don’t you drop by too, Ricky? The ASM-140 fires automatically. You’d do well to learn how it behaves after release.”


                        “What’s that you say?”


                        Ricky pulled a nine-page flight plan from his copy of their orders. Target velocity: 7.7 kilometers per second … Shit! Even the parts that mattered were in metric.










Tue, 15 Dec 2020, 14:12 -0800 (2020-12-15T22:12 GMT)


Western Days Hotel, Seattle




                        Bruce chose the chair nearest Chris and pulled it toward him. This action brought the central display to life and displayed a list of accounts Bruce could use. A reader screwed into place under the table was detecting the name card Akari had made for him.


                        “Who built this setup?” Bruce asked.


                        “Daryl built the hardware, Akari the software,” Chris said. “They put it together yesterday—only took them one evening. You can connect it to a CIA desktop too. Headquarters is going to fail their security audit for sure.”


                        If you wanted to display your laptop’s screen directly, you simply inserted it below the display and plugged in a few cables.


                        “Amazing,” Bruce said. “Very different from headquarters. You practically have to show your health insurance just to buy a keyboard there.”


                        “I have no interest in US national secrets,” came another voice. “You are safe with this system.”


                        “Huh?” Bruce said. “Oh, that’s fine. I trust you.”


                        The third speaker was Akari, currently on her hands and knees attaching Nichrome wire to the picnic mats Bruce had gone out and bought for her. Conversation with her wasn’t always smooth, but he appreciated the effort she made to communicate. Anyone who could make themselves this useful after being chased to a foreign country was a cut above the rest.


                        Bruce logged in to his CIA remote desktop and inserted a flash drive into one of the ports lined up beneath the monitor. A frame from a high-res video immediately appeared on the display, showing a man with a tightly wound air pushing his silver-framed glasses up the bridge of his nose with his middle finger. This was the man who had convinced Jose Juarez to draw the illustration of the Rod from God. Kirilo Panchenko, a forty-one-year-old Ukrainian. He had actually existed once, but thirty-eight years ago, at the age of three, he had gone missing. The profile for Kirilo in the video chat system was presumably an example of what people in Bruce’s line of work called a “legend”: a false identity backed by real documents.


                        Bruce thought back on the videoconference between the man calling himself Kirilo and Jose that he’d pulled from the NSA archives. They had spoken in English, Kirilo with a phony-sounding Russian accent. Once Jose had accepted the proposal to draw the illustration, Kirilo had sent him the plans.


                        Bruce was sure of one thing. Whoever this liar was, he had been at the center of the effort to muddy the waters around the Rod from God. The image that had come through on the videoconference had been doctored, thwarting the automatic facial-recognition engine. Not bad work for North Korean cyber command. The agent who’d processed the video at the CIA had been just as surprised.


                        “Pretty good-looking guy. Looks a bit uptight, though.” As he cropped the rest of the image out to send the face to headquarters, Bruce saw a human form reflected in his display. Turning, he found Akari staring at the screen in disbelief. “What’s wrong, Akari? Friend of yours?”


                        Bruce followed this up with a friendly chuckle, but Akari didn’t react. She just gaped at the screen, not even blinking.


                        “Ageha Ojisan … ”A mumble in Japanese escaped her lips as her trembling hand reached toward the monitor.


                        Bruce felt his body tense. “Akari, do you know this man?”


                        Slowly, Akari nodded. Her fingertips made contact with the screen, tracing the frames of the man’s glasses. Haltingly, she began to speak.


                        “Yes. He’s my uncle. Ageha Shiraishi … He changed his glasses.”


                        Bruce felt someone poke his shoulder and realized that Chris was now standing directly behind him. She put her finger to her lips and jerked her chin toward her own laptop to signal that she would send out the request for information on this Ageha Shiraishi.


                        Akari spoke in English, clearly and carefully, eyes glued to the monitor. “Where did you find him? This is cropped from a video frame, right? Can I see the video?”


                        Akari obviously had strong feelings for this man. How would she react if Bruce showed her the video of him gleefully deceiving the illustrator? With anger? Dismay?


                        “This still was all that headquarters sent,” Bruce said. This was a lie. He had the whole video on his flash drive. “Was he an engineer too?”


                        “He was my mentor,” Akari said.


                        Now Bruce understood how a regular civilian hacker had managed to figure out so much of what the North Korean spies were doing. Akari had been able to see through the SIM reuse, the translation-engine corruption, and the trip wire ads because she thought the same way as Ageha Shiraishi, the man behind it all.


                        Bruce’s experience as an intelligence agent whispered to him: You can use this. If Akari stuck with them on the team, they’d have someone who knew how Shiraishi thought. Who could read him.


                        “It seems he’s the man who gave the plans for the Rod from God to the illustrator,” Bruce said. “He’s mixed up in this somehow. Are you sure that’s your uncle?”


                        “Yes … Maybe the North Koreans are putting him up to this.”


                        “Maybe so.” Bruce quietly pulled out the flash drive with the video on it.










2020-12-15T23:00 GMT


Project Wyvern




                        We’ve had an absolute flood of inquiries and information since yesterday.


                        Thank you so much, everyone.


                        I know much more about the Rod from God now.


                        If we could get a photo of it, we could try zooming in, but unfortunately it’s not yet visible to the naked eye. According to the orbital hotel’s debris-detection radar, it’s following us quietly at a distance of ten kilometers. We’re correcting our orbit as necessary to make the planned rendezvous with the ISS, but the Rod from God’s speed relative to us has stayed at zero.


                        In other words, that object can move as freely as we can, not to mention observe us.


                        What does it want? If there’s someone out there who’s mastered such advanced technology, why don’t they have anything better to do? It’s a bigger waste than this hotel’s Showerpots.


                        Because, really, there’s so much that needs to be done.


                        “That’s one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind.” Neil Armstrong’s first words after stepping onto the moon, 380,000 kilometers from Earth, as you know. It’s been fifty years now, and no one has made giant leap number two yet. No one has gone any farther out than he did.


                        In fact, these days we can barely make it four hundred measly kilometers up—so low there are still atmospheric effects. And only a handful of people at a time, too. Six in the ISS, three in Tiangong-2, and two here in Wyvern. A grand total of eleven human beings in orbit.


                        And now someone’s launched something into that same practically deserted orbit just to cause trouble. How petty and pathetic can you get?


                        Ronnie’s acting tough, saying, “Let the idiots do what they want. We have our own work to do.” But if something doesn’t change, we’ll be leading that Rod from God right to the ISS.


                        That would be no way to repay their hospitality.


                        Judy Smark