Chapter 7








Excerpt 14 … Zakhar’s son, comfortably ensconced on the corner of the bed, graced the proceedings with occasional readings from the Popular Medical Encyclopedia, given to him by Malianov to keep him quiet. Vecherovsky, strikingly elegant in contrast to the sweaty, disheveled Weingarten, listened and looked at the strange boy curi-ously, raising his red eyebrows high. He had not yet said anything substantial – he had asked a few questions that had, to Malianov (and not to Malianov alone), seemed irrelevant. For instance, for no reason at all, he asked Zakhar if he was often in conflict with his supervisors and Glukhov if he liked to watch television. (It turned out that Zakhar never had conflicts with anybody, that was his personality, and Glukhov did like to watch television, not only liked it, but couldn’t resist it.)


Malianov really liked Glukhov. In general, Malianov didn’t like seeing new people in old company; he was always afraid they would misbehave somehow and he would be embarrassed for them. But Glukhov turned out to be okay. He was extremely cozy and unthreatening – a little scrawny, snub-nosed fellow with reddish eyes hidden by strong glasses. When he arrived he happily drank the glass of vodka Weingarten offered him and was visibly saddened when he learned it was the last one in the house.


When he was subjected to cross-examination, he listened to each one attentively, leaning his head professorially to the right and looking to the right as well. ‘No, no,’ he replied apologetically. ‘No, nothing like that happened to me. Please, I can’t even imagine anything like that. My thesis? I’m afraid it’s too foreign for you: “The Cultural Influence of the USA on Japan: An Attempt at a Qualita-tive and Quantitative Analysis”. Yes, my headaches seem to be some idiosyncrasy: I’ve discussed it with major doctors – a rare case, they said.’


In general, they laid an egg with Glukhov, but it didn’t matter, it was nice that he was there. He was a real down-to-earth guy. He drank heartily and wanted more, ate caviar with childlike glee, preferred Ceylon tea, and his favorite reading matter was mysteries. He watched the strange child with reserved apprehension, laughing uncertainly from time to time, listened to the delirious tales with uncommon sympathy, and scratched behind both ears, muttering, ‘Yes, that’s amazing, unbelievable!’ In a word, everything about Glukhov was clear to Malianov. There would be no new information and certainly no advice coming from him.


Weingarten, as usual when Vecherovsky was around, lowered his profile. He even looked more presentable and stopped shouting and calling people ‘buddy’. However, he did eat the last grains of the black caviar.


If you didn’t count the brief replies to Vecherovsky’s questions, Zakhar said nothing. He didn’t even get to tell his own story – Weingarten took that upon himself. And he stopped admonishing his son and just smiled painfully as he listened to the helpful quotations about the diseases of various delicate organs.


And so they sat in silence. Sipping cold tea. Smoking. The windows of the house across the street shone molten gold, the silver sickle of the new moon hung in the dark blue sky, and there was a sharp crackling sound coming through the window – they must have been burning old crates again on the street. Weingarten rustled his pack of cigarettes, peeked inside, crumpled it up, and softly asked: ‘Who’s got any cigarettes left?’ ‘Here, help yourself,’ Zakhar replied in a low voice. Glukhov coughed and rattled his teaspoon in the glass.


Malianov looked over at Vecherovsky. He was sitting in his chair, his legs stretched out and crossed at the ankles, studying the nails of his right hand. Malianov looked at Weingarten. Weingarten was smoking and watching Vecherovsky over the glowing tip of his cigarette. Zakhar was looking at Vecherovsky. And Glukhov. Malianov was struck by the silliness of the situation. What, actually, do we expect from him? So, he’s a mathematician. So, a major mathematician. So, let’s say he’s a very major mathematician – a world-famous mathematician. So? We’re like a bunch of children. God! We’re lost in the woods and trustingly flutter our eyes at the nice man: Oh, he’ll lead us out.


‘Well, basically, that’s all the ideas we have on the matter,’ Weingarten said smoothly. ‘As you can see, there are at least two positions shaping up.’ He spoke as though addressing the group, but looked only at Vecherovsky. ‘Dmitri feels that we should try to explain all these events in the framework of known natural phenomena. I feel that we are dealing with the intervention of forces completely unknown to us. That is: like cures like, fantastic with the fantastic.’


That tirade sounded unbelievably phony. No, he couldn’t just simply say, we’re lost, mister, lead us out; no, he had to sum things up: We’ve been doing some thinking too. And now sit there like a fool. Malianov picked up the teapot and left Val to his shame. He did not hear the conversation while he ran the water and put on the kettle. When he returned, Vecherovsky was speaking slowly, carefully examining the nails on his left hand.


‘… and that’s why I feel your point of view is more accurate. Really, the fantastic should be explained by the fantastic. I suspect that all of you have fallen into the sphere of interest of … let’s call it a supercivilization. I think that’s become the standard term for an intelligence many degrees more powerful than human intelligence.’


Weingarten inhaled deeply and, exhaling smoke, nodded with an important and concentrated air.


‘Why they need to stop your research in particular,’ continued Vecherovsky, ‘is not only a complex question, but an academic one. The point is that humanity, without even suspecting it, has attracted the attention of this intelligence and stopped being a self-contained system. Apparently, without even suspecting it, we’ve trod on the corns of some supercivilization, and that supercivilization, apparently, has decided to regulate our progress as it sees fit.’


‘Phil,’ Malianov said. ‘Wait. Don’t you see it either? What the hell kind of supercivilization is this? Some supercivilization that prods us like a blind kitten. Why all this meaningless nonsense? My investigator and the cognac? Zakhar’s women? Where is the fundamental principle of reason: expediency, economy?’


‘Those are particulars,’ Vecherovsky replied softly. ‘Why measure nonhuman expediency in human terms? And then remember with what force you smack yourself on the cheek to kill a crummy mosquito. A blow like that could easily kill all the mosquitoes in the vicinity.’


Weingarten added: ‘Or, for instance. What is the expediency of building a bridge over a river from the point of view of a trout?’


‘Well, I don’t know,’ Malianov said. ‘It just doesn’t make sense.’


Vecherovsky waited a while and then, certain that Malianov had stopped talking, continued.


‘I would like to stress the following. When the question is put this way, your personal problems recede into the background. We’re talking about the fate of mankind. Well, perhaps not in the fatal sense of the word, but the fate of its dignity in any case. So now our goal is to protect not only your revertase, Val, but the future of our whole planet’s biology. Or am I wrong?’


For the first time in Vecherovsky’s presence Val blew up to his usual proportions. He nodded most energetically but said something that Malianov did not expect at all.


He said: ‘Yes, absolutely. We all understand that we’re not talking just about us here. We’re talking about hundreds of research projects. Maybe thousands. What am I saying – about the future of research in general!’


‘So,’ Vecherovsky said energetically, ‘there is a battle ahead of us. Their weapon is secrecy, therefore ours will be publicity. The first thing we should do is tell all our friends who, on the one hand, have enough imagination to believe us and, on the other, enough authority to convince their colleagues who hold high posts in science. In that way we will enter into contact with the government obliquely and gain access to the mass media. We will then be able to inform all mankind if necessary. Your first move was absolutely correct. You turned to me. I will personally attempt to convince several major mathematicians who are at the same time important administrators. I will begin, naturally, with our own people, and then move on to foreign mathematicians.’


He was animated, sitting up straight, and talking and talking and talking. He mentioned names, titles, posi-tions; he clearly defined who Malianov should see and who Weingarten should turn to. You would have thought that he had been planning this for days. But the more he talked, the more depressed Malianov became. And when Vecherovsky, with totally indecent agitation, moved on to part two of his program, the apotheosis – when humanity, united by the general alarm, fights off the super-civilized enemy shoulder to shoulder across the entire planet – well, then Malianov felt that he’d had it, stood up, and went into the kitchen to make fresh tea. So much for Vecherovsky. Some brain. The poor guy must have been terrified too. This is no simple argument about telepathy. But it’s our own fault: Vecherovsky this, Vecherovsky that. Vecherovsky is just an ordinary man. A smart man, yes, a major figure, but no more than that. As long as you talk about abstractions, he’s terrific, but when it’s real life … That Vecherovsky immediately took Val’s side and didn’t even want to hear him out really hurt. Malianov took the teapot and went back into the room.


Naturally, Weingarten was letting Vecherovsky have it: Deep respect is deep respect, but when a man is blathering nonsense, no amount of respect is going to help. Maybe Vecherovsky thinks he’s dealing with total idiots. Maybe Vecherovsky has a couple of authoritative and feeble-minded academicians stowed away somewhere who will greet this news with great enthusiasm after a bottle or two. He, Weingarten, did not personally have any academicians like that. He, Weingarten, had his old friend Dmitri Malianov, from whom he expected some definite sympathy, especially since Malianov was in the same pickle. And what happened – did he welcome his tale of woe with enthusiasm? With interest? With at least sympathy? The hell he did! The first thing he said was that Weingarten was a liar – and in his own way, Malianov is right. Weingarten is terrified to even think about approaching his boss with a story like that even though his boss is still a young man, not yet ossified, and well disposed to a certain noble madness in science. He doesn’t know Vecherovsky’s situation, but he, Weingarten, has no intention of spending the rest of his days in even the most luxurious of nuthouses.


‘The orderlies will come and take us away!’ Zakhar said woefully. ‘That’s clear. It’s okay for you guys, but they’ll brand me a sex maniac as well.’


‘Hold on, Zakhar,’ Weingarten said in irritation. ‘No, Phil, I just don’t recognize you! Let’s assume that all our talk of mental institutions is an exaggeration. This will still mean the end of our careers as scientists, immediately! Our reputations will be ruined! And then, goddamn it, even if we did find one or two sympathetic souls in the Academy, how can they go to the government with this ranting? Who would want to risk doing that? You know what kind of pressure would have to be brought on a man for him to risk that? And for humanity, our dear co-inhabitants of planet Earth …’ Weingarten waved his hand and looked at Malianov with his olive eyes. ‘Pour me some hot tea,’ he said. ‘Publicity … publicity is a two-ended stick, you know.’ And he began slurping his tea, rubbing the back of his hairy arm across his nose.


‘Who would like some more?’ Malianov asked.


He tried not to look at Vecherovsky. He poured some for Zakhar, for Glukhov. For himself. He sat down. He was terribly sorry for Vecherovsky and very uncomfort-able for him. Val was right: A scientist’s reputation is a fragile thing. One unsuccessful speech, and then where is your reputation, Philip Pavlovich Vecherovsky?


Vecherovsky was huddled up in the chair, his face in his hands. It was unbearable.


‘You see, Phil, all your suggestions, your plan of action, it’s probably all correct in theory,’ Malianov said. ‘But we don’t need theory now. We need a plan that can be realized in real circumstances. You say: a united mankind. You see, for your plan, there may be some life-form that could do it, but not ours, not earthlings, I mean. Our people would never believe anything like that. You know when it will believe in a supercivilization? When that supercivilization stoops to our level and starts sprin-kling us with bombs from whining spacecraft. Then we’ll believe, then we’ll be united, and even then not right away. We’ll probably wallop each other with a few salvos first.’


‘That’s it exactly!’ Weingarten agreed in an unpleasant voice and laughed curtly.


No one said anything.


‘And my boss is a woman, anyway,’ Zakhar said. ‘Very nice, very sweet, but how can I tell her about all this? About me, I mean?’


They all sat there silently sipping tea. Then Glukhov spoke softly.


‘What wonderful tea! You really are a specialist, Dmitri. I haven’t had tea like this in ages. Yes … of course, all this is difficult and unclear. On the other hand, look at the sky, what a beautiful moon. Tea, a smoke – what else does man need? A good detective series on television? I don’t know. Now, you, Dmitri, you’re doing something with stars, with interstellar gases. Really, what business is it of yours? Just think about it. Something doesn’t want you to pry. Well, the answer is simple: Just don’t. Drink tea, watch television. The heavens aren’t for spying on – they’re for admiring.’


And then Zakhar’s boy announced out loud:


‘You’re a sneak!’


Malianov thought that he meant Glukhov. But no. The boy, squinting like an adult, was looking at Vecherovsky and threatening him with a chocolate-covered finger.


‘Sh, sh,’ Zakhar whispered helplessly. Vecherovsky suddenly took his hands from his face and resumed his original position – lounging in the chair with his legs stretched out and crossed at the ankles. There was a grin on his face.


‘So,’ he said, ‘I am happy to prove that Comrade Weingarten’s hypothesis leads us to a dead end that is obvious to the naked eye. It’s easy to see that the hypothesis about the legendary Union of the Nine will lead us to the same dead end, as will the mysterious intelligence hiding in the depths of the seas or any other rational force. It would be very good if you all stopped and thought for a minute to convince yourselves of the correctness of what I say.’


Malianov stirred his tea and thought: The bastard! Did he have us going! Why? What’s the play-acting for? Weingarten was staring straight ahead, his eyes bulging slowly, his fat, sweaty cheeks twitching threateningly. Glukhov was staring at everyone in turn, and Zakhar waited patiently – the drama of the minute’s pause completely escaping him.


Then Vecherovsky spoke again.


‘Note. In order to explain fantastic events we tried to use concepts that, however fantastic, still belonged in the realm of contemporary understanding. That yielded nothing. Absolutely nothing. Val proved that to us quite convincingly. Therefore, obviously, there is no point in applying concepts from outside the realm of contemporary understanding. Say, for instance, God or … or something else. Conclusion?’


Weingarten wiped his face nervously with his shirt and attacked his tea feverishly. Malianov asked in an in-jured tone:


‘You mean, you were just making fools of us on purpose?’


‘What else could I do?’ Vecherovsky replied, raising his damn red eyebrows to the ceiling. ‘Prove to you that going to the authorities was useless? That it was meaningless to put the question the way you were? The Union of the Nine or Fu Manchu – what’s the difference? What is there to argue about? Whatever answer you got, there could be no practical course of action based on it. When your house burns down or is destroyed by a hurricane or is carried away by flood – you don’t think about what precisely happened to the house, you think about how you’re going to live, where you’re going to live, and what to do next.’


‘You’re trying to say …’ began Malianov.


‘I’m saying that nothing interesting happened to you. There is nothing to be interested in here, nothing to study, nothing to analyze. All your seeking of causes is nothing more than wasteful idle curiosity. You shouldn’t be thinking about what kind of press is squeezing you; you should be thinking about how to behave under the pressure. And thinking about that is much more complex than fantasizing about King Asoka, because from now on each of you is alone! No one will help you. No one will give you any advice. No one will decide for you. Not the academicians, not the government, not even progressive humanity – Val made that perfectly clear for you.’


He stood, poured himself some tea, and returned to his chair – intolerably confident, pulled together, elegant-ly casual, still looking like a peer at a diplomatic reception at the palace.


The boy read aloud:


‘“If the patient does not follow doctor’s orders, does not take his medication, and abuses alcohol, then approximately five or six years later the secondary phase is followed by the disease’s third – and last – stage.”’


Zakhar sighed.


‘But why? Why me?’


Vecherovsky placed the cup in the saucer with a light clatter and put the saucer on the table next to him.


‘Because our age is wearing black,’ he explained, dabbing his pinkish gray equine lips with a snowy white handkerchief. ‘It is still wearing a tall top hat, and still we continue to run, and when the clock strikes the hour of inaction and the hour of leave-taking from daily cares, then comes the moment of division, and we no longer dream of anything –’


‘The hell with you,’ Malianov said, and Vecherovsky pealed with smug Martian guffaws.


Weingarten fished a longish butt out of the ashtray, stuck it between his fat lips, struck a match, and sat for a while, his crossed eyes focused on the glowing tip.


‘Really,’ he muttered, ‘does it really matter what power … as long as it is more powerful than humans?’ He inhaled. ‘An aphid squashed by a brick and an aphid squashed by a coin … but I’m no aphid. I can choose.’


Zakhar looked at him hopefully, but Weingarten said nothing else. Choose, thought Malianov. That’s easy enough to say.


‘That’s easy enough to say – choose!’ Zakhar began, but Glukhov started talking. Zakhar looked at him hopefully.


‘But it’s clear,’ Glukhov said with unusual feeling. ‘Isn’t it obvious which you should choose? You must choose life! What else? Surely not your telescopes and test tubes. Let them choke on your telescopes! And interstellar gases! You have to live, love, feel nature – really feel it, not dig around in it! When I look at a tree or a bush now, I feel, I know that it is my friend, that we exist for each other, that we need each other.’


‘Now?’ Vecherovsky asked loudly.


Glukhov stuttered to a stop.


‘Excuse me?’


‘We’ve met, you know, Vladlen,’ Vecherovsky said. ‘Remember? Estonia, the math-linguistics school? The sauna, the beer.’


‘Yes, yes,’ Glukhov said, lowering his eyes. ‘Yes.’


‘You were quite different then,’ Vecherovsky said.


‘Well, back then …’ Glukhov began. ‘Barons grow old, you know.’


‘Barons also struggle,’ Vecherovsky said. ‘It wasn’t so long ago.’


Glukhov spread his hands in silence.


Malianov understood nothing of this interlude, but there was something to it, something unpleasant, sinis-ter, there was some reason for what they were saying to each other. And Zakhar, apparently, had understood, in his own way. Malianov felt some insult to himself in that brief exchange, because suddenly, with unusual harsh-ness, almost with anger, he shouted at Vecherovsky:


‘They killed Snegovoi! It’s easy for you to talk, Philip, they don’t have you by the throat, you’re all right!’


Vecherovsky nodded.


‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I’m all right. I’m all right, and Vladlen here is all right, too. Right, Vladlen?’


The little cozy man with the bunny-rabbit eyes behind the strong glasses in steel frames spread his hands again in silence. Then he stood up and, avoiding everyone’s eyes, said:


‘Excuse me, friends, but it’s time for me to go. It’s getting late.’