4. REDRICK SCHUHART, AGE 31


     The valley had cooled overnight, and by dawn it was actually cold. They
were walking along the embankment, stepping over the rotten ties between the
rusty  rails,  and  Redrick  watched the drops of condensed fog  glisten  on
Arthur  Burbridge's leather jacket. The  boy  was striding along lightly and
merrily, as though the exhausting night, the nervous tension that still made
every vein  in his body ache, and the two horrible hours they  spent huddled
back to back for warmth in a tortured half-sleep on top of the hill, waiting
for the flood  of the  green stuff  to drip past them and disappear into the
ravine--as though all that had not happened.
     A thick  fog lay along the  sides of the embankment. Once in a while it
crawled up on the rails with its  heavy  gray feet and in  those places they
walked knee-deep in the swirling mists.  The  air  smelled of rust, and  the
swamp  to  the right of  the embankment  reeked of  decay. The  fog made  it
impossible to see anything, but Redrick knew that a hilly  plain with rubble
heaps  surrounded them,  and that mountains  hid in the gloom beyond. And he
knew also that when the sun came up  and the fog settled  into dew, he would
see  the  downed helicopter some where on his  left  and the ore flatcars up
ahead. And then the real work would begin.
     Redrick slipped his hand up under the backpack to  lift  it so that the
edge of the helium  tank would not dig into his  spine. It's a heavy bugger,
he thought. How am I going to crawl with it? A mile on all fours. All right,
stalker, no grumbling now, you knew what you were getting into. Five hundred
thousand  at  the  end of the  road. I  can work  up a sweat  for that. Five
hundred thousand sure is a sweet bundle. I'll be damned if I give it to them
for less. Or if I give Buzzard more than thirty. And the punk? The punk gets
nothing. If the old  bugger had  told even  half  the  truth,  the punk gets
nothing.
     He looked at Arthur's  back again and watched through squinted eyes  as
the  boy stepped over two  ties at a  time, broad-shouldered, narrow-hipped.
His dark raven hair,  like his sister's, bounced rhythmically.  He asked for
it,  Redrick  thought  grimly.  Himself. Why did he  beg  to come  along  so
persistently!  So desperately! He trembled and  had tears in his eyes. "Take
me, Mr. Schuhart! Lots of people have offered to take me  along, but they're
all no good! My father ... but he can't take me now!" Redrick forced himself
to drop the memory. He was repelled by the thought  and maybe that's  why he
started  thinking about  Arthur's sister. He just  could not  fathom it: how
such a fantastic-looking woman could actually be a plastic fake, a dummy. It
was like the buttons on his mother's blouse--they were amber, he remembered,
semitransparent, and golden. He just wanted to shove them  in his mouth  and
suck on them, and every time he was disappointed terribly, and every time he
forgot  about  the disappointment --not forgot, just refused  to accept what
his memory told him.
     Maybe it was his pop who sent him over  to me, he thought about Arthur.
Look at the piece he's carrying in his back pocket. Nah, I doubt it. Buzzard
knows  me. Buzzard knows that I don't go for jokes. And  he  knows what  I'm
like in the Zone. No, that's all nonsense. He's not the first to have begged
me, and  not  the first  to have  shed tears; others even got  down on their
knees. And as  for the piece, they all bring guns on their first time in the
Zone. The first and last time. Is it  really the last? It's  your last, bud.
Here's how it works out, Buzzard: his last. Yes, if you knew what your sonny
boy  was planning --you  would have beaten him to a pulp with your crutches.
He  suddenly  felt  that there was something ahead  of  them--not far,  some
thirty or forty yards away.
     "Stop," he told Arthur.
     The boy obediently froze in his tracks. His reflexes were good-- he had
stopped  with one foot in  the air, and he lowered it slowly and  carefully.
Redrick  stopped  next   to  him.  The  track  dipped  noticeably  here  and
disappeared  completely  in the fog.  And  there  was something in  the fog.
Something big and motionless. Harmless. Redrick care fully sniffed the  air.
Yes. Harmless.
     "Forward,"  he said quietly. He waited for Arthur to take a step and he
followed. Out of  the  corner  of his  eye  he could see Arthur's  face, his
chiseled profile, the clear skin of his cheek, and the determined set of his
lips under the thin mustache.
     They were up to their waists in fog,  and then up to their necks. A few
seconds later the great hulk of the ore cars loomed ahead of them.
     "That's it,"  Redrick said  and  took off his backpack. "Sit down right
where you are. Smoke break."
     Arthur  helped him  with the backpack, and  they sat down next  to each
other on the rusty rails.  Redrick unbuttoned  a flap and took out a package
with  sandwiches and a thermos of coffee. While Arthur set up the sandwiches
on top of the backpack, Redrick took out  his flask,  opened it,  closed his
eyes, and took several slow sips.
     "Want some?" he offered, wiping the neck of the flask. "For courage?"
     Arthur shook his head, hurt.
     "I don't need that for courage, Mr. Schuhart.  I'd rather have  coffee,
if I may. It's awfully damp here, isn't it?"
     "It's  damp."  He  put away  the  flask, chose  a sandwich,  and set to
chewing.  "When  the fog lifts, you'll see that we're  surrounded by nothing
but swamps. In the old days the mosquitoes were something fierce."
     He shut up and poured himself some coffee It was hot, thick, and sweet,
and it  was even  nicer to drink  now  than alcohol. It smelled of home.  Of
Guta. And not just of Guta, but of  Guta in her robe, fresh from sleep, with
pillow marks still on her cheek. Why did I get mixed up in this, he thought?
Five hundred thousand. And what do I need it for? Planning to buy a bar with
it or something?  You need money so you  don't  have  to think about  money.
That's the truth. Dick was right  about  that. You have a  house, you have a
yard, you won't he without a  job  in Harmont.  Buzzard trapped me, lured me
like a tenderfoot.
     "Mr.  Schuhart,"  Arthur  suddenly  said,  looking away "Do you  really
believe this thing grants wishes?"
     "Nonsense!"  Redrick muttered distractedly and froze over the cup  near
his lips. "How do you know what we're after here?"
     Arthur  smiled  in  embarrassment,  ran his fingers  through  his hair,
tugged at it, and spoke.
     "Well, I guessed! I don't remember exactly what gave me the clue. Well,
first  of all, Father was always going on and on about the Golden Ball,  and
lately he's stopped. And he has been talking about you. And
     know better  than  to  believe  Father  about you  being  friends.  And
secondly, he's been  kind of strange lately."  Arthur laughed  and shook his
head, remembering something. "And finally, I figured it out, when you and he
tried out the little dirigible  over  in the lot." He  smacked the  backpack
that contained the  tightly rolled balloon. "I followed  you and when  I saw
you lift the bag  with rocks and guide it over the ground, it was all  clear
to me. As far as I know, the Golden Ball is the only heavy thing left in the
Zone." He took a bite  out of his sandwich and spoke dreamily with his mouth
full. "I just don't Understand how you plan  to hook  onto it, it's probably
smooth."
     Redrick watched him over the rim of the cup and thought how unlike each
other they were, father and son. They had absolutely  nothing in common. Not
face, or voice, or soul. Buzzard had a hoarse, whiny, sneaky kind  of voice.
But  when he  talked  about this, his voice  was hearty. You couldn't ignore
him. "Red," he had said then, leaning over the table. "There are only two of
us left, and only  two legs for both, and they're yours.  Who  else but you?
It's probably the most valuable thing in  the Zone! And who  should have it?
Should those wise guys with their machinery get it? Hah? I found it. Me! How
many of our boys fell there? But I found it! I was saving it for myself. And
I wouldn't be giving it to  anyone now, but as you  see, my arms have gotten
too short.  There's nobody left  but  you. I  dragged lots  of young ones in
there, a  school full. I opened a school for them, you see ...  they  can't.
They don't have  the guts for it, or something. All right, you don't believe
me, I don't care. You want the money. You get it. You give me as much as you
want. I know you won't gyp me. And  maybe I'll be able  to get my legs back.
My legs, do  you  understand? The Zone took them away, and maybe  it'll give
them back?"
     "What?" Redrick asked, coming out of his reverie.
     "I asked, do you mind if I smoke, Mr. Schuhart?"
     "Sure. Go ahead and smoke. I'll have one too."
     He gulped  the rest of  the  coffee, pulled out  a cigarette, and as he
squeezed it, he gazed into the thinning fog. A psyche, he thought He's nuts.
He wants his legs back, the bastard.
     All this talk had left a  residue, he was not  sure of what. And it was
not dissolving with time, but  on the contrary, it was accumulating. And  he
could not understand what it was, but it was bothering him. It was as though
he had  caught something from  Buzzard, not some disgusting  disease, but on
the contrary .. .  his strength, perhaps?  No, not strength. But what  then?
All  right,  he told himself. Let's look at it this way: let's assume that I
didn't get  this far.  I was all ready to  go,  packed,  and then  something
happened, they arrested me, say.  Would that  be  bad?  Definitely. Why bad?
Because I would lose  money? No, it has nothing to  do with the  money. That
this  treasure  will fall into  the  hands  of  Throaty and  Bones?  There's
something in that. It would hurt. But what  do I care?  In  the end, they'll
get it all anyway.
     "Brrrrrr."  Arthur shivered. "It gets into  your bones.  Mr.  Schuhart,
maybe now you'll give me a sip?"
     Redrick got the flask silently. I didn't agree right  away, he thought.
Twenty times  I told Buzzard to get lost, and on the  twenty-first I agreed,
after all. I couldn't take it any more.  Our last conversation turned out to
be brief and businesslike. "Hi, Red. I brought the  map. Maybe you'll take a
look  at  it,  after  all?" And I looked into his eyes,  and they were  like
sores--yellow with black dots--and I said "Let me have it." And that was it.
I remember that I was  drunk then,  I had  been  drinking all week,  I  felt
really low. Ah, the hell with it. Does it matter?  I went. So here I am. Why
am I worrying about it? What am I, afraid?
     He shuddered. He could hear a long sad sound through the fog. He jumped
up and Arthur jumped up too. But it was quiet  again, and the only sound was
the gravel tumbling down the incline under their feet.
     "Must be the ore settling," Arthur whispered  unsurely,  barely able to
get the words out.  "The ore  cars have a  history--they've been here a long
time."
     Redrick looked straight ahead and saw nothing. He remembered. It was at
night.  He  woke up from the same sound, sad and long,  his  heart stopping,
like in a dream. Only it hadn't been a dream. It was Monkey screaming in her
bed by the window. Guta woke up, too, and took Redrick's hand. He could feel
the  sweat  break out  on  her  shoulder against his.  They  lay  there  and
listened, and when Monkey stopped crying and went back to sleep, he waited a
little longer, then got up,  went down to the kitchen, and greedily drank  a
half-bottle of cognac, That was the night he started drinking.
     "It's  the  ore,"  Arthur  said.  "You know, it  settled with time. The
dampness, erosion, all kinds of things like that."
     Redrick looked at his pale face and  sat down again.  His cigarette had
disappeared somewhere from his fingers, and he lit another one. Arthur stood
a little longer, looking around anxiously, then he also sat down.
     "I've heard  that there's life in  the Zone. People. Not  visitors, but
people. It seems  the Visitation  caught  them  here,  and they mutated ....
they've acclimated  to  the new conditions.  Have  you heard  that, too, Mr.
Schuhart?"
     "Yes," Redrick said. "But not here. In  the mountains in the northwest.
Some shepherds.
     That's what he's infected me  with, he thought. His madness. That's why
I've come here.  That's what I  want  here. A  strange  and very new feeling
overwhelmed him. He  was aware that the feeling was  really not  new at all,
that it  had  been  hidden  in  him  for  a  long  time,  but  that  he  was
acknowledging  it  only now,  and  everything  was  falling  into place. And
everything that  had seemed  like nonsense  and the delirious  ravings  of a
crazy  old man turned out to be his only hope, the only meaning of his life.
Because he finally understood:  the only thing he had left in the world, the
only  thing he lived for in the last few months  was  the hope of a miracle.
Fool that  he was, he  kept  pushing hope away, trampling on it, mocking it,
trying to drink it away,  because that  was the way he  was used to  living.
Since  childhood he had relied  on nothing but himself. And since  childhood
this self-reliance had been measured in the amount of money he could snatch,
grab, or  bite away from the indifferent  chaos that  surrounded him. It had
always been that way, and it would have continued, if he had not ended up in
a  hole that no  amount of money could  get him  out of and in  which it was
absolutely useless to rely on himself. And now this hope--no longer a  hope,
but  confidence in a miracle --filled him to the brim,  and he was amazed at
how he could have lived for so long in the impenetrable,  exitless gloom. He
laughed and gave Arthur a poke in the shoulder.
     "Well, stalker, think we'll live through this, eh?"
     Arthur  looked  at him  in  surprise and  smiled  uncertainly.  Redrick
crumpled  up the waxed paper from  the sandwiches, tossed it under  the  ore
car, and lay down, his elbow on the backpack.
     "All  right," he said.  "Let's  say  that  the Golden Ball really--what
would you wish?"
     "You mean, you do believe?" Arthur asked quickly.
     "That's  not  important  whether  or  not  I  believe.  You  answer  my
question."
     He really was interested  in what  such  a young boy, a  schoolboy just
yesterday, could ask  of the Golden  Ball, He enjoyed watching Arthur frown,
tug at his mustache, and look up at him and look away.
     "Well,  dad's legs, of course. And  for  everything to  be all right at
home."
     "You're lying," Redrick said pleasantly. "Keep  this in mind,  brother.
The Golden Ball only grants your deepest, innermost wishes, the kind that if
they're not granted, it's all over for you!"
     Arthur Burbridge blushed,  looked up at Redrick  once more, and  became
even redder. His eyes filled with tears. Redrick grinned.
     "I understand,"  he said  almost  gently. "All right, it's none  of  my
business. Keep your secrets to yourself." He suddenly remembered the gun and
thought that while he had the time he  should take care of whatever could be
taken care of. "What's that in your back pocket?" he asked casually.
     "A gun."
     "What do you need it for?"
     "To shoot!" Arthur said challengingly.
     "Forget  it," Redrick  said firmly  and sat up. "Give it here.  There's
nobody to shoot at in the Zone. Give it to me.
     Arthur  wanted to say  something, but  kept silent,  took the Army Colt
from his pocket and handed it to Redrick by the barrel. Redrick took the gun
by its warm textured handle, tossed it up in the air, and caught it.
     "Do you have a handkerchief or something? I want to wrap it up."
     He  took Arthur's handkerchief,  clean and smelling of cologne, wrapped
the gun in it, and put it on the railroad tie.
     "We'll leave it here  for now. God willing, we'll come back and pick it
up.  Maybe  we'll have to  shoot it  out  with  the patrol  guards. However,
shooting it out with them.... Arthur decisively shook his head.
     "That's not  what I wanted it for," he  said sadly.  "There's only  one
bullet. In case of an accident like Father's."
     "So, that's it."  Redrick stared at him. "Well, you don't have to worry
about that. If that should happen, I'll drag you back here. I promise. Look,
it's getting light!"
     The fog was disappearing before their eyes. It was completely gone from
the embankment and in the distance it was thinning, melting away and showing
the  rounded  bristly peaks  of the hills. Here and there between  the hills
could  be  seen  the mottled  surface  of the stagnant swamps, covered  with
sparse  thickets of willows, and the horizon, beyond  the hills, was  filled
with bright yellow explosions of mountain peaks, and the  sky above them was
clear and blue. Arthur looked  back and gasped with awe. Redrick looked too.
In the  east the  mountains looked  black, and over them  the familiar green
wash of color billowed and shone iridescently--the Zone's green dawn.
     Redrick  got up, went  behind the ore car,  sat  on the embankment, and
watched as the  green  wash  dimmed and quickly  turned to  pink. The  sun's
orange rim came up over  the  ridge, and purple  shadows  stretched from the
hills. Everything became harsh  and in  high  relief, he could see things as
clearly as if they were in the palm of his hand. Right in front, two hundred
yards away, Redrick  saw the helicopter. It had fallen, apparently, into the
middle of a mosquito mange spot, and its  fuselage had been  squashed into a
metal pancake.  Its  tail  had  remained  intact, only slightly bent, and it
stuck out  over the glade like a black hook. The stabilizer was also  whole,
and it squeaked distinctly, turning in the light breeze. The mange must have
been  very powerful, for there hadn't even  been a real fire,  and the Royal
Air  Force  insignia was very clear on the flattened  metal. Redrick had not
seen one in many years  and had almost  forgotten  what the  insignia looked
like.
     Redrick went back to his  pack for the map,  which he spread out on the
hot mound of  ore in the car. You couldn't see the quarry from  here--it was
blocked  by the  hill  with the burned-out tree on its rise.  He had  to  go
around the hill from the right, along the depression between it and the next
hill, which he could also see, completely bare, its slope covered with brown
rocks.
     All  the  reference   points   corresponded,   but   Redrick  felt   no
satisfaction.  His instinct of many years as a stalker protested against the
very thought, which was  irrational and unnatural, of  laying a path between
two nearby elevations. All  right, Redrick  thought,  we'll  see  about that
later. It will be clearer when we get there. The path before the  depression
led through the swamp, along open flat ground, which seemed safe enough from
here. But looking closer, Redrick noted a dark gray spot between the two dry
hills. He looked at the  map. There was an X  there, and it said "Whip" next
to it in clumsy letters.  The red dotted line of the  path went to the right
of the )i. The name was sort of familiar, but who Whip was exactly, and what
he  looked like, and what  he did,  Redrick  could  not  remember.  For some
reason, Redrick could only remember the smoky room of the Borscht, huge  red
paws  holding glasses, thundering laughter, and open jaws filled with yellow
teeth--a fantastic  herd of titans and giants gathered at the watering hole,
one of his most striking childhood memories--his first visit to the Borscht.
What  had I brought that time? An empty, I  think. Straight  from the  Zone,
wet, hungry, crazy, with a  sack over my shoulder, I burst into  the bar and
clattered the  sack  on the  counter  in  front of  Ernest,  looking  around
angrily, listening to the wisecracks, waiting for Ernest--young  then and in
a bow tie, as usual --to count the right amount  of greenbacks. No, wait, it
wasn't  green  back then,  we still had  the  square royal  bills  with some
half-naked dame wearing  a cape and a wreath. I waited, put away the  money,
and unexpectedly,  even  for myself, took  a heavy  mug from the counter and
slammed  it into  the  closest laughing  face. Redrick smirked and  thought:
maybe that was Whip himself?
     "Is it  all right  to  go between  the two hills, Mr. Schuhart?" Arthur
asked in a low voice near  his  ear.  He was next to him looking at the map,
too.
     "We'll see when we  get there." Redrick kept looking at  the map. There
were two other X's, one on the slope of the hill with the tree, the other on
the rocks.  Poodle and Four-eyes. The  path was  marked  below them.  "We'll
see," he repeated, folding up the map and putting it in his pocket.
     He looked Arthur over.
     "Put the backpack on my back. We'll go  like before," he said, shifting
under the weight of the pack and arranging the straps more comfortably. "You
go ahead,  so that call see  you every second. Don't look back and keep your
ears open. My order is law. Keep in mind  that we'll have a  lot of crawling
to do, don't  suddenly be afraid of the  dirt. If I tell  you  to, drop your
face into the mud without any backtalk. And button your jacket. Ready?"
     "Ready."  Arthur  was  very nervous;  the  rosiness of  his cheeks  had
disappeared.
     First we go  this way." Redrick  waved sharply in the direction of  the
nearest hill a hundred steps from the rocks. "Got it? Let's go."
     Arthur heaved a sigh, stepped over the rails, and started down sideways
from the embankment. The pebbles rained after him noisily
     "Easy, easy," Redrick said. "There's no hurry."
     He  started  down slowly after  him,  automatically adjusting  his  leg
muscles  to the weight  of the heavy backpack. He  watched Arthur out of the
corner of his eye. He's  scared, he thought. He must sense  it. If his sense
is like his father's, he does. If you only knew how things were turning out,
Buzzard. If you only knew, Buzzard, that I took your advice this time. "This
is one place,  Red, that you can't go to alone. Like it or not,  you'll have
to  take  somebody  with  you.  I  can  give you  one  of  my  people  who's
expendable."  You talked me  into it. It's the first  time in my life that I
agreed to something like this. Well,  maybe it will  turn  out all right, he
thought. Maybe,  somehow,  it  will  work out.  After all,  I'm not  Buzzard
Burbridge, maybe I'll figure something out.
     "Stop!" he told Arthur.
     The boy stopped ankle-deep in rusty water. By the time Redrick got down
to him, the quagmire had sucked him in up to his knees.
     "Do you see that rock?" Redrick asked. "There, under the hill? Head for
it."
     Arthur moved on. Redrick let him get ten paces ahead and then followed.
The mud slurped underfoot. It was a dead swamp--no bugs, no frogs,  even the
willows were dry and  rotten. Redrick looked around, but for  now everything
seemed to be  in order. The hill slowly got closer, covering the sun,  which
was still  low in the sky, and finally  blocking the entire  eastern sky. At
the rock, Redrick looked back at the embankment.  It was brightly lit by the
sun. A train of ten  ore cars stood oil it.  Some of the cars had fallen off
the tracks and were lying on their sides, and the embankment above  them was
covered with the rusty red piles of the ore. Further on, in the direction of
the  quarry,  north of  the  train,  the air over  the  track  shimmered and
undulated, and tiny rainbows exploded and died in the air. Redrick looked at
the shimmer, spat, and turned away.
     "Let's go,"  he  said. Arthur turned his tense  face to him. "See those
rags over there? You're looking the wrong way! Over there, to the right."
     "Yes," said Arthur.
     "Well, that was a guy called Whip. A long time ago. He didn't listen to
his elders and now he lies there in  order to  show  smart people the  right
way. Look just  to the right of Whip. Got it? See the spot? Right where  the
willows are a little thicker. That's the way. You're off!"
     Now they  were  moving parallel to  the  embankment. Every step brought
them to  shallower  water,  and  soon  they  were walking  on  dry,  springy
hillocks. The map still  showed this as solid swamp. The  map's old, thought
Redrick, Burbridge hasn't been  here in a long time, and it's gotten out  of
date. That's bad. Of course, it's easier to walk on dry  land,  but it would
have  been better for that swamp to be  here. Look at Arthur go, he thought.
He's walking like he's strolling down Central Avenue.
     Arthur seemed to have perked up and was  walking full speed. He had one
hand in his pocket and he  was  swinging the other  as if out  on  a stroll.
Redrick rummaged in his pocket, took out a bolt weighing an ounce or so, and
threw it  at his head. The bolt hit Arthur in the back of the  head. The boy
gasped, grabbed  his  head, crouched,  and fell  into the dry grass. Redrick
stood over him.
     "That's how it comes  out here, Artie," he pontificated. "This isn't an
avenue, we're not on a  promenade here, you  know. Arthur got up slowly. His
face was drained white.
     "Everything clear?" Redrick asked. Arthur gulped and nodded.
     "Fine. And next time I'll let you have it in the teeth. If you're still
alive. Go ahead!"
     The boy could  have made a stalker,  after  all, thought  Redrick. They
probably would have  called him Pretty Boy Artie.  We used to  have  another
Pretty  Boy, his  name was Dixon, but now they called him  Hamster. The only
stalker to fall into the  meatgrinder and live. He was lucky. The fool still
thinks that  it was Burbridge who pulled him out of it. The hell he did! You
don't  get pulled out of the meatgrinder.  He did pull him out of the  Zone,
that's true enough Burbridge performed a heroic deed like that. If he hadn't
... !  Everybody  was getting fed  up with his tricks, and the guys had told
him: you  better  not come back if you come back alone.  That  was when they
began calling him Buzzard, before they used to call him Winner.
     Redrick felt a barely perceptible current of air on  his left cheek and
immediately, without thinking, he shouted: "Halt!"  He extended his  hand to
the  left.  The  current  was  stronger. Some  where  between  them and  the
embankment there was  a  mosquito  mange,  or  maybe it  extended  along the
embankment itself: there was a reason  why the cars had tilted  over. Arthur
stood as though he had been planted, he did not even turn around.
     "To the right. Let's go."
     Yes, he would have made a good stalker. What the hell, do I feel  sorry
for him or something? That's all  I need. Did anyone ever feel sorry for me?
I guess they did. Kirill felt  sorry for me. Dick Noonan feels sorry for me.
Of course, he might be more interested in Guta than in feeling sorry for me,
but one  doesn't necessarily rule out  the  other. Only  I don't get to feel
pity.  My choice  is always either/or.  He  finally  understood  the choice:
either this boy, or  my Monkey. There was no real choice, it  was clear.  If
only miracles did happen, some voice said inside, and he repressed the voice
with horror
     They  went around  the  mound  of gray  rags. There was nothing left of
Whip.  Some  distance  away in the dry grass lay  a  long, completely rusted
stick--a minesweeper. In those days many stalkers used mine sweepers, buying
them  up on the quiet from army suppliers, and depended on them like on  the
Lord  God himself, and  then two  stalkers  were killed  within  a few days,
killed  by underground  explosions. And that put an  end to it. Who had this
Whip been? Did Buzzard bring  him here  or had he come on his own? Why  were
they  all  drawn to this quarry?  Why hadn't I heard anything about it? Damn
it,  it's hot! And this is  so early in the morning, I can  imagine what  it
will be like later.
     Arthur,  walking five paces  ahead,  wiped  the sweat  from  his  brow.
Redrick squinted up at the sun;  it was  still low. And suddenly he realized
that the dry grass was not rustling underfoot but squeaking like cornstarch,
and it was no longer stiff and bristly, but soft and crumbly--it was falling
apart under  their shoes, like  flakes  of soot. And  he  saw Arthur's clear
footprints, and  he  threw himself  down  on the ground, shouting:  "Hit the
dirt!"
     He  fell face  down into the  grass, and it  turned into dust under his
cheek.  He gnashed his  teeth in anger over  their bad  luck.  He  lay there
trying  not to move, still hoping that it  would  blow over, even though  he
realized that they were trapped. The  heat  was increasing,  over-  whelming
him, enveloping his body like  a sheet soaked in boiling water. Sweat poured
into his eyes, and Redrick shouted  belatedly to  Arthur: "Don't move!  Bear
it!" And he started bearing it himself.
     He would  have withstood it, and everything would  have  passed quietly
and well, they would have gotten by with a lot of sweat, but Arthur couldn't
take it. Either he had not heard Redrick's shout, or he became scared out of
his wits, or maybe, he had been baked more strongly than Redrick--anyway  he
lost  control  and ran  off  blindly,  with  a scream  deep  in his  throat,
following his instinct--backward,  The  very direction  they  couldn't take.
Redrick  barely managed to rise and grab his  ankle with  both hands. Arthur
fell  down with  the full weight of-his body,  raising  a  cloud  of  ashes,
squealed  in  an unnatural voice, kicked Redrick in the face with his  other
foot, and struggled  wildly. Redrick, not thinking clearly  any more through
the pain, crawled on top of him, touching the leather jacket with his burned
face, trying  to press  the boy into the ground, holding his long hair  with
both hands and  desperately kicking his feet  and knees at Arthur's legs and
his rear end and  at the dirt. He could barely hear the muffled moans coming
from beneath him and his own hoarse shouts:
     "Lie there,  you toad, lie still, or I'll  kill you."  Tons and tons of
hot coals  were pouring  over him,  and  his clothing was in flames and  the
leather of  his shoes and jacket was blistering and  cracking, and  Redrick,
his head mashed into  the gray  ash, his chest trying to keep the damn boy's
head down, could not stand it. He yelled his lungs out.
     He did not remember when it all ended. He understood only that he could
breathe again, that  the air was air again,  and not  steam  that burned his
throat, and  he realized  that they had to hurry and get out  from under the
devilish heat before it came crashing down on them again. He got off Arthur,
who was lying perfectly still, tucked both his legs under one arm, and using
his free  arm, crawled forward, never taking his eyes off the line where the
grass  started again. It was  dead,  prickly,  dry, but  it  was real and it
seemed like the greatest source of life in the world. The ashes felt  gritty
in his teeth, his burnt face gave off heat, and the sweat  poured right into
his eyes, probably because  he no longer had eyebrows or  eyelashes.  Arthur
was stretched out behind, his jacket seeming  to catch on to  every possible
place. Redrick's  parboiled hands ached, and the backpack  kept bumping into
his burned neck.  The pain and lack  of air made  Redrick think that he  was
completely burned  and  that  he would not make  it.  The fear made him work
harder  with his elbow and his knees. just get  there,  just a  little more,
come on, Red, come on, you can make it, like that, just a little more....
     Then he  lay for a long  time, his face and  hands in  the  cold, rusty
water, luxuriating in the smelly, rotten coolness. He could have  lain  like
that  forever, but  he forced himself to get up on  his knees, throw off the
backpack, crawl over to  Arthur, who was  still lying motionless some thirty
feet from the  swamp, and turn  him over  on his back. Well, he used to be a
pretty boy.  And  now that  handsome face was a dark gray  mask of  baked-on
blood and ash. For a  few  seconds Redrick examined  with dull  interest the
ruts and furrows made in the mask--the tracks of stones and  sticks. Then he
got up  on his feet, picked up Arthur by the armpits, and dragged him to the
water. Arthur was breathing hoarsely, moaning once in a while. Redrick threw
him  face down into the  deepest puddle  and fell down next to him, reliving
the pleasure of  the  wet, icy  caress. Arthur  gurgled, moved about, braced
himself on his hands,  and raised  his head. He was bug-eyed, he  understood
nothing and was greedily gulping air, coughing and spitting. Then he came to
his senses. His gaze settled on Redrick.
     "Phoo-oo-ey." He shook his head, scattering dirty drops of water.
     "What was that, Mr. Schuhart?"
     "That was death," Redrick murmured and coughed. He  felt his  face.  It
hurt. His nose was swollen, but his brews and lashes, strangely enough, were
in place. And the skin on his hands remained intact, but red.
     Arthur was also gingerly  touching his face. Now that the horrible mask
had been washed away, his face--also contrary to expectation --turned out to
be all right. There  were a few  scratches,  a bump on his forehead, and his
lower lip was split. But all in all, okay.
     "I've never heard of anything like that," Arthur said looking back.
     Redrick looked back too. There were many tracks on the gray ashy grass,
and Redrick was amazed to see how short his terrible, endless path had been,
when he crawled to save them from doom. It was only  twenty or  thirty yards
from one edge of the burnt-out grass to the other, but in his  blindness and
fear he had crawled in  some wild zigzag, like a roach on a hot skillet, and
thank  God  he had  at  least crawled in the right  direction. He could have
gotten into the mosquito mange on the left, or he could have  gotten  turned
around  completely.  No, that  would  not  have happened  to  him, he was no
greenhorn. And  if it had not been for  that fool, then nothing at all would
have happened,  he would have  gotten blisters on  his  feet--and that would
have been it as far as injuries.
     He looked  at Arthur. Arthur  was washing up, moaning as he touched the
sore spots. Redrick stood  up, and wincing  from the pain of his clothes  on
his burnt skin, walked to a dry spot and examined the backpack. The pack had
really  taken  a beating. The top buckles  had melted  and the  vials in the
first-aid  kit  had burst  to hell, and  a damp  spot reeked of  antiseptic.
Redrick opened the pack and started  picking out  the  slivers of glass  and
plastic, when he heard Arthur's voice.
     "Thank you, Mr. Schuhart! You saved my life!"
     Redrick said nothing. Thanks! You fell apart, and I had to rescue you.
     "It was my own fault. I heard your order to lie there, but I was really
scared,  and  when  it got so hot--I  lost my head. I'm very much afraid  of
pain, Mr. Schuhart."
     "Why don't you get up?" Redrick said without turning around toward him.
"That was just a sample. Get up, what are you loafing around for?"
     Wincing  from the pain  of the pack on his burned shoulders, he put his
arms through the straps. It felt as though the skin on the burned places had
wrinkled up. He was afraid of pain,  was  he?  Shove you and your  pain!  He
looked around. It was all  right,  they  hadn't  left  the path. Now for the
hills with the corpses. The damn hills, just stood there, the lousy mothers,
sticking out like the devil's horns,  and that damn depression between them.
He  sniffed the air. You damn depression, that's the really  lousy part. The
toad.
     "See that depression between the hills?" he asked.
     "I see it.
     "Head straight for it. March!"
     Arthur wiped his face with the back of his hand and moved on, splashing
through  the  puddles.  He was  limping and did  not  look  as straight  and
well-proportioned as he had  before. He was bent  over and  was walking very
carefully. There's another one I pulled out, thought Redrick. What does that
make? Five? Six? And now I wonder why? He's no relation. I'm not responsible
for him. Listen,  Red, why did you  save  him? You  almost got  it  yourself
because of him. Now that my head is clear, I know why. It was right to  save
him, I can't manage without him, he's my hostage for Monkey. I didn't save a
human being, I saved my  minesweeper. My master key. Back there in the heat,
I never  gave it a second thought. I Pulled him out like he was my flesh and
blood,  and didn't  even  think about  abandoning  him  Even  though  I  had
forgotten everything -- the master key and  Monkey. What does  that mean? It
means that  I really am a good guy, after all. That's what Guta insists, and
Kirill used to say, and what Richard is always babbling about. Some good guy
they found! Drop it, he told himself. You  have to think first, and then use
your arms and legs. Got that straight? Mr. Nice  Guy. I have to save him for
the  meatgrinder, he thought coldly and clearly. We can get past  everything
except the grinder.
     "Stop!"
     The depression lay before them, and Arthur was already  standing there,
looking at Redrick for orders. The  floor of the depression was covered with
a  rotten  green  slime that glinted oilily in the sun. A  light  steam rose
above it, getting  thicker between the hills, and nothing was visible beyond
thirty  feet.  And it  stank. "It'll really stink  in  there, but  don't you
chicken out. Arthur made a noise in the back of his throat  and backed away.
Redrick shook himself back to action, pulled from his pocket a wad of cotton
soaked in deodorant, stuffed up his nostrils, and offered some to Arthur.
     "Thanks,  Mr. Schuhart. Isn't there a land route we could take?" Arthur
asked in a weak voice.
     Redrick  silently  took  him by  the  hair  and turned  his head in the
direction of the bundle of rags on the stony hillside.
     "That was  Four-eyes," he said. "And on the left  hill,  you  can't see
from here, lies Poodle. In the same condition. Do you understand? Forward."
     The slime  was warm and sticky. At first they walked erect, waist- deep
in the slime. Luckily the bottom was rocky and rather even. But soon Redrick
heard  the familiar rumble from both  sides. There was nothing  on  the left
hill except the intense sunlight, but on the right slope, in the shade, pale
purple lights were fluttering
     "Bend low!" he  whispered  and  bent over  himself.  ''Lower, stupid!''
Arthur bent over in  fright, and a clap of thunder shattered the air.  Right
over  their  heads an  intricate  lightning bolt  danced  furiously,  barely
visible against the bright sky. Arthur sat down, shoulder deep in the slime.
Redrick, ears clogged by the noise, turned and saw a bright red spot quickly
melting in  the shade among  the  pebbles  and rocks, and there was  another
thunderclap.
     "Forward! Forward!" he shouted, unable to hear himself.
     Now  they  were moving in  a  crouch,  Indian  file,  only  their heads
exposed. At every peal Redrick watched Arthur's long  hair stand on end  and
could feel a thousand needles  puncturing  his face.  "For- ward!"  he  kept
repeating.  "Forward!"  He could  not hear a thing  any  more. Once  he  saw
Arthur's profile, and  he saw  his terror-stricken eyes  bulging out and his
white bouncing lips and  his green-smeared sweaty cheek. Then the  lightning
began  striking so low that they  had to duck their heads.  The green  slime
gummed his mouth, making it  hard to breathe. Gulping for  air, Redrick tore
the cotton out of his nose and discovered  that  the reek was gone, that the
air  was filled with the fresh, piercing odor  of ozone, and that the  steam
was  getting  thicker, or maybe he was blacking out, and he  could no longer
see either  of the two hills. All he could see was Arthur's head sticky with
green slime and the billowing clouds of yellow steam.
     I'll get  through, I'll  get through, Redrick thought;  this is nothing
new. My  whole life is like this. I'm stuck in filth  and  there's lightning
over my head. It's never  been any  other way. Where is all this gunk coming
from? You could go crazy from this much gunk in one place! Buzzard Burbridge
did  this: he  walked through and  left this behind.  Four-eyes  lay on  the
right, Poodle on the left, and all so that Buzzard could  walk  between them
and leave all  his filth  behind. That's what you deserve,  he told himself.
Whoever walks behind Buzzard walks up to  his neck in filth. You didn't know
that? There are  too  many buzzards, that's why there isn't  a  single clean
place left.
     Noonan's a fool: Redrick, Red, you violate the balance, you destroy the
order, you're  unhappy, Red, under any order, any system. You're  not  happy
under a bad one, you're not happy under a good one. It's people like you who
keep us from having the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth. What do you know, fatso?
Where have you  seen a good system? When have you ever seen me under  a good
system? He slipped on  a stone  that turned  under his foot, and fell in. He
surfaced and saw Arthur's terrified face right next to his. For a second  he
felt a chill: he thought that he had lost  his way.  But he had  not  gotten
lost. He realized immediately that they had  to go that way, where the black
top of  the rock stuck out of the slime; he realized that even  though there
was nothing else visible in the yellow fog.
     "Stop!" he shouted. "Keep right! To the right of the rock!"
     He could not hear his own voice. He caught up  with Arthur, grabbed his
shoulder, and  pointed: keep  right of  the  rock and keep your  head  down.
You'll pay for  this, he thought. Arthur  dove under at the rock, just as  a
lightning bolt hit it, smashing it to smithereens.  You'll pay for this,  he
repeated, as he ducked under and worked furiously with his arms and legs. He
could hear another  peal of  thunder. I'll shake your souls  out of you  for
this! He had  a  fleeting thought: who do I mean? I don't know. But somebody
has to pay for  this, and somebody will! Just wait, just let  me get  to the
ball, when I get to the ball, I'm no Buzzard, I'll get what I want from you.
     When  they finally  scrambled out onto dry  land  that  was covered  by
sun-heated pebbles, they were  half-deaf, turned inside out,  and staggering
and holding on to each other. Redrick saw the peeling pick-up truck, sagging
on  its axles, and he remembered that  they could  rest  in the shade of the
truck.  They crawled into  the  shade.  Arthur  lay on  his  back  and began
unbuttoning his  jacket with limp  fingers, and Redrick leaned  his backpack
against  the side of the truck, wiped his hands against the small rocks, and
reached inside his jacket.
     "And me, too." Arthur said. "Me too."
     Redrick  was  surprised by the loudness of the  boy's  voice. He took a
sip, shut his  eyes, and handed the  flask  to Arthur. That's it, he thought
weakly. We got through. We got  through even this. And now, accounts payable
upon demand. Do you think that  I forgot? No way, I remember it all.  Do you
think I'll thank you for letting me live and not  drowning me? You get zilch
from me. This  is  the end for all of you, get  it?  I'm not  leaving any of
this. From  now on, I make all the decisions.  I, Redrick Schuhart, being of
sound mind  and body, will  make all the decisions for everybody. And as for
all of you, buzzards, toads, Visitors, Boneses,  Quarterblads, bloodsuckers,
green-  backers, Throaties, in your suits and ties,  clean  and  fresh, with
your briefcases  and speeches and good deeds  and  employment opportunities,
and your eternal batteries and eternal engines and mosquito manges and false
promises--I've  had  enough, you've led me by  the nose long enough.  All my
life you've led me  by the nose, and I thought and bragged that I was living
the  way I  wanted to,  fool,  and all the time  you were egging me  on  and
winking among  yourselves, and leading me by  the nose, dragging me, hauling
me through jails and  bars. I've had it! He unsnapped the straps of the pack
and took the Bask from Arthur.
     "I  never thought...."  Arthur  was saying with  meek disbelief in  his
voice. "I couldn't even imagine. I knew  about death  and  fire and  all, of
course, but something like that! How are we going to get back?"
     Redrick was not listening. What that thing was saying no longer had any
meaning. It  had no meaning before,  either, but before it was  a person  at
least. And now, it was like  a  talking  key, a  key to open the way to  the
Golden Ball. Let it talk.
     "If we get some water," Arthur said. "At least wash our faces.
     Redrick  looked  at  him distractedly,  saw the  disheveled  and glued-
together hair, the face  smeared with drying slime with  finger marks in it,
and all of him covered with a crust of oozing slime, and he felt no pity, no
irritation,  nothing. A talking key. He turned away. A dreary expanse,  like
an  abandoned  construction  site, yawned before them.  It was  covered with
broken brick,  sprinkled  with white dust, and  highlighted by the  blinding
sun,  which was unbearably white, hot, angry, and dead.  The  far end of the
quarry was visible from there --also  blindingly white and at that  distance
seemingly perfectly  smooth  and perpendicular. The near end  was marked  by
large  breaks and  boulders,  and  there  was the path down into the quarry,
where the  excavator's cabin stood out  like a red splotch against the white
rock. That was the only landmark. They had to head for it, depending on dumb
luck to guide them.
     Arthur  propped himself up, stuck his arm under  the truck,  and pulled
out a rusty tin can.
     "Look at that, Mr.  Schuhart,"  he said, livening up. "Father must have
left this. There's more under there.
     Redrick  didn't reply. That's  a mistake, he thought,  dispassionately.
Better  not think  about your father  now, you'd  be  better off not  saying
anything.  On the other hand, it doesn't matter. Getting up,  he winced: his
clothes  had  stuck to his body, to his burned  skin, and now  something was
tearing  inside,  like a dried  bandage  pulling  from  a wound. Arthur also
groaned as he got  up; he gave Redrick a martyred look. It was clear that he
wanted to complain but that he  didn't  dare.  He  only said  in a strangled
voice:
     "Do you think I might have another sip, Mr. Schuhart?"
     Redrick put the flask that he had been holding back under his shirt.
     "Do you see that red between the rocks?"
     "I see it," Arthur said and shuddered.
     "Straight for it. Let's go."
     Arthur  stretched his arms, straightened his  shoulders,  grimaced, and
said looking around:
     "I wish I could wash up. Everything's sticking."
     Redrick waited silently. Arthur looked at  him hopelessly, nodded,  and
was about to start when he stopped suddenly.
     "The backpack. You forgot the backpack, Mr. Schuhart."
     "March!" Redrick ordered.
     He did not want to explain  or  to lie, and there was no need. He would
go anyway. He had nowhere  else to go. He'd go. And Arthur went. He wandered
on, hunched over, dragging his feet, trying to pick off the baked slime from
his face,  looking  small,  scrawny,  and forlorn, like a wet  stray kitten.
Redrick walked  behind him, and as soon  as he stepped out of the shade, the
sun seared  and blinded him, and he shaded his eyes  with  his hand and  was
sorry that he had not taken his sunglasses.
     Every  step raised a cloud of  white dust, and the dust  settled on his
shoes and gave off an unbearable stench. Or rather, it came from  Arthur, it
was impossible  to walk behind  him. It took  him a while to understand that
the stench  was  coming from himself.  The odor was disgusting,  but somehow
familiar--that was the smell that filled the city on the days that the north
wind carried the smoke from the plant. And his father smelled that way, too,
when he came  home, hungry,  gloomy, with red wild eyes. And  Redrick  would
hurry  to hide in some faraway corner and watch in  fear  as his father tore
off  his work clothes and tossed  them to his mother,  pulled off his  huge,
worn  shoes and shoved them on the  floor of the closet, and stalked off  to
the shower in his stocking feet, leaving sticky footprints. He would stay in
the shower, grunting and slapping his body, for a long time, splashing water
and muttering under his breath, until  he shouted so that  the  house shook:
"Maria! Are you  asleep?"  He had to  wait until his  father  had washed and
seated himself  at the table, where  a pint bottle,  a bowl with thick soup,
and bottle  of catsup were  ready  for him. Wait until he had slurped up all
the soup and started on the pork and beans, and then he could creep out into
the  light,  climb  up on his lap,  and  ask which shop  steward  and  which
engineer he had drowned in vitriol that day.
     Everything around him was white hot, and  he  was dizzy from the  cruel
dry heat, the exhaustion,  and the unbearable pain of his skin blistering at
the  joints; it seemed to him, through the hot haze that  was enveloping his
consciousness, that  his skin was  crying out to him, begging him for peace,
for   water,   for   coolness.   The  memories,  worn   to   the  point   of
unrecognizability, were crowding each other in  his swollen  brain, knocking
each other  over, blending, tumbling, mingling with the white hot world that
was flaming before his half-closed eyes, and they  were all bitter, and they
all evoked self-pity or hatred. He tried to fight the  chaos, to summon from
the past  some  sweet mirage,  a feeling  of tenderness  or cheerfulness. He
squeezed out the fresh laughing face of Guta from the depths of his  memory,
when she was still a girl, desired and untouched, and her face appeared, but
was immediately  blanketed  by rust and then  twisted and deformed  into the
sullen  face  of  Monkey, covered  with  coarse brown fur.  He  struggled to
remember Kirill, that sainted man, his swift, sure movements, his laugh, his
voice, which  promised  unheard-of marvelous  places  and times,  and Kirill
appeared; but then a silver cobweb  exploded on  the sun  and  Kirill was no
more, and Throaty's  unblinking angelic eyes stared at Redrick, a  porcelain
container  in his big  white hand....  The  dark thoughts festering  in  his
subconscious  knocked  down  the  barrier  his  will  tried  to  create  and
extinguished the little good that his memory contained,  and it  seemed that
there had never been anything good at all, only ugly, vicious faces.
     And  during all this  time, he never stopped being a  stalker.  Without
realizing it, he  recorded somewhere in  his  nervous system  the  essential
information: that on the left, at a safe distance, there  was a  jolly ghost
over a pile of old planks--it was quiet, exhausted, and so the hell with it;
on the right there was  a  slight  breeze, and  a  few steps  later he saw a
mirror-smooth mosquito mange, with many  arms, like a starfish-far away,  no
danger--and right in its center, a flattened bird, a rare sight, since birds
did not  often fly over  the Zone; and  right  by the  path there  were  two
abandoned empties--apparently Buzzard had dropped them on the way back, fear
is stronger than  greed.  He saw  all of this  and took it into account, and
Arthur had only to stray a single foot from their path  for  Redrick's mouth
to open  and  the hoarse warning  to  fly automatically  from  his throat. A
machine, he thought. You made  a machine out of me. The  broken rocks at the
edge of  the  quarry  were getting  closer,  and  he could  see the fanciful
designs made by rust on the cabin's red roof.
     You fool, you,  Burbridge, Redrick thought. You're clever, but you're a
fool. How could you have trusted me? You've known me for so long, you should
know  me  better than I  know myself. You're getting old, that  must  be it.
Getting  dumber.  But what am I saying,  I've been dealing with fools all my
life. And then he pictured  Buzzard's  face when he  discovered that Arthur,
his sweet Artie, his  one and only son, that his pride and joy had gone into
the  Zone with Red  after  Buzzard's legs,  not  some  expendable  punk.  He
pictured  his  face and laughed. When  Arthur turned  his frightened face to
look at him, Redrick went  on  laughing  and motioned  him on. And then  the
faces  crawled  across his consciousness again like  pictures on  a  screen.
Everything had  to be changed. Not one life or two lives,  not  one  fate or
two--every link in this rotten, stinking world had to be changed.
     Arthur  stopped  at  the steep descent into  the quarry,  froze in  his
steps,  straining  to  look down  and into the distance, extending  his long
neck. Redrick joined him. But he did not look where Arthur was looking.
     Right at their feet the  road into the quarry began, torn up many years
ago  by the treads and wheels of heavy vehicles.  To the right was  a  white
steep slope,  cracked by the heat; the next  slope was half  excavated,  and
among  the rocks  and rubble stood a  bulldozer, its lowered  bucket  jammed
impotently against the side of the  road. And,  as was to be expected, there
was nothing else to be seen  on  the road,  except  for  the  black  twisted
stalactites  that looked like fat candles  hanging from the jagged edges  of
the slope, and a multitude of black splotches in the dust, as though someone
had spilled bitumen.  That was  all that  was  left  of  them,  it was  even
impossible to tell how many there had been. Maybe each splotch represented a
person, or one of Buzzard's wishes.  That one there  was Buzzard coming back
alive and  unharmed  from the basement of Complex #7. That  bigger one  over
there  was Buzzard getting the  wriggling magnet out of the Zone  unscathed.
And that icicle was the luxurious  Dina Burbridge, who resembled neither her
mother nor her father. And that  spot there was Arthur Burbridge, unlike his
father and mother, Artie, the handsome son, their pride and joy.
     "We made it!" Arthur rasped deliriously. "Mr. Schuhart, we did make it,
after all, right?"
     He laughed a happy laugh, crouched down, and beat both fists as hard as
he could on the  ground.  His  matted  hair bounced ridiculously, and  dried
clumps of dirt flew  in all directions. And only then did Redrick look up at
the ball. Carefully. With caution. With a hidden fear that it would turn out
wrong--that it would disappoint him, evoke doubts, throw him  from the cloud
that he had managed to scramble up on, and leave him to wallow in filth.
     It was not golden, it was more  a copper color, reddish, and completely
smooth, and  it shone dully in the sun. It lay at  the foot  of the quarry's
far wall,  cozily ensconced amid  the piles  of  accumulated rocks, and even
from that  distance, he could  see how  heavy  and massive  it was,  and how
solidly it lay in its place.
     There was nothing disappointing or doubt-inspiring about it, but  there
was nothing to inspire hope either. For some reason,  his first thought  was
that it was  probably hollow  and that it  should  be hot to  the touch from
being  in the sun.  It obviously did  not  glow with  its  own light and  it
obviously was incapable of floating up  and dancing in the  air,  the way so
many of the  tales had  it. It lay where it had fallen. Maybe  it had fallen
out of some monstrously huge  pocket or had  gotten lost, rolled away during
some game between some giants. It had not been carefully placed here, it had
been left behind,  littering up  the Zone  like all  the empties, bracelets,
batteries, and other rubbish remaining after the Visitation.
     But  at the same time, there was  something  about  it, and  the longer
Redrick looked at  it, the clearer it became that it was pleasant to look at
it, that he  wanted to go up to  it, to touch it, pat  it, and suddenly  the
thought came to him that it would be good, probably, to sit down next to it,
or  even better,  to lean  back against  it,  close  his  eyes,  and  think,
reminisce, and maybe just  dream  and drowse and rest.... Arthur  jumped up,
tore open all  the zippers on  his  jacket,  took  it off, and threw it down
smack at his feet, raising a cloud of white dust. He was shouting something,
making faces and waving his arms, and then he put his hands behind his back,
and dancing a jig, headed down the slope. He was not looking at  Redrick any
more, he had forgotten Redrick,  he  had forgotten everything. He  was going
down  to make his wishes come true, the little secret wishes of  a  blushing
college student, of a boy who had never seen any money beyond his allowance,
who had been beaten mercilessly  if he had a whiff  of alcohol on his breath
when he came home, and who was being groomed to  be a famous  lawyer, and in
the  future, a  cabinet minister,  and  in  the distant future,  and  as his
greatest prospect--president.  Redrick, squinting  his swollen  eyes against
the blinding light, silently watched him go. He was cool and calm,  he  knew
what was about  to happen, and  he knew that he would not watch, but it  was
still all right to  watch, and he did, feeling nothing in particular, except
that deep inside a little worm  started wriggling  around  and  twisting its
sharp head in his gut.
     And the boy  kept  walking down, dancing a  jig,  shuffling to his  own
beat, and the white dust rose from his heels, and he was shouting at the top
of  his lungs,  clearly,  joyously,  and  festively--either  a  song  or  an
incantation--and Redrick thought that this was the first time in the history
of the quarry that a man went down there as though he were going to a party.
And at first he did not listen to what his talking key was yelling, and then
something clicked inside him and he heard:
     "Happiness for everybody!  ...  Free! ...  As  much as  you want! ..  .
Everybody come here! . . . There's enough  for everybody! Nobody will  leave
unsatisfied! ... Free! ... Happiness! ... Free!"
     And then he was suddenly silent, as though a huge fist  had punched him
in the mouth. And Redrick saw the transparent emptiness that was lurking  in
the  shadow of the excavator's bucket grab him, throw him up in the air, and
slowly slowly twist him,  like a  housewife wringing her  wash.  Redrick had
time  to see one of his dusty shoes fall  off his jerking  leg and fly  high
above  the  quarry.  Then he turned away and sat down. There wasn't a single
thought in his head,  and he  had  somehow  stopped sensing himself. Silence
hung heavy in the air, particularly behind  him, there on the road.  Then he
remembered  the flask, without particular joy, but  just as medicine that it
was time to take. He unscrewed the cap and drank with tiny  stingy sips, and
for the first  time in his life he  wished that instead of liquor, the  Bask
contained cold water.
     Time  passed, and more or  less coherent  thoughts came  to him.  Well,
that's it, he thought unwillingly. The road is open. He could go down  right
now, but it was better, of course,  to wait a while. The meatgrinders can be
tricky.  Anyway,  he  had  some thinking to do.  An  unaccustomed  exercise,
thinking,  that was the trouble.  What was "thinking" anyway? Thinking meant
finding a  loophole,  pulling  a  bluff,  pulling the  wool  over  someone's
eyes--but all that was out of place here.
     All  right.  Monkey, his father.... Make  them pay  for that, steal the
bastards' souls,  let the sons of bitches eat what I've been eating. ... No,
that's not it, Red.... I mean, that is it, but what  does it mean? What do I
need? That's cursing, not thinking. A terrible presentiment chilled him, and
quickly  skipping over the many arguments that were still ahead  of him,  he
told himself angrily: this is how it is, Red, you won't leave here until you
figure it out, you'll  drop  dead  here next to the ball, burn  to death and
rot, but you won't leave.
     God, where are the words, where are my thoughts? He slapped his head. I
have never had a thought in  my entire life! Wait, wait, Kirill  used to say
something like that. Kirill!  He feverishly  dug through  his memories,  and
words  Boated to the surface,  familiar  ones and unfamiliar, but it was all
wrong,  because  Kirill had  not left words  behind.  He  had left pictures,
vague, and very kind, but thoroughly improbable.
     Meanness and  treachery. They let  me  down  in this too, they left  me
speechless, the bastards. A bum--I was always a bum, and now I'm an old bum.
It's  not  right, do you hear me? In  the future, for  once and for  all, it
should be outlawed! Man is born  in order to think (there he is,  old Kirill
at  last!). Only I don't believe it. I  didn't believe it before and I don't
believe it now. And I don't know what man is born for. I was born. So here I
am. People eat whatever they  can. Let all of us  be  healthy and let all of
them drop dead. Who  is us and who are they? I  don't understand a thing. If
I'm  happy,  Burbridge isn't, if  Burbridge's  happy,  Four-eyes  isn't,  if
Throaty is happy, no  one else is, and if things  are bad for Throaty,  he's
the only one fool enough to  think he'll manage somehow. God, it's  just one
long brawl! I fight all my life with Captain Quarterblad,  and he fights all
his life with Throaty, and all he wants from me  is that I give up stalking.
But how can I give up stalking  when I have a family  to  feed? Get a job? I
don't want to work for you, your work makes me puke, do you understand? This
is  the  way I figure it: if a man works  with you, he is always working for
one  of  you,  he is a  slave and  nothing  else. And I always wanted to  be
myself, on  my own,  so that I could  spit  at you all, at your boredom  and
despair.
     He finished the dregs of the brandy  and  threw  the empty flask to the
ground  with all his  might. The  flask bounced, flashing  in  the  sun, and
rolled away. He forgot about it immediately. He sat there, covering his eyes
with  his hands, and  he  was  trying--not to understand,  not to think, but
merely  to see something  of  how things should be, but  all he saw were the
faces,  faces, faces, and more faces ... and greenbacks, bottles, bundles of
rags that were once people, and columns of figures. He knew that  it all had
to be  destroyed, and he wanted to destroy it, but he guessed that if it all
disappeared there  would  be  nothing  left  but  the flat, bare  earth. His
frustration and despair made him want to lean back against the ball. He  got
up, automatically brushed off his pants, and started down into the quarry.
     The sun  was broiling hot,  red  spots floated before his eyes, the air
was quivering on the floor of the quarry, and in the shimmer it seemed  that
the ball  was dancing in  place like a buoy on the waves. He  went past  the
bucket, superstitiously picking up  his  feet higher and making sure not  to
step on the splotches. And then, sinking into the rubble, he dragged himself
across the quarry to the dancing,  winking ball.  He was covered with  sweat
and panting from the heat, and at the same time, a chill was running through
him,  he was shuddering,  as  if he had a bad hangover, and  the sweet chalk
dust  gritted between his  teeth.  He had stopped  trying  to think. He just
repeated his  litany over and  over: "I am an animal, you see  that. I don't
have the words, they didn't teach me the words. I  don't know how  to think,
the  bastards  didn't let me learn how to think.  But if  you really are ...
all-powerful ... all-knowing ... then you figure it out! Look into my heart.
I know that everything you need is  in  there. It has to be. I never sold my
soul to anyone! It's mine,  it's human! You take from me what it is  I  want
... it just can't be that I would  want something bad! Damn it all,  I can't
think of anything, except those words of  his ...'HAPPINESS  FOR  EVERYBODY,
FREE, AND NO ONE WILL GO AWAY UNSATISFIED!' "