2. REDRICK SCHUHART, AGE 28,


 MARRIED, NO PERMANENT OCCUPATION


     Redrick Schuhart lay behind a gravestone and looked at the road through
a  branch of the ash  tree. The searchlights of  the patrol car were combing
the cemetery  and once in  a while one caught him in the eyes. Then he would
squint and hold his breath.
     Two  hours had passed and things were still the same on  the  road. The
car was still parked, its motor throbbing evenly, and kept scanning with its
three  searchlights  the  rundown graves, the lopsided,  rusty  crosses  and
headstones,   the  overgrown  bushy  ash  trees,   and   the  crest  of  the
ten-foot-thick wall that broke off on the  left.  The border  patrol  guards
were  afraid  of the Zone.  They didn't  even get out  of the car.  Near the
cemetery, they  were even  too scared  to shoot.  Redrick  could hear  their
lowered voices once in a while, and once  in a while  he could see the light
of a  cigarette butt fly out of the  car  window and roll  down the highway,
skipping along and scattering weak red sparks. It was very damp, it had just
rained,  and  Redrick  could  feel  the  dank cold  through  his  waterproof
jumpsuit.
     He  carefully  released  the  branch, turned  his head,  and  listened.
Somewhere to the  right,  not too far, but not too close  either,  there was
someone else in the cemetery. The leaves  rustled  there once more  and soil
crumbled, and  then there  was  the soft thud  of  something hard and  heavy
falling. Redrick  started crawling backward,  carefully  and without turning
around, hugging  the wet grass. The  beam of light  swung  over his head. He
froze, following  its silent movement, and he thought he saw  a man in black
sitting motionless on  a  grave  between the crosses.  He  was sitting there
openly, leaning against a  marble obelisk, turning  his white face  with its
black sunken holes toward Redrick. Actually Redrick did not see him clearly,
nor was it possible in the split second he had, but he filled in the details
with his  imagination.  He crawled away a few more  steps  and  felt for his
flask  inside his  jacket.  He pulled  it out and  lay with  its warm  metal
against his cheek for a while. Then still holding onto the flask, he crawled
on. He stopped listening and looking around.
     There  was  a break in the  wall  and Burbridge was lying  there  in  a
lead-lined raincoat  with a  bullet hole in it. He was  still  on  his back,
Pulling at the collar of his sweater with both hands and moaning  painfully.
Redrick  sat  next  to him and unscrewed  the flask's cap. He carefully held
Burbridge's head, feeling the hot, sticky,  sweaty bald spot  with his palm,
and brought the Bask  to the old  man's  lips. It was dark, but  in the weak
reflections  of the  searchlights  Redrick could see Burbridge's  wide-open,
glassy eyes and the dark stubble that covered his cheeks. Burbridge greedily
took several gulps and then nervously felt for his sack with the swag.
     "You came back.... Good fellow.... Red. You won't leave an old  man  to
die."
     Redrick threw back his head and took a deep swallow.
     "It's still there. Like it was nailed to tile highway.
     "it's no accident," Burbridge said. He spoke in  spurts, on the exhale.
"Someone must have squealed. They're waiting for us"
     "Maybe, said Redrick. "Want another swallow?"
     "No. That's enough for now. Don't abandon me.  If you don't leave me, I
won't die. You won't be sorry. You won't leave me, will you? Red?"
     Redrick  did  not answer. He was looking over  at the highway  and  the
flashes of light.  He could see the marble obelisk, but he  couldn't tell if
he was sitting there or not.
     "Listen, Red. I'm not fooling. You won't be sorry Do  you  know why old
Burbridge is still alive? Do you know? Bob tile Gorilla blew it. Pharaoh the
Banker  kicked the bucket.  And what  a  stalker he was! And he  was killed.
Slimy, too.  And Norman Four-Eyes. Culligan. Pete the Scab. AII of them. I'm
the only who's survived. Why? Do you know?"
     "You  were always a rat, said Red, never taking  his eyes off the road.
"A son of a bitch."
     "A rat.  That's true.  You can't get by without being one.  But  all of
them were. Pharaoh. Slimy. But I'm the only one left. Do you know why?"
     "I know," said Red to end the conversation.
     "You're lying. You don't know. Have you heard about the Golden Ball?"
     "Yes.
     "You think it's a fairy tale?"
     "You'd better keep quiet. Save your strength.
     "It's all right.  You'll carry me  out. We've gone to the  Zone so many
times. Could you  abandon  me?  I knew  you  when. You  were so small.  Your
father....
     Redrick said nothing. He wanted a  cigarette  badly.  He  took one out,
crumpled the tobacco in his hand, and sniffed it. It didn't help.
     "You  have  to get me out. I got burned because of you. You're the  one
who wouldn't take the Maltese.
     The Maltese  was  itching  to  go  with them.  He  had treated them all
evening, offering a good percentage, swore that he would get a special suit,
and Burbridge, who was  sitting next to him, kept winking  to Red behind his
leathery  hand.  Let's take him, we won't go wrong. Maybe  that  was why Red
said no.
     "You got it because you were greedy,"  Red said  coldly. "I had nothing
to do with it. You'd better be quiet. "
     For a while,  Burbridge moaned.  He had his fingers in his collar again
and his head was thrown back.
     "You can have all the swag," he gasped. "just don't leave me.
     Redrick looked at his watch. There wasn't much time until dawn, and the
patrol car  was still there. Its spotlights were still searching the bushes,
and their  camouflaged  jeep was  quite  close to the police car. They could
find it any minute.
     "The Golden Ball,"  said  Burbridge.  "I found it. There were  so  many
tales about it. I spun  a few myself. That  it would  grant your every wish.
Any  wish,  hah!  If that were  true, I sure wouldn't be here. I'd be living
high on the hog in Europe. Swimming in dough."
     Redrick looked down  at him. In the flickering blue light Bur- bridge's
upturned face looked dead. But his glassy eyes were fixed on Redrick.
     "Eternal youth--like hell I got it. Money--the hell with that, too. But
I got health. And good children. And I'm alive. You can only dream about the
places I've been. And I'm still alive." He licked his lips. "I  only ask for
one thing. Let me live. And give me health. And the children.
     "Will you shut up?" Red finally said. "You sound like a dame. If I can,
I'll get you out. I'm sorry for your Dina. She'll have to hit the streets.
     "Dina,"  the old  man  whispered hoarsely.  "My little girl. My beauty.
They're  spoiled,  Red. I've  never refused them anything. They'll be  lost.
Arthur. My Artie. You know him, Red. Have you ever seen anything like him?"
     "I told you: if I can I'll save you."
     "No," Burbridge said stubbornly. "You'll get me out no matter what. The
Golden Ball. Do you want me to tell you where it is?"
     "Go ahead." Burbridge moaned and stirred.
     "My legs.... Feel how they are."
     Redrick reached out and moved his hand down his leg below the knee.
     "The bones...." He moaned. "Are the bones still there?"
     "They're there. Stop fussing."
     "You're lying. Why lie?  You  think I don't  know,  I've  never seen it
happen?"
     Actually all he could feel  was  the kneecap. Below, all the way to the
ankle, the leg was like a rubber stick. You could tie knots in it.
     "The knees are whole," Red said.
     "You're probably  lying," Burbridge said sadly. "Well, all right.  just
get me out. I'll give you everything. The Golden Ball. I'll draw you  a map.
Show you all the traps. I'll tell you everything."
     He promised other things, too, but Redrick  wasn't  listening.  He  was
looking  at the highway. The spotlights  weren't racing across the shrubbery
any more. They  were frozen. They converged on  that obelisk.  In the bright
blue  fog  Redrick  could see the  bent  black  figure wandering  among  the
crosses.  The figure seemed  to be moving blindly, straight into the lights.
Redrick saw it bump  into a huge cross, stumble, bump into the cross  again,
walk around it, and continue on,  its  arms outstretched before  it, fingers
spread wide. Then it suddenly disappeared, as though it fell underground; it
surfaced a few seconds later, to the right and farther away, stepping with a
bizarre, inhuman stubbornness, like a wind-up toy.
     Suddenly the  lights went  out. The transmission squealed,  the  engine
roared, and the blue and red signal lights showed  through  the  shrubs. The
patrol  car tore  away,  accelerated  wildly,  and  raced  toward  town.  It
disappeared behind the wall. Redrick gulped and unzipped his jump suit.
     "They've  gone  away."  Burbridge  muttered feverishly. "Red, let's go.
Hurry!" We shifted around, felt for and found his  bag, and tried to get up.
"Let's go, what are you waiting for?"
     Redrick was still looking toward the road. It was dark now, and nothing
could be seen, but  somewhere out there he was stalking, like an  automaton,
stumbling, falling, bumping into crosses, getting tangled in the shrubs.
     "All right," Red said out loud. "Let's go."
     He lifted Burbridge. The old man clamped  onto his  neck with his  left
hand.  Redrick,  unable to  straighten up,  crawled with  him  on  all fours
through the hole in the wall, grabbing the wet grass.
     "Let's go, let's  go," Burbridge whispered hoarsely. "Don't worry, I've
got the swag, I won't let go. Come on!"
     The path was familiar, but the wet grass was slippery, the ash branches
whipped  him in the face, the  bulky  old man was  unbearably  heavy, like a
corpse, and  the  bag  with the booty, clinking and clanging,  kept  getting
caught,  and he was afraid of running into him, who could be anywhere in the
dark.
     When they got out onto  the highway, it  was still  dark, but you could
tell that  dawn was coming. In  the little  wood across the road, birds were
making sleepy and uncertain noises,  and the  night  gloom was turning  blue
over the black houses in the distant suburbs. There was a chilly damp breeze
coming  from  there. Redrick put  Burbridge on the shoulder of the  road and
like a big black spider scuttled across the road. He quickly found the jeep,
swept off the  branches from  the  hood and fenders, and drove out onto  the
asphalt without turning on the  headlights. Burbridge was there, holding the
bag in one hand and feeling his legs with the other.
     "Hurry  up! Hurry. My knees, I still have my knees.  If  only we  could
save my knees!"
     Redrick picked him  up, and gritting  his teeth from the strain, shoved
him over the side. Burbridge landed on the back seat  and groaned. He hadn't
dropped the bag. Redrick picked up the lead- lined raincoat and  covered him
with it. Burbridge had even managed to get the coat out.
     Redrick took  out  a  flashlight and checked the  shoulder for  tracks.
There  weren't  too many  traces.  The  jeep  had Battened some of  the tall
grasses as it came  onto  the road, but the grass would stand up in a couple
of hours. There were an  enormous number of butts around the  spot where the
patrol car had parked. That reminded Redrick that  he wanted a smoke. He lit
one up, even though what he wanted more was to get the hell out of there and
drive as fast as he could. But he couldn't do that yet. Everything had to be
done slowly and consciously.
     "What's  the  matter?"  Burbridge  whined  from the  car. "You  haven't
spilled the water, and the finishing gear is dry. What are you  waiting for?
Come on, hide the swag!"
     "Shut up! Don't bug me! We'll head for the southern suburbs."
     "What  suburbs?  Are  you crazy? You'll ruin my knees, you  bastard! My
knees!"
     Redrick took a last drag and put the butt in his matchbox.
     "Don't be a jerk, Buzzard. We can't go straight through town. There are
three roadblocks. We'll get stopped once for sure."
     "So what?"
     "They'll take one look at your feet and it's curtains."
     "What about my legs? We were fishing, I hurt my legs, and that's that."
     "And what if they feel your legs?"
     "Feel them. I'll  yell  so loud  that they'll  never try feeling a  leg
again."
     But Redrick had already decided.  He lifted the driver's seat, flashing
his light, opened a secret compartment, and said:
     "Let me have the stuff."
     The gas tank under  the  seat was  a  dummy. Redrick took  the bag  and
stuffed it inside, listening to the clinking and clanging in the bag.
     "I can't take any risks," he muttered. "I don't have the right.
     He put  the  cover back on, covered  it up  with rubbish and rags,  and
replaced the seat. Burbridge was moaning and groaning, begging him to hurry,
and promising him the Golden Ball again. He twisted and shifted in his seat,
staring  anxiously into the growing light. Redrick paid no attention to him.
He  tore open the plastic bag of water with  the fish in  it, poured out the
water over the  fishing gear, and put the flopping  fish into the basket. He
folded up the  plastic bag and put it in his  pocket. Now  everything was in
order.  Two  fishermen  coming  back from a not very successful trip. He got
behind the wheel and started the car.
     He  drove all the way  to the  turn without putting on the lights.  The
vast  ten-foot wall stretched to  the left of them, hemming in the Zone, and
on  their  right  there  were occasional abandoned  cottages,  with  bearded
windows and peeling paint. Redrick could see well in the dark, and it wasn't
that  dark any more anyway, and besides, he knew that it was coming. So when
the bent  figure, striding rhythmically, appeared before the  car, he didn't
even slow down. He hunched over the wheel.  He was walking in  the middle of
the road--like all of them, he was headed for town.  Redrick passed him from
the left and speeded up.
     "Mother of God!" Burbridge muttered in the back seat. "Red, did you see
that?"
     "Yes."
     "God! That's all we need!" Suddenly Burbridge broke into a loud prayer.
     "Shut up!" Redrick shouted at him.
     The turn should have been right around there  somewhere. Redrick slowed
down, staring at the row of sinking houses and fences on the right. The  old
transformer  hut,  the pole with the supports, the  rotting  bridge over the
culvert. Redrick turned the wheel. The car tossed and turned.
     "Where are  you  going?"  Burbridge  wailed.  "You'll ruin my legs, you
bastard!"
     Redrick turned  around for  a  second and slapped  the  old man's face,
feeling his prickly stubbled cheek. Burbridge sputtered and fell silent. The
car was bouncing and the wheels  slipped in the fresh mud from last  night's
rain. Redrick  turned on the lights.  The  white bouncing  light illuminated
overgrown old  ruts, huge puddles, and rotten, leaning fences. Burbridge was
crying,  sobbing, and snuffling. He wasn't promising  anything any more.  He
was complaining and  threatening, but  in a very quiet and indistinct voice,
so that Redrick heard only isolated words. Something  about legs, knees, and
his darling Archie. Then he shut up.
     The  village stretched along the  western edge of the city.  There once
had been summer houses, gardens, orchards, and the summer villas of the city
fathers  and  plant directors. Green, pleasant places  with small lakes  and
clean sandy beaches, translucent birch groves, and ponds stocked with  carp.
The stink and pollution from the plant never reached this verdant glade--nor
did the city plumbing system. But now everything here was abandoned and they
passed  only one inhabited house--the window shone yellow through  the drawn
blinds,  the wash on the  line was wet from the rain, and  a huge dog rushed
out  at them furiously and  chased the car through the mud thrown up by  the
wheels.
     Redrick carefully drove over an old  rickety  bridge. When he could see
the turnoff to Western Highway, he stopped the car and turned off the motor.
Then he got. out and went on the road without looking back at Burbridge, his
hands  stuffed  into  the  damp  pockets  of  his jumpsuit.  It  was  light.
Everything  around them  was wet, still, and  sleepy. He  walked over to the
highway  and  peered  from  the bushes.  The police:  checkpoint  was easily
visible from  his vantage point: a  little trailer house, with three lighted
windows.  The patrol car was parked next to it. It was empty.  Redrick stood
watching for some time. There  was no action  at the checkpoint;  the guards
must  have gotten cold and wornout during the night  and  were warming up in
the  trailer.  Dreaming over  cigarettes  stuck  to their  lower  lips. "The
toads,"  Redrick  said softly. He found  the brass knuckles in  his  pocket,
slipped his fingers  into  the oval holes, pressed  the  cold metal into his
fist, and still hunched up against the chill and with his hands still in his
pockets, he  went back. The  jeep, listing  slightly to one side, was parked
among  the bushes. It  was a lost, quiet spot. Probably nobody had looked at
it in the last ten years.
     When Redrick  reached the car, Burbridge sat up and  looked at him, his
mouth open. He looked even older than usual,  wrinkled, bald,  unshaven, and
with rotten teeth.  They stared at each  other silently,  and then Burbridge
said distinctly:
     "The map . . . all  the traps, everything. . . . You'll find it and you
won't be sorry."
     Redrick listened  to him without moving; then he loosened  his  fingers
and let the brass knuckles fall into his pocket
     "All  right. All  you have to do  is lie there in  a faint. Understand?
Moan and don't let anyone touch you."
     He got behind the wheel and started the car.
     Everything went well. No one got out of the trailer when the jeep drove
slowly  past,  obeying all the signs and making all  the correct signals. It
accelerated and sped into town through die southern end. It was six A.M. The
streets were empty, the pavement wet and shiny black, and the traffic lights
winked lonely and unneeded at the intersections. They  drove past the bakery
with its high,  brightly lit windows,  and Redrick was engulfed in a wave of
the warm, incredibly delicious smell of baking bread.
     "I'm  starved,"  Redrick  said and stretched his stiffened  muscles  by
pushing his hands into the wheel.
     "What?" Burbridge asked frightenedly.
     "I'm starved, I said. Where to? Home or straight to the Butcher?"
     "To the Butcher, and hurry." Burbridge was ranting, leaning forward and
breathing hotly on Redrick's neck. "Straight to his house. Come on! He still
owes me seven hundred.  Will  you drive faster? You're crawling like a louse
in  a  puddle."  He  started cursing  impotently  and  angrily,  sputtering,
panting. It ended in a coughing fit.
     Redrick  did  not answer. He  had neither  the time  nor the energy  to
pacify Buzzard  when he was going  at full speed. He wanted to Finish up  as
soon as  possible and get an hour or so of  sleep  before his appointment at
the Metropole. He turned onto Sixteenth Street, drove two blocks, and parked
in front of a gray, two-story private house.
     The Butcher  came to the door himself. He had just gotten up and was on
his way  to the bathroom. He was wearing a luxurious robe  with gold tassels
and was carrying a glass with his  false teeth.  His hair was disheveled and
there were dark circles under his eyes.
     "Oh, itsh Red? Sho how are you?"
     "Put in your teeth and let's go."
     "Uh-huh." He nodded him into  the waiting  room and hurried off to  the
bathroom, scuffing along in his Persian slippers.
     "Who is it?" he asked from there.
     "Burbridge."
     "What?"
     "His legs."
     Redrick could hear running  water, snorting, splashing, and some- thing
fall and roll along the tile floor in the bathroom. Redrick sank exhaustedly
into an armchair and lit a cigarette. The waiting room was nice. The Butcher
didn't  skimp.  He  was a  highly  competent  and very  fashionable surgeon,
influential in both city and state  medical circles.  He had gotten mixed up
with the stalkers not for the money, of  course. He collected from the Zone:
he  took various types of swag, which he used for  research in his practice;
he  took  knowledge, since  he  studied  stricken stalkers  and the  various
diseases, mutilations,  and traumas  of the human body that  had  never been
known before; and he  took glory, becoming famous as the first doctor on the
planet  to be a  specialist  in nonhuman diseases of  man.  He was  also not
averse to taking money, and in great amounts.
     "What specifically  is wrong with  his legs?"  he asked, appearing from
the bathroom with a huge towel around his neck.  He was carefully drying his
sensitive fingers with the corner of the towel.
     "Landed in the jelly," Redrick said. The Butcher whistled.
     "Well, that's the end of Burbridge. Too bad, he was a famous stalker."
     "It's all right," Redrick said, leaning back in the chair. "You'll make
artificial legs for him. He'll hobble around the Zone on them."
     "All right." The Butcher's face became completely businesslike.
     "Wait a minute, I'll get dressed."
     While he dressed and made a  call--probably to his clinic to  pre- pare
things  for  the  operation--Redrick lounged  immobile  in the armchair  and
smoked. He moved only once  to get his flask. He drank in small sips because
there  was only a little on the bottom, and he tried to think about nothing.
He simply waited.
     They both walked out to the car. Redrick got in the driver's seat,  the
Butcher  next  to him. He  immediately  bent  over the back  seat to palpate
Burbridge's legs.  Burbridge, subdued and withdrawn, muttered  pathetically,
promising  to shower him with gold,  mentioning  his  deceased wife and  his
children repeatedly, and begging him  to save at least  his knees. When they
got to the clinic, the Butcher  cursed at not finding the orderlies  waiting
at the driveway and jumped out of  the moving car to run inside. Redrick lit
another cigarette. Burbridge suddenly spoke,  clearly and calmly, apparently
completely calm at last:
     "You tried to kill me. I won't forget."
     "I didn't kill you, though," Redrick said.
     "No, you didn't...." He was silent. "I'll remember that, too."
     "You do that. Of course, you wouldn't have tried to kill me." He turned
and  looked at Burbridge. The old man was  nervously  moving  his lips. "You
would have abandoned me just like that," said Redrick.
     "You would have left me  in the Zone and thrown  me in the water.  Like
Four-eyes."
     "Four-eyes died on his own," Burbridge said gloomily. "I had nothing to
do with it. It got him."
     "You bastard," Redrick said dispassionately, turning  away. "You son of
a bitch."
     The  sleepy rumpled attendants ran out onto the driveway, unfurling the
stretcher as they came  to the car. Redrick, stretching and yawning, watched
them extricate  Burbridge from the back seat  and  trundle him  off  on  the
stretcher. Burbridge lay immobile, hands folded on chest, staring resignedly
at the sky. His huge feet, cruelly eaten away by the jelly, were turned  out
unnaturally. He was the last of the old stalkers who had started hunting for
treasure right  after  the Visitation, when the Zone wasn't called the Zone,
when there were no  institutes, or walls,  or UN forces, when the  city  was
paralyzed  with  fear and  the world was snickering  over  the new newspaper
hoax. Redrick was  ten years  old  then and Burbridge was still a strong and
agile man--he  loved  to drink  when  others  paid, to brawl, to  catch some
unwary girl in a corner. His own children  didn't interest him in the least,
and he was a petty bastard even then;  when he was drunk he used to beat his
wife with a repulsive pleasure, noisily,  so that  everyone  could hear.  He
beat her until she died.
     Redrick turned  the  jeep  and,  disregarding  the  lights, sped  home,
honking at the few pedestrians on the streets and cornering sharply.
     He  parked in front  of the  garage,  and  when he  got out he saw  the
superintendent  coming toward him from across the little park. As usual, the
super was out of sorts, and his crumpled face with its swollen eyes mirrored
extreme distaste, as though he were walking on liquid manure instead  of the
ground.
     "Good morning," Redrick said politely.
     The  super stopped two feet in front of him  and pointed with his thumb
over his shoulder.
     "Is that your handiwork?" he asked. You could tell that those  were his
first words of the day.
     "What are you talking about?"
     "The swings, was it you who set them up?"
     "I did."
     "What for?"
     Redrick did  not answer  and went  over to unlock the garage  door. The
super followed.
     "I asked you why you set up the swings. Who asked you to?"
     "My daughter," he answered very calmly. He rolled back the door.
     "I'm not asking you about your daughter!" He raised his voice.
     "That's another  question. I'm asking you who gave  you  permission?  I
mean who let you take over the park?"
     Redrick  turned to  him  and stared at the bridge of his nose, pale and
covered with spidery veins. The super stepped back and spoke more softly.
     "And don't you repaint the terrace. How many times have I...."
     "Don't bother. I'm not going to move out."
     He got back in the car and started the engine. As he took the wheel, he
saw how white his knuckles were. Then he leaned out the window and no longer
controlling himself, said:
     "But if I am forced to move, you creep, you'd better say your prayers."
     He  drove into the garage, turned on the light, and closed the door. He
pulled the swag from the false gas tank, fixed up the car, put the bag in an
old  wicker basket,  put the fishing gear, still damp and covered with grass
and leaves, on top, and put the fish that Burbridge had bought in a store in
the  suburbs last night on top of everything. Then  he  checked the  car one
more time. Out of  habit. A flattened cigarette butt had stuck to  the right
rear fender. Redrick pulled it away--it was Swedish. He thought about it and
put it into the matchbox. There were three butts in it already.
     He didn't  meet anyone on the  stairs. He stopped in front of his  door
and it flew open  before he had time to get his keys. He walked in sideways,
holding  the heavy  basket under his arm, and immersed himself in the warmth
and  familiar  smells of home. Guta threw her arms around his neck and froze
with  her face on his  chest. He  could feel  her heart beating wildly  even
through his jumpsuit and heavy shirt. He didn't rush her--he stood patiently
and waited for her to calm down,  even though he  fully sensed for the First
time just then how tired and worn out he was.
     "All right," she finally said in  a low husky voice and let go  of him.
She turned on the light in the entry  and went into the kitchen. "I'll  have
the coffee ready in a minute," she called.
     "I've  brought some fish," he said in an artificially hearty tone. "Fry
it up, won't you, I'm starved."
     She came back, hiding her face in her loosened hair;  he set the basket
on the floor,  helped  her take  out  the net with  the fish,  and they both
carried the net to the kitchen and dumped the Fish into the sink.
     "Go wash up,"  she said. "By  the time you're  ready, the fish  will be
done.
     "How's Monkey?" Redrick asked, pulling off his boots.
     "She was  babbling all evening," Guta  replied. "I barely got her to go
to bed. She keeps asking, where's  daddy, where s daddy? She wants her daddy
all the time."
     She moved swiftly and quietly in the  kitchen, strong and graceful. The
water was boiling  in the pan on the stove and the scales were  flying under
her knife, and the butter was sizzling in the largest pan, and there was the
exhilarating smell of fresh coffee in the air.
     Redrick walked in his bare feet to the entry hall,  took the basket and
brought  it to the  storeroom. Then he looked into the  bedroom.  Monkey was
sleeping peacefully, her crumpled blanket  hanging on the floor. Her nightie
had ridden  up.  She was warm and soft, a little  animal breathing  heavily.
Redrick could not resist the temptation to stroke her back covered with warm
golden  fur,  and was amazed for the thousandth  time by the fur's silkiness
and  length. He wanted to pick up Monkey badly, but  he was afraid  it would
wake her  up-- besides, he was as dirty as hell and permeated with death and
the Zone. He came back into the kitchen and sat down at the table.
     "Pour me  a cup of coffee. I'll wash up later. A bundle of evening mail
was  on the table: The  Harmont Gazette. Sports, Playboy--there was  a whole
bunch of magazines--and the thick gray-covered Reports  of the International
Institute of Extraterrestrial Cultures,  issue  56.  Redrick took  a  mug of
steaming  coffee  from  Guta and reached  for  the  Reports.  Squiggles  and
markings, blueprints of some kind, and photographs of familiar  objects from
strange  angles.  Another  posthumous  article  by  Kirill:  "An  Unexpected
Property  of the Magnetic Trap  Type-77b." The surname Panov  was  framed in
black and below  in tiny type it said: "Dr. Kirill A.  Panov, USSR, perished
tragically  during an  experiment  in  April 19.."  Redrick tossed  away the
journal, gulped some  coffee, burning his mouth, and asked: "Did anyone drop
by?"
     "Gutalin was here," Guta said,  after  a slight pause. She was standing
by the stove and looking at him. "He was stinking drunk, I sobered him up."
     "How about Monkey?"
     "She didn't want to let him go, of  course. She started  bawling. But I
told  her  that  Uncle Gutalin wasn't feeling very  well. And she  told  me,
'Gutalin's smashed again.'"
     Redrick laughed and took another sip. Then he asked another question.
     "What about the neighbors?"
     Guta hesitated again before answering.
     "Like always," she finally said.
     "All right, don't tell me."
     "Ah!" she  said,  waving  her  hand in  disgust.  "The woman from below
knocked  at  our  door  last  night.  Her  eyes were  bulging  and  she  was
practically spitting with anger. Why are we  sawing in the bath- room in the
middle of the night?"
     "The dangerous old  bitch," Redrick said  through  his  teeth. "Listen,
maybe we should  move?  Buy a house  somewhere  out  in  the country,  where
there's no one else, some old abandoned cottage?"
     "What about Monkey?"
     "God, don't you think the two of us could make her life good?"
     Guta shook her head.
     "She loves children. And they love her. It's not their fault that.  . .
."
     "No, it's not their fault."
     "There's  no  use talking about it!" Guta  said. "Somebody  called you.
Didn't leave a name. I told him you were out fishing."
     Redrick put down the mug and got up.
     "OK. I'll go wash up. I've got lots of things to take care of."
     He locked himself in the bathroom, threw  his  clothes in the pail, and
placed the brass knuckles, the remaining nuts and bolts, and his  cigarettes
on the shelf.  He turned  himself under  the boiling hot shower  for a  long
time, rubbing his body with a rough sponge until it  was bright red. He shut
off the  shower  and sat  on the  edge of the  tub,  smoking. The pipes were
gurgling and Guta was clattering dishes  out in the kitchen.  Then there was
the smell of frying fish and Guta knocked, bringing him fresh underwear.
     "Hurry it up," she ordered. "The fish is getting cold."
     She was completely  back  to normal--and back to being  bossy.  Redrick
chuckled as he dressed--that is, put on hi shorts and T-shirt --and  went to
the table.
     "Now I can eat," he said as he seated himself.
     "Did you put your underwear in the pail?"
     "Uh-huh," he said with his mouth full. "Good fish."
     "Did you cover it with water?"
     "No-ope. Sorry, sir,  it won't happen again, sir. Will you  sit  still?
Forget it!" He  caught her hand and tried to  pull her into his lap, but she
pulled away and sat across from him.
     "You're  neglecting your husband," Redrick said,  his mouth full again.
"Too squeamish?"
     "Some husband you are now. You're just an empty bag, not a husband. You
have to be stuffed first."
     "What if I could?" Redrick asked. "Miracles do happen, you know."
     "I haven't seen miracles like that from you before. How about a drink?"
Redrick played with his fork indecisively.
     "N-no, thanks." He looked at his watch and got up. "I'm off now. Get my
dress-up outfit ready. First class. A shirt and tie."
     Enjoying  the sensation of the  cool Boor under his clean bare feet, he
went  into  the  storeroom and barred the door. He put on a rubber apron and
rubber gloves up to his elbows  and started unloading the swag on the table.
Two empties.  A box of pins. Nine batteries.  Three bracelets. Some  kind of
hoop, sort of like the bracelets, but of white metal, lighter, and bigger in
diameter by an  inch.  Sixteen  black  sprays  in  a  polyethylene case. Two
marvelously preserved sponges the  size of  a fist. Three itchers. A jar  of
carbonated  clay. There was still  a  heavy  porcelain  container  carefully
wrapped in Fiberglass in the bag, but Redrick didn't touch it. He smoked and
examined the wealth spread out on the table.
     Then he opened a drawer and took  out a piece of paper, a pencil stump,
and a calculator. He kept the  cigarette in the  corner  of his  mouth,  and
squinting in the  smoke, he wrote number after number,  making three columns
in all. He added up the first  two.  The numbers were impressive. He put out
the butt in an ashtray and carefully opened the box and spilled out the pins
on  the  paper. In the  electric light the pins  looked  slightly  blue  and
occasionally sputtered with other colors--yellow, red, and green.  He picked
up  a  pin and  carefully squeezed  it between  his thumb and index  finger,
avoiding being pricked. Then he put out the  light and waited a bit, getting
accustomed  to the dark. But the pin was silent. He put it aside  and  found
another one, which he also  squeezed. Nothing. He squeezed harder, risking a
pinprick, and  the  pin spoke: weak  red Bashes ran  along the  pin and were
suddenly replaced by slower green pulses. Redrick enjoyed this strange light
play for a few seconds. He had learned from the Reports that the lights were
supposed to mean something, maybe something  very  important. He put the pin
in a different spot from the first and picked up another.
     He ended up with seventy-three pins,  twelve  of  which spoke. The rest
were silent. Actually  they  too could speak, but fingers were not enough to
get them started.  You needed a special  machine  the  size  of  the  table.
Redrick put  on  the light and  added two more numbers to his list. And only
then did he decide to do it.
     He stuck both hands into  the bag and holding his breath brought out  a
soft package  and  placed  it  on  the  table. He stared at it for  a while,
thoughtfully rubbing  his chin  with the back of his hand. Then he picked up
the pencil,  played  with  it  with his  clumsy rubbery fingers, and  put it
aside. He took another  cigarette and smoked the entire thing without taking
his eyes off the package.
     "What the hell!"  he said out loud and decisively stuffed the pack- age
back into the bag "That's it. Enough."
     He  quickly gathered all the pins  into the box and got up. It was time
to go. He probably  could get a half hour's sleep  to clear his head, but on
the  other  hand, it was probably a much better idea to get there  early and
check out the situation. He took off the gloves, hung up the apron, and left
the storeroom without turning out the light.
     His suit was ready and laid out on the bed. Redrick got dressed. He was
doing his tie in front of  the mirror when the floor creaked behind him, and
he heard heavy breathing, and he made a face to keep from laughing.
     "Ha!" a tiny voice shouted next to him and someone grabbed his leg.
     "Oh-oh!" Redrick exclaimed, falling back onto the bed.
     Monkey, laughing  and squealing, immediately clambered up on  him.  She
trampled  him, pulled his hair, and inundated him with  an endless stream of
news. The neighbor's boy Willy tore off dolly's leg.  There was a new kitten
on the third Boor--all white and with red eyes, he probably didn't listen to
his mama and went into the Zone. She had porridge and  jam for dinner. Uncle
Gutalin was  smashed again and was sick. He even cried. Why don't fish drown
if they  live in water? Why didn't mama sleep at night? Why  are there  five
fingers, and and only two hands, and only one nose? Redrick carefully hugged
the warm creature that was  crawling  all over him and looked into the  huge
dark eyes that had no whites at all, and cuddled his cheek against the plump
little cheek covered with silky golden fleece.
     "Monkey.  My little Monkey. You sweet  little  Monkey, you."  The phone
rang by his ear. He picked up the receiver.
     "I'm listening."
     Silence.
     "Hello! Hello!"
     No answer. There was a click and then short repeated tones. Redrick got
up, put Monkey on  the  floor, and put on his trousers and jacket, no longer
listening to her. Monkey  chattered on nonstop, but he only smiled with  his
lips in a distracted way.  Finally she announced that daddy had bit off  his
tongue and swallowed it and left him in peace.
     He went back into the  storeroom, put everything  from the table into a
briefcase, got  his  brass knuckles  from  the  bathroom, came back  to  the
storeroom, took the briefcase in one hand and the basket with the bag in the
other, went out, carefully locked the door, and called out to Guta.
     "I'm leaving."
     "When will you be back?" Guta came out of the kitchen. She had done her
hair and put on makeup. She  was no longer wearing her  robe, either,  but a
house dress, his favorite one, bright blue and low-cut.
     "I'll call," he said, looking at  her. He walked  over and  kissed  her
cleavage.
     "You'd better go," Guta said softly.
     "What about me? Kiss me?" Monkey whined, pushing between them.
     He had to bend down even lower. Guta watched him steadily.
     "Nonsense," he said. "Don't worry. I'll call."
     On the landing below theirs, Redrick saw a fat man  in striped  pajamas
fussing with the lock  to his door.  A warm sour smell was  coming  from the
depths of his apartment. Redrick stopped.
     "Good day."
     The fat man looked at him cautiously over his fat shoulder and muttered
something.
     "Your wife dropped by  last night," Redrick  said. "Something about  us
sawing. It's some kind of misunderstanding."
     "What do I care?" the man in the pajamas said.
     "My wife was doing the laundry last night," Redrick continued.
     "If we disturbed you, I apologize."
     "I didn't say anything. Be my guest."
     "Well, I'm glad to hear it."
     Redrick went outside, dropped into the  garage, put the basket with the
bag into the  corner, covered it with an old seat, looked over his work, and
went out into the street.
     It  wasn't a long walk--two blocks to the square, then through the park
and  one  more block to Central Boulevard.  In  front  of the  Metropole, as
usual,  there  was a shiny array  of cars gleaming chrome  and lacquer.  The
porters in raspberry red uniforms were lugging suitcases into the hotel, and
some foreign-looking people were standing around in groups of two and three,
smoking and talking on the marble steps.  Redrick  decided not to go in yet.
He made  himself  comfortable under  the awning of a  small  cafe across the
street, ordered coffee, and lit up a cigarette. Not two  feet from his table
were three  undercover men from the international police force, silently and
quickly  eating grilled  hot dogs Harmont style and drinking  beer from tall
glass steins. On the other side, some ten feet away, a sergeant was gloomily
devouring French fries, his fork in his fist. His blue helmet was set upside
down on the  Boor by his chair and  his shoulder holster draped on the chair
back.  There  were  no  other customers. The waitress, an  elderly woman  he
didn't  know,  stood behind the counter and  yawned, genteelly  covering her
painted mouth with her hand. It was twenty to nine.
     Redrick saw  Richard Noonan leave  the  hotel,  chewing  something, and
arranging his  soft hat on his head. He boldly strode down the steps--short,
plump, and  pink, still lucky,  well-off, freshly washed, and confident that
the day would bring him no unpleasantness. He  waved to  someone,  flung his
raincoat over  his right shoulder, and  walked over  to his Peugeot.  Dick's
Peugeot was also plump, short, freshly  washed, and seemingly confident that
no unpleasantness threatened it.
     Covering his face  with his hand,  Redrick watched  Noonan  bustle, get
comfortable in  the front  seat, move something from  the front seat  to the
back,  bend down  to pick  something up, and adjust the rearview mirror. The
Peugeot expelled  a puff of blue smoke, beeped  at an African in a burnoose,
and jauntily drove out into the street. It looked like Noonan was headed for
the institute, in which case he had to go around the fountain and drive past
the cafe. It  was too late to get up and leave, so Redrick covered his  face
completely and hunched over  his cup. It didn't help.  The Peugeot beeped in
his ear, the brakes squealed, and Noonan's hearty voice called:
     "Hey! Schuhart! Red!"
     Redrick swore under his breath and looked up. Noonan was walking toward
him, hand outstretched. Noonan was beaming.
     "What  are  you doing here  at  the  crack  of dawn?"  he asked  as  he
approached. "Thank you, ma'am," he said to the waitress. "Nothing for  me. I
haven't seen you in a hundred years. Where've you been? What are you up to?"
     "Nothing special," Redrick said unwillingly. "just unimportant things."
     He  watched Noonan bustle and  establish himself  in the chair opposite
and move the glass with the napkins in  one direction with  his  plump hands
and the plate with sandwiches in another. And he listened to Noonan gab.
     "You look kind of  peaked. Not  sleeping enough? You know, lately, I've
been very busy with this  new  automation stuff,  but I never miss my sleep,
that's  for sure. 7'he  automation can go hang."  He suddenly looked around.
"I'm sorry, maybe you're expecting someone. Have  I interrupted? Am I in the
way?"
     "No, no,"  Redrick said lamely. "I just had some  time and  thought I'd
have a cup of coffee, that's all."
     "Well, I won't keep you long," Dick said, looking at his watch.
     "Listen, Red, why don't you drop your unimportant things and  come back
to the institute. You know they'll take you back whenever you want. You want
to work with another Russian? There's a new one."
     Red shook his head.
     "Nope, a second Kirill hasn't been born. Anyway, there's nothing for me
to do in your institute. It's all automated now, you  have robots going into
the  Zone and that  means  that  the robots  get all the  bonuses.  The  lab
assistants are paid peanuts. It wouldn't even keep me in cigarettes."
     "All that could be arranged."
     "I don't like having things arranged for me," Redrick said. "I've taken
care of myself all my life, and I intend to keep on doing it."
     "You've become very proud," Noonan said with condemnation.
     "No, I'm not. I just don't like pinching pennies."
     "I  guess  you're  right,"  Noonan  said  distractedly.  He  looked  at
Redrick's briefcase on  the chair next to him and  rubbed  the  silver plate
with the engraved cyrillic letters. "You're right, a man needs money so that
he  doesn't have to always be counting it. A present from Kirill?" he asked,
nodding at the briefcase.
     "I inherited it. How come never see you at the Borscht any- more?"
     "You're  the  one who's never there," Noonan countered.  "I  have lunch
there almost every day. At the  Metropole they charge an arm and a leg for a
hamburger. Listen," he said suddenly, "how's your money situation now?"
     "Want a loan?"
     "Just the opposite."
     "You want to lend me money?"
     "I have work...."
     "Oh God!" Redrick said. "Not you too!"
     "Who else, then?" Noonan demanded.
     "There's lots of you ... hirers."
     Noonan, seeming to finally get his point, laughed.
     "No, no, this isn't along the lines of your primary specialty."
     "Along what lines then?" Noonan looked at his watch again.
     "Here's the deal," he said, getting up. "Come to the Borscht for lunch,
around two. We'll talk."
     "I may not be able to make it by two."
     "Then this evening around six. All right?"
     "We'll see." Redrick looked at his watch. It was five to nine.
     Noonan waved and  rolled out to his Peugeot. Redrick followed him  with
his  eyes,  called the  waitress,  paid  the  bill, bought a  pack  of Lucky
Strikes, and slowly headed over to the hotel with his briefcase. The sun was
baking hot already and the street had quickly become muggy, and Redrick felt
a  burning  sensation under his eyelids.  He  squinted hard,  sorry  that he
hadn't time for an hour's nap before his important business. And then it hit
him.
     He had never experienced anything  like this  before outside the  Zone.
And it had happened in the Zone only two or three times. It was as though he
were  in  a  different  world.  A  million  odors  cascaded  in  on  him  at
once--sharp,  sweet,   metallic,  gentle,  dangerous   ones,  as  crude   as
cobblestones,  as  delicate and complex as  watch  mechanisms, as huge as  a
house  and as tiny as  a  dust particle. The air became  hard,  it developed
edges,  surfaces,  and  corners,  like  space  was  filled  with huge, stiff
balloons, slippery  pyramids, gigantic  prickly crystals, and he had to push
his way  through  it all,  making  his way in a dream through a  junk  store
stuffed with  ancient  ugly furniture.... It lasted a  second. He opened his
eyes, and everything was gone. It hadn't been a different world--it was this
world turning a new, unknown side to him. This side was revealed to  him for
a second and then disappeared, before he had time to figure it out.
     An angry horn beeped,  and Redrick walked faster, faster,  and then ran
all  the way to the wall of the Metropole. His heart was  beating wildly. He
put the  briefcase on the  pavement and  impatiently tore open  the  pack of
cigarettes.  He lit one, inhaled deeply, and rested,  as if after a fight. A
cop stopped near him and asked:
     "Need help, mister?"
     "N-no," Redrick squeezed the word out and coughed. "It's stuffy."
     "Can I take you where you're going?"
     Redrick picked up his briefcase.
     "Everything, everything is fine, pal. Thanks."
     He walked quickly toward the  entrance, walked up the  steps  and  went
into the  lobby.  It was cool,  dusky, and echoey. He should have  sat for a
while in one of those voluminous leather chairs  and caught his breath,  but
he was  late already.  He allowed  himself  time to  finish  the  cigarette,
checking out the crowd through half-shut eyes. Bones was  there, irritatedly
riffling through the magazines at the newsstand. Redrick threw the butt into
the ashtray and went into the elevator.
     He didn't manage to close the door in time and others crowded in: a fat
man breathing asthmatically, a  heavily perfumed  lady with  a grumpy little
boy  eating chocolate, and a heavyset  old woman with a poorly  shaved chin.
Redrick was pushed into the corner. He closed his  eyes, trying to shut  out
the boy with chocolate  saliva dripping down his  chin, whose face was fresh
and pure, without a single  hair. And to shut out his mother, whose  scrawny
bosom was embellished with a necklace made of  large  black  sprays  set  in
silver. And  to shut out the bulging sclerotic whites of the eyes of the fat
man, and the hideous warts on the swollen face of the old woman. The fat man
tried to  light a  cigarette, but the  old woman attacked him and kept after
him until she got out on five. As soon as she did, the fat man lit up with a
look  that proclaimed that he was defending his civil rights, and broke  out
coughing and  hacking  as soon as  he inhaled, sticking out his  lips like a
camel and jabbing Redrick in the ribs with his elbow.
     Redrick got out on the eighth floor and walked down the thick carpet on
the corridor,  cozily illuminated  by hidden  lamps. It smelled of expensive
tobacco, French  perfumes,  the soft  natural  leather  of stuffed  wallets,
expensive ladies of the night, and  solid gold cigarette cases. It reeked of
everything,  of the lousy fungus that was  growing on the Zone, drinking  on
the  Zone, eating, exploiting, and growing fat  on the Zone  and that didn't
give a damn about any of it, especially about what  would happen later, when
it had eaten its full and gotten power, and when everything that was once in
the Zone was outside the Zone.  Redrick  pushed open the door to 874 without
knocking.
     Throaty, sitting on a table by the window, was performing a ritual over
a cigar. He  was still in his pajamas and his thinning hair, though wet, was
carefully parted. His unhealthy puffy face was smoothly shaved.
     "Aha," he  said  without looking up. "Punctuality  is the politeness of
kings. Good day, young man!"
     He  finished clipping  the end  of  the cigar,  took it in  both hands,
brought it up to his nose, and passed it back and forth under it.
     "Where is good  old Burbridge?"  he asked and looked up. His eyes  were
clear, blue, angelic.
     Redrick put the  briefcase  on  the sofa,  sat down, and  took  out his
cigarettes.
     "Burbridge isn't coming."
     "Good old Burbridge," Throaty repeated. He took the  cigar between  two
fingers  and carefully  brought it to his mouth. "Old Burbridge's nerves are
acting up."
     He kept looking at Redrick with his clear blue eyes, never blinking. He
never blinked. The door opened slightly and Bones slipped into the room.
     "Who were you talking to?" he asked from the doorway.
     "Ah, hello," Redrick  said cheerily, flipping ashes on the floor. Bones
shoved his hands in his pockets and came closer, taking broad steps with his
huge pigeon-toed feet. He stopped in front of Redrick.
     "We've  told  you a  hundred times,"  he reproached  him.  "No contacts
before a meeting. And what do you do?"
     "I say hello," Redrick replied. "And you?"
     Throaty laughed. Bones was irritated.
     "Hello, hello, hello." He removed his reproachful gaze from Redrick and
flung himself down on the couch next to him. "You cannot behave that way. Do
you understand me? You cannot!"
     "Then arrange meetings in places where I don't know anybody."
     "The boy  is right," Throaty interjected. "Our mistake. So who was that
man?"
     "Richard   Noonan.  He  represents  some  companies   that  supply  the
institute. He lives here in the hotel."
     "You  see  how simple it  is!"  Throaty  said  to Bones. He picked up a
colossal lighter shaped like the Statue of Liberty, looked at it doubtfully,
and replaced it on the table.
     "Where's Burbridge," Throaty asked in a friendly tone.
     "Burbridge blew it."
     The two men exchanged a quick glance.
     "Rest in  peace,"  Throaty  said  tensely. "Or has  he  been arrested?"
Redrick didn't answer right away,  taking slow long drags on  his cigarette.
He threw the butt on the floor.
     "Don't worry, everything's safe. He's in the hospital."
     "That's some safe!" Bones said nervously. He jumped up and went over to
the window. "Which hospital?"
     "Don't worry,  everything is taken care of. Let's get down to business.
I'm sleepy."
     "What hospital specifically?" Bones asked in irritation.
     "I've  told  you,"  Redrick picked  up  the briefcase.  "Are  we  doing
business today or not?"
     "We are, we are, son," Throaty said heartily.
     With  unexpected  agility  he  leaped  to  the  Boor, knocked  all  the
magazines  and newspapers from the coffee table, and  sat  in front  of  it,
resting his hairy pink hands on his knees.
     "Show your stuff."
     Redrick opened the briefcase, took out the list with prices, and put it
on  the table before  Throaty. Throaty glanced at it  and flicked it to  the
side. Bones stood behind him and started reading the list over his shoulder.
     "That's the bill," Redrick said.
     "I see. Let's see the stuff," Throaty said.
     "The money," Redrick said.
     "What's this 'hoop'?"  Bones  asked suspiciously,  pointing at the list
over Throaty's shoulder.
     Redrick said nothing. He was holding the  open briefcase on his lap and
staring into the blue angelic eyes. Throaty finally chuckled.
     "And  why do I love you so much,  my son?" he  muttered.  "And they say
love at first sight doesn't exist!" He sighed dramatically.
     "Phil, buddy, how do  they say it  here? Dole out the cabbage, lay some
greenbacks on  him ... and give me  a match. You see...." He waved his cigar
at him.
     Phil the Bones muttered something under his breath, tossed him  a  book
of matches,  and  went  through  a curtain into the next room. Redrick could
hear him talking to someone there, irritated and indistinct, something about
the cat being in the  bag, and Throaty, his cigar finally lit, kept  staring
at  Redrick with  a  frozen smile on his thin pale  lips.  Redrick, chin  on
briefcase, was looking at him and also trying not to blink, even  though his
lids were  burning  and  his eyes were tearing. Bones  came back, threw  two
packs of  money on the table,  and sat next to  Redrick in  a huff.  Redrick
lazily reached for the money, but Throaty motioned  him to  stop,  tore  the
wrappers from the money, and put them in his pajama pocket.
     "Now let's see it."
     Redrick took the money  and  stuffed it  into  his inner  jacket pocket
without counting  it. Then he presented his wares. He did it slowly, letting
both of them examine the swag and check items off the  list. It was quiet in
the room, the only sound was Throaty's heavy breathing and the jingle coming
from the other room--a spoon against the side of a glass, perhaps.
     When Redrick shut the briefcase and clicked the lock, Throaty looked up
at him.
     "What about the most important thing?"
     "No way," Redrick replied. He thought and added: "So far."
     "I like that 'so far,"' Throaty said gently. "How about you, Phil?"
     "You're throwing dust in our eyes, Schuhart," Bones said suspiciously.
     "Why the mystery, I ask you?"
     "That comes with the territory: shady dealings," Redrick said.
     "We're in a demanding profession.
     "All right, all right," Throaty said. "Where's the camera?"
     "Hell!" Redrick  scratched  his cheek, feeling the  color rise  in  his
face. "I'm sorry, I forgot all about it.
     "There?" Throaty asked making a vague gesture with the cigar.
     "I  don't remember. Probably there." Redrick shut  his eyes and  leaned
back on the couch. "Nope. I clean forgot."
     "Too bad," Throaty said. "But you at least saw the thing?"
     "Not even that," Redrick said sadly. "That's the whole point. We didn't
get as far as the blast furnaces. Burbridge fell into the jelly and I had to
head back immediately.  You can be sure that if I'd seen it  I wouldn't have
forgotten it."
     "Hey, Hugh, look at this!" Bones whispered in fright. "What's this?"
     He stuck out his right index finger. The white  metal hoop was twirling
around his finger and Bones was staring pop-eyed at the hoop.
     "It's not stopping!" he said aloud, moving his eyes  from the  hoop  to
Throaty and back again.
     "What do you mean it's not stopping?" Throaty asked carefully and moved
away.
     "I put it on my finger and gave it a spin, just for the hell of it, and
it  hasn't stopped for  a  whole minute!" Bones  lumped up and,  holding his
finger extended before him, ran behind the curtain. The silvery hoop twirled
smoothly in front of him like a propeller.
     "What the hell did you bring us?" Throaty asked.
     "God knows! I had no idea--if I had, I'd have asked more for it."
     Throaty stared at him, then got up  and went behind the curtain. Voices
started  babbling  immediately.  Redrick picked up a magazine from the floor
and  flipped  through it. It  was  chock-full of beauties, but  somehow they
nauseated him just  then.  Redrick's eyes roved around the room, looking for
something to drink. Then  he took  a pack from his inside pocket and counted
the  bills.  Everything was in order, but to  keep from  falling asleep,  he
counted  the other one.  Just  as he  was putting it  back into his  pocket,
Throaty came back.
     "You're lucky, son," he announced, sitting opposite  Redrick once more.
"Do you know what a perpetuum mobile is?"
     "Nope, we never studied that.
     "And  you  don't  need to," Throaty  said. He pulled  out another pack.
"That's  the  price  for the  first  specimen,"  he  said,  pulling  off the
wrapping. "For each new one you'll get two packs like this. Got it, son? Two
apiece.  But only on the condition  that no  one except you and I  ever know
about  it. Are we  agreed?" Redrick put the money in his pocket silently and
stood up.
     "I'm going," he said. "When and where for the next time?"
     Throaty also rose.
     "You'll  be called.  Wait  for  a call  every Friday between  nine  and
nine-thirty  in the  morning.  You'll get regards from  Phil and Hugh  and a
meeting will be set up
     Redrick nodded and  headed  for the door. Throaty followed, and put his
hand on his shoulder.
     "I want you to  understand one thing," he continued. "All this  is very
nice, charming, and so  on, and the hoop is simply marvelous,  but above all
we need  two  things: the  photos and  the container filled  up. Return  our
camera to  us, but with exposed film,  and our porcelain  container, but not
empty. Filled. And you'll never have to go into the Zone again.
     Redrick shook Throaty's  hand from his shoulder, unlocked the door, and
went out. Without turning he  walked down the  thickly  carpeted hallway and
sensed the  unwavering blue angelic  gaze  fixed on the back of his neck. He
didn't wait for the elevator but walked down from the eighth floor.
     Outside the Metropole  he  called a cab  and went to  the other side of
town. The driver was  a new one, someone Redrick didn't know, a  beak-nosed,
pimply fellow. One of the  hundreds that had poured into Harmont in the last
few  years to look  for exciting  adventures, untold riches, world fame,  or
some  special  religion.  They  poured   in  and  ended  up  as  chauffeurs,
construction  workers,  or  thugs--thirsting,  wretched,  tortured  by vague
desires, profoundly  disillusioned, and certain that  they  had been tricked
once again. Half of them,  after hanging around for a month or two, returned
to their homes, cursing,  and spreading the word of their disillusionment to
all the  countries  of  the  world. A  very few  became stalkers and quickly
perished before they had  caught onto the  tricks of the trade. Some managed
to  get  a job at the institute, but only  the best-educated and smartest of
them,  who  could at least work  as lab assistants. The rest  wasted evening
after evening in  bars, brawled over some  difference of opinion, girls,  or
just because they were drunk, and drove the municipal  police, the army, and
the guards out of their minds.
     The  pimply driver  reeked  of liquor a mile away,  and  his eyes  were
rabbit  red, but  he  was  very excited and told Redrick how that  morning a
stiff from the  cemetery  showed up  on  their block. "He  came  back to his
house,  and  the  house  had  been locked  up  for years,  and everyone  had
moved--his  widow,  an old lady now, and his daughter and her  husband,  and
their children. He had died, the neighbors said, some thirty years ago, that
is, before the Visitation, and now there he was. He walked around the house,
sniffed  and scratched, and then  sat by  the fence  and waited. People came
round from the whole neighborhood. They stared and  stared but were  afraid,
of course,  to  come  close.  Finally somebody got a bright idea--they broke
open the  door to  his  house, making an entrance for him.  And what do  you
think? He  got up,  went  in, and shut the door  behind him. I was  late for
work, so I  don't  know  how it  turned  out, but  I do know  that they were
planning to call the institute and have someone come  over  and  get him the
hell out of there.
     "Stop," Redrick said. "Let me off right here.''
     He rummaged  in  his pocket. He had no  change and  had to  break a new
bill. Then he stood in the  doorway  and waited for the  cab to drive  away.
Buzzard's  cottage wasn't too bad: two stories,  a glassed-in veranda with a
pool table, a well-tended garden, a greenhouse, and a white gazebo under the
apple trees. A  filigree iron fence painted  light green  surrounded it ail.
Redrick pushed the bell several times, the gate swung open with a creak, and
Redrick slowly moved up  the shady path, with  rose bushes planted along the
edges. Hamster was already standing on the porch. He was gnarled, black, and
trembling with the desire to be of service. Impatiently  he turned sideways,
lowered  one trembling  leg  in  search  of support,  steadied  himself, and
dragged the other foot to meet its mate. His right arm shook convulsively in
Redrick's direction, as if to say, coming, coming, any minute.
     "Hey, Red!" a woman's voice called from the garden.
     Redrick turned  his head and saw  bare  tanned shoulders, a  bright red
mouth, and a waving hand among  the greenery next to the lacy  white roof of
the gazebo. He nodded to Hamster, turned from the path, and breaking through
the rose bushes, headed for the gazebo along the soft green grass.
     A large red mat was  spread on the lawn, and Dina Burbridge was sitting
regally on  it with a glass in her hand and a miniscule  bathing suit on her
body; a book  with a bright cover  lay on the mat and an  ice bucket with  a
slender bottle neck peering over the edge sat in the shade nearby.
     "Hi, Red!" Dina Burbridge said, greeting him with a wave  of the glass.
"Where's the old man? Don't tell me he's messed up again?"
     Redrick stood over her with the briefcase in his hands behind his back.
Yes, Buzzard  sure managed to  wish  himself  up some marvelous children out
there  in  the  Zone.  She was all  silk and satin, firm and full, flawless,
without a single unnecessary wrinkle - hundred- twenty pounds of sugar-candy
flesh, and emerald eyes that had an inner  glow, a large wet mouth  and even
white  teeth, and raven hair, shining in the  sun and carelessly tossed over
one shoulder. The sun  was caressing her, pouring from her  shoulders to her
belly and hips, leaving deep  shadows between  her almost  naked breasts. He
stood above  her and looked her over  openly,  and  she  looked up  at  him,
laughing understandingly, and then  raised  the  glass to her lips  and took
several sips.
     "You  want?" she asked, licking her  lips. She waited just  long enough
for him to get the double entendre and then handed him the glass.
     He turned and looked  until he  found a chaise longue in the  shade. He
sat down and stretched his legs.
     "Burbridge is in the hospital," he said. "They're going to amputate his
legs."
     Still smiling, she looked at him with one eye. The other was covered by
the  heavy hair that fell over  her shoulder. But her  smile  had  frozen--a
sugary  grin on  a tan face. Then  she swirled the glass, listening  to  the
tinkle of the ice cubes.
     "Both legs?"
     "Both. Maybe below the knees, maybe above."
     She  put down  the  glass and pushed  back her  hair. She was no longer
smiling.
     "Too bad," she said. "And that means you...."
     Dina Burbridge was the one person he could have told how it happened in
all the details. He could have even told her how they drove back,  his brass
knuckles ready, and how Burbridge had begged --not for himself even, but for
the children, for her and for Archie, and  promised him the Golden Ball. But
he didn't tell her. He pulled out a pack of money from his breast pocket and
tossed  it onto the red mat right  at her long naked  legs. The notes fanned
out in a rainbow.  Dina absentmindedly picked up several  and examined them,
as though she had never seen one before but wasn't that interested.
     "This is the last earnings, then," she said.
     Redrick leaned over  from the chaise longue  and pulled the bottle from
the ice  bucket. He looked  at the  label. Water was dripping along the dark
glass and Redrick held the bottle  away from  himself, so as not  to drip on
his pants. He did not  like expensive whiskey, but he could force himself to
have  a slug at a time like this. He was just about to put the bottle to his
mouth  when he was stopped  by indistinct sounds of protestation behind him.
He looked around and saw that Hamster was painfully dragging his feet across
the lawn, holding  a glass of clear liquid in both hands.  The exertion  was
making  the sweat pour off his  dark wooly head, and his  bloodshot eyes had
practically  popped  out of their  sockets.  When he saw  that  Redrick  was
looking at him  he extended the  glass  in  despair  and sort of  mooed  and
howled, opening his toothless mouth ineffectually.
     "I'll wait, I'll  wait," Redrick said and shoved the bottle back in the
bucket.
     Hamster  finally limped over, gave  Redrick the glass, and  patted  his
shoulder shyly with his arthritic hand.
     "Thanks, Dixon," Redrick said seriously. "That's just what I need right
now. As usual, you're right on top of things."
     And  while  Hamster  shook his  head in embarrassment  and  rapture and
convulsively slapped  himself on  the  hip with his good arm, Redrick raised
the glass, nodded to him, and gulped down half. Then he looked at Dina.
     "You want?" he asked meaning the glass.
     She  did not reply. She was  folding  a  bill in half and  in half once
again, and then again.
     "Cut it out," he said. "You won't be lost. Your old man...."
     She interrupted him.
     "And  so  you  dragged him out,"  she said. She wasn't asking, she  was
stating  a  fact. "You  carried him, you jerk, through the  whole  Zone, you
redheaded cretin, you dragged that bastard  on your back- bone, you ass. You
blew an opportunity like that."
     He was watching her, his glass forgotten. She got up and stood in front
of  him,  walking over the scattered money, and stopped, her  clenched fists
jammed into her smooth hip, blocking out the  entire  world for him with her
marvelous body smelling of perfume and sweet sweat.
     "He's got all  of you idiots wrapped around his finger.  He'll walk all
over  your  bones.  rust wait and see, he'll walk  on your  thick skulls  on
crutches.  He'll show you the meaning of  brotherly love and mercy!" She was
screaming.  "I'll bet  he promised you the  Golden Ball, right? The map, the
traps, right?  Jerk!  I can see by your dumb  face  that he  did! Just wait,
he'll give you  a map. Lord have  mercy on the soul  of  the redheaded  fool
Redrick Schuhart."
     Redrick  got up slowly and slapped her face hard. She shut up,  sank to
the grass, and buried her face in her hands.
     "You fool ... Red," she muttered. "To blow an opportunity like that."
     Redrick  looked down at her and  finished the  vodka. He  thrust it  at
Hamster without looking  at him. There was  nothing to talk about. Some fine
kids Burbridge conjured up in the Zone. Loving and respectful.
     He went  into the street  and hailed a cab. He told the driver to go to
the  Borscht. He  had to  finish  up  his affairs. He was  dying for  sleep,
everything was swimming before his eyes, and  he fell asleep in the cab, his
body slumped over the briefcase, and awoke only when the driver shook him.
     "We're here, mister.
     "Where are we?" he looked around. "I told you the bank.
     "No way, buddy. You said the Borscht. Here's the Borscht."
     "OK," Redrick grumbled "I must have dreamed it."
     He paid up and got out, barely able to move his heavy legs. The asphalt
was steaming in the sun,  and it was very  hot. Redrick realized that he was
soaked, that there was  a  bad taste  in  his mouth, and that his eyes  were
tearing. He  looked around before going in. As usual at this time of day the
street was  deserted.  Businesses weren't  open  yet,  and  the Borscht  was
supposed to  be  closed  too, but Ernest was at  his  post  already,  wiping
glasses and giving dirty  looks to the trio  sopping up beer at  the  corner
table. The chairs had not been  removed from the other tables. An unfamiliar
porter in a white  jacket was mopping  the floor and  another was struggling
with  a  case  of  beer behind Ernest. Redrick  went up to the  bar, put the
briefcase on the bar, and said hello. Ernest muttered something that was not
exactly welcoming.
     "Give me a beer," Redrick said and yawned convulsively.
     Ernest  slammed an empty  mug on the table, grabbed  a  bottle from the
refrigerator, opened  it, and upended it over the mug. Redrick, covering his
mouth with his hand, stared at Ernest's  hand. It was  trembling. The bottle
hit  the edge  of the mug several times. Redrick looked up at Ernest's face.
His heavy eyelids were  lowered, his puffy mouth twisted, and his fat cheeks
drooping. The porter was mopping right under Redrick's feet, the guys in the
corner were arguing loudly over  the races, and  the other porter  with  the
crates  backed into  Ernest  so  hard that  he reeled.  The  man  mumbled an
apology. Ernest spoke in a cramped voice.
     "Did you bring it?"
     "Bring what?" Redrick looked over his  shoulder. One of  the guys stood
up  lazily and went  to the  door. He stopped  in  the  doorway  to  light a
cigarette.
     "Let's go  talk,"  Ernest  said. The porter with the  mop was  now also
between Redrick and  the door. A big black man, along the lines  of Gutalin,
but twice as broad.
     "Let's  go," Redrick said and  picked up the briefcase. He didn't  feel
sleepy anymore, in either eye.
     He went behind the bar and squeezed past the  porter with the cases  of
beer.  The  porter  had apparently caught  his finger.  He  was sucking  his
fingertip and  watching Redrick. He was a big fellow, with a broken nose and
cauliflower ears. Ernest went  into the back room, and Redrick followed him,
because  now the three guys from the corner table were blocking the door and
the  porter  with  the mop was  standing near the  curtains  that led to the
storeroom.
     In the  back room Ernest stepped  aside and sat on a chair by the wall.
Captain  Quarterblad,  yellow  and angry, stood  up  from  the  table.  From
somewhere on  the left a huge UN trooper appeared,  his helmet  pulled  down
over his eyes, and quickly frisked him with his large  hands. He slowed down
at his right pocket and extracted the brass knuckles. He prodded Redrick  in
the captain s direction. Redrick approached the  table and set the briefcase
in front of Captain Quarterblad.
     "You bloodsucker," he said to Ernest.
     Ernest raised his eyebrows and shrugged one shoulder. It was all clear.
The two porters in the doorway were smirking, and there  were no other doors
and the window was barred from the outside.
     Captain  Quarterblad, his face contorted by disgust, was digging around
with both hands in the briefcase, and  taking out the swag and Putting in on
the table: two small empties; nine batteries; various sizes of black sprays,
sixteen pieces in a polyethylene  package; two  perfectly preserved sponges;
and one jar of carbonated clay....
     "Anything in your pockets?" Captain Quarterblad asked softly.
     "Empty them.
     "Snakes," Redrick said. "Skunks."
     He  pulled  out  a pack  of  bills  and flung  it  on  the table.  They
scattered.
     "Aha!" the captain said. "Any more?"
     "Lousy  toads!" Redrick shouted and threw the second pack on the floor.
"There you go. I hope you choke on it!"
     "Very interesting," the captain said calmly. "Now pick it up."
     "The hell I will," Redrick said, putting his hands behind his back.
     "Your  slaves will pick it  up. You can  pick it up yourself, for all I
care."
     "Pick  up the money, stalker," Captain Quarterblad said without raising
his voice, leaning his fist on the table and straining toward Redrick.
     They  stared  at  each other for  a  few  seconds,  and  then  Redrick,
muttering curses under his breath, crouched down,  and reluctantly set about
picking up the money. The porters were snickering behind his back and the UN
trooper snorted gleefully
     "Don't snort at me!" Redrick said. "You'll lose your snot."
     He was crawling around on his hands and knees, picking up the notes one
by one, moving closer and closer to the dark brass  ring lying peacefully on
the  dusty parquet floor. He turned to  get better  access. He kept shouting
obscenities, all the ones he could  remember and ones he was making up along
the  way. When the moment was right, he  shut up,  tensed, grabbed the ring,
pulled it up with all his strength, and before the opened trapdoor landed on
the floor he  had jumped head first  into  the gray  cold prison of the wine
cellar.
     He fell  on his hands,  somersaulted,  jumped up, and ran hunched over,
seeing  nothing, counting on his memory and luck, into the narrow passageway
between cases of  bottles, knocking them over as he went past, hearing  them
fall  and  shatter  in the  passage behind  him.  Slipping, he  ran  up some
invisible steps, threw his body against the  door with its rusty hinges, and
found himself  in Ernest's garage. He  was shaking and  panting,  there were
bloody spots swimming before his eyes and his heart was beating heavily with
strong jolts right in his throat, but  he did not stop  for a second. He ran
to the far corner, and scraping his hands, tore into the mountain of garbage
that hid the place  where the boards had been removed  from the wall. He lay
down on his stomach and  crawled through, hearing his jacket tear,  and when
he was out in the narrow courtyard he crouched down behind the garbage cans,
pulled off his jacket, threw away  his tie, gave  himself a quick once-over,
brushed  off his pants, straightened up, and ran into the yard. He dove into
a low  smelly tunnel that led  to the  next  courtyard. He  listened for the
whine of the police sirens as he ran, but there weren't any yet,  and he ran
faster, scaring playing children, dodging  hanging laundry, crawling through
holes in rotten  fences-trying to get  out  of the neighborhood as  fast  as
possible, before  Captain  Quarterblad could cordon it off. He knew the area
very  well.  He  had played  in all  the  yards and cellars,  the  abandoned
laundries, and the  coal cellars. He  had plenty  of acquaintances and  even
friends here, and under different circumstances he would have had no trouble
in hiding out,  even  for a week, in the neighborhood. But  he hadn't made a
daring escape from arrest under Captain Quarterblad's  very  nose, adding an
easy twelve months to his sentence, for that.
     He was very lucky. On Seventh Street a  parade  of some brother hood or
other was making raucous progress down the street. Two hundred of them, just
as disheveled and  filthy as he was. Some  looked  worse, as though they had
spent the evening crawling through holes in fences, spilling the contents of
garbage cans on themselves, maybe after having spent the night rowdily  in a
coal bin.  He ducked out  of  a doorway into the crowd,  cutting  across it,
pushing and shoving, stepping  on feet,  getting  an occasional  fist in his
face, and returning the  favor, until he broke out on the other  side of the
street and ducked into another  doorway.  Just then  the familiar disgusting
wail of the  patrol cars resounded, and the  parade came to a grinding halt,
folding up like  an accordion. But he was in  a different neighborhood  now,
and Captain Quarterblad had no way of knowing which one.
     He approached his own garage from the side of the radio and electronics
store, and he had to  wait  while the workmen  loaded a van  with television
sets. He  made  himself  comfortable in  the  ragged  lilac  bushes  by  the
windowless side  of the  neighboring  houses,  caught his  breath and  had a
cigarette. He smoked greedily, crouching down and leaning against tile rough
fireproof wall, touching his cheek from time to time,  trying to  still  the
nervous tie. He  thought and  thought  and  thought. When the  van  with the
workers  pulled away honking into  the driveway,  he laughed and said softly
after them: "Thanks,  boys, you held up this fool ... and let me  think." He
started  moving quickly, but without  rushing, cleverly and  premeditatedly,
like he worked in the Zone.
     He  entered  his garage through the hidden  passage, noiselessly lifted
the old seat, carefully pulled the roll of paper from the bag in the basket,
and slipped it  inside his shirt. He took an old worn leather jacket from  a
hook, found a greasy cap in the corner,  and pulled it down  over  his eyes.
The cracks in the door  let narrow rays of light with  dancing dust into the
gloomy garage, and kids were yelling and playing outside. As he was leaving,
he heard his daughter's voice. He  put his eye against the widest  crack and
watched Monkey wave two balloons and  run around the swings. Three old women
with knitting  in  their laps were  sitting  on a nearby bench, watching her
with  pursed lips. Exchanging  their lousy opinions, the dried-up  hags. The
kids were  fine, playing with her as though she were just like them.  It was
worth all the bribery--he  bull;  them a slide, and  a doll house,  and  the
swings--and  the bench  that  the old biddies were on. "All right, he  said,
tore himself away  from the crack,  looked around the garage one  more time,
and crawled into the hole.
     In the  southwest part of town, near the abandoned gas  station  at the
end  of  Miner Street, there was a  phone  booth. God only knew who used  it
nowadays--all the houses around it were  bearded up  and beyond  it  was the
seemingly endless empty lot that used  to be the town dump. Redrick sat down
in the  shade  of the booth and stuck  his hand  into the crack below it. He
felt the dusty wax paper  and the  handle of the gun wrapped in it; the lead
box of bullets was there, too, as well as the bag with the bracelets and the
old wallet with fake  documents. His hiding place was in order. Then he took
off his jacket and cap  and felt inside his shirt.  He sat  for a minute  or
more, hefting  in  his hand the porcelain container and the  invincible  and
inevitable death it contained. And he felt the nervous tic come back.
     "Schuhart," he  muttered, not hearing  his  own  voice,  "what are  you
doing, you snake? You scum, they can kill us all with  this thing."  He held
his  twitching  cheek,  but  it didn't help. "Bastards,"  he said about  the
workers who had been loading the TV sets. "You got  in my way. I  would have
thrown it back into the Zone, the bitch, and it would have been all over.
     He  looked  around sadly. The hot air was shimmering over  the  cracked
cement, the hoarded-up windows looked at him gloomily, and tumbleweed rolled
around the lot. He was alone.
     "All right," he said decisively. "Every man for himself, only God takes
care of everybody. I've had it."
     Hurrying, so as not to change his  mind,  he stuffed the container into
the cap, and wrapped  the cap  in the jacket. Then he got On his knees,  and
leaned against the booth. It moved. The bulky package fit  in the  bottom of
the pit under the  booth, with  room  to  spare.  He carefully  replaced the
booth, shook it to  see  how steady  it  was, and got up,  brushing off  his
hands.
     "That's it. It's settled."
     He got into the heat of the phone booth, deposited a coin, and dialed.
     "Guta," he said. "Please, don't worry. They caught  me again." He could
hear  her shuddering sigh. He quickly added:  "It's  a minor offense, six to
eight months, with  visiting  rights.  We'll manage. And  you'll have money,
they'll send it  to you." She was still silent. "To-  morrow morning they'll
call you down to the command post, we'll see each other then. Bring Monkey."
     "Will there be a search?" she asked.
     "Let them.  The house is clean. Don't  worry, keep  your tail  up-- you
know,  bright-eyed  and  bushy-tailed.  You  married  a  stalker,  so  don't
complain. See you tomorrow. And  remember, I didn't call. I kiss your little
nose."
     He hung up  abruptly and stood  for a few seconds, eyes shut and  teeth
clenched so  tightly there  was  a tingling  in his  ears. Then he deposited
another coin and dialed another number.
     "Listening," said Throaty.
     "It's Schuhart. Listen carefully and don't interrupt."
     "Schuhart? What Schuhart?" asked Throaty in a natural manner.
     "Don't interrupt, I said! They caught me, I  ran, and I'm going to turn
myself in now. I'm going to get  two and a half or three years. My wife will
be penniless. You take care  of her. So that  she needs nothing, understand?
Understand, I said?"
     "Go on," said Throaty.
     "Not far from the place where we first met, there's a phone booth. It's
the only one, you won't mistake it. The  porcelain is under it.  If you want
it,  take it, if you  don't, don't. But my wife must be  taken  care of.  We
still have many years of  playing together. If I come back and find out  you
double-crossed me ... I don't suggest that you do. Understand?"
     "I understand  everything," said Throaty. "Thanks." After  a  pause, he
asked: "Maybe you want a lawyer?"
     "No," said Redrick. "Every last cent goes to my wife. My regards."
     He  hung up, looked  around, dug his hands into his pants pockets,  and
slowly went up Miner Street between the empty, bearded-up houses.