3. RICHARD  H.  NOONAN,  AGE  51,


 SUPERVISOR  OF  ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
SUPPLIES FOR THE HARMONT BRANCH OF THE IIEC


     Richard  H. Noonan was sitting at the desk in his study doodling on the
legal size pad. He was  also smiling sympathetically, nodding his bald head,
and not listening to  his visitor.  He was simply  waiting  for  a telephone
call, and his visitor, Dr. Pilman, was lazily  lecturing him.  Or  imagining
that  he  was  lecturing  him. Or trying  to  convince  himself that  he was
lecturing him.
     "We'll keep  all that  in  mind,"  Noonan  finally said,  crossing  out
another group of five lines and flipping down the pad's cover. "It really is
shocking."
     Valentine's slender  hand neatly flicked the  ashes  from his cigarette
into the ashtray.
     "And what precisely will you keep in mind?" he inquired politely.
     "Why, everything that  you  said," Noonan answered  cheerfully, leaning
back in his armchair. "To the very last word."
     "And what did I say?"
     "That  doesn't  matter," Noonan  said. "We'll keep  whatever you say in
mind."
     Valentine (Dr. Valentine Pilman, Nobel  Prize winner)  was  sitting  in
front  of him  in a deep armchair. He was small, delicate,  and neat.  There
wasn't  a  stain on  his  suede  jacket  or  a  wrinkle in his  trousers.  A
blindingly  white  shirt,  a  severe  solid-colored  tie,  shining shoes.  A
malicious smile on  his thin pale lips and enormous  dark glasses  over  his
eyes. His low broad forehead was topped with a bristly crewcut.
     "In  my opinion, you're being paid  a fantastic salary for nothing," he
said. "And on top of that, in my opinion, you're a saboteur as well, Dick."
     "Shhhhhh!" Noonan whispered. "For God's sake, not so loud."
     "Actually,"  Valentine  continued, "I've been  watching you for  a long
time. In my opinion, you don't work at all."
     "Just a minute here!"  Noonan interrupted  and waved his pink finger at
him.  "What  do you  mean I don't work? Is there  even one replacement order
that hasn't been handled?"
     "I don't know," Valentine said and flicked his ash again. '.We get good
equipment  and we get bad equipment.  We get the good  stuff more often, but
what you have to do with it I'm sure I don't know."
     "Well, if it weren't for me," Noonan countered,  "the  good stuff would
be  much rarer.  And besides, you scientists  are always breaking  the  good
equipment, and then calling  for a replacement, and who covers for you then?
For example...."
     The phone rang and Noonan broke off and grabbed the receiver.
     "Mr. Noonan?" the secretary asked "Mr. Lemchen again."
     "Put him on."
     Valentine got up,  brought two  fingers  to  his  forehead as a sign of
farewell, and went out. Small, straight, and well-proportioned.
     "Mr. Noonan?" the familiar drawling voice spoke in the phone.
     "I'm listening."
     "You're not easy to reach at work, Mr. Noonan."
     "A new shipment has arrived."
     "Yes, know  about it  already. Mr.  Noonan, I'm  here only for  a short
time. There are a  few  questions that  must  be  discussed  in person.  I'm
referring to the latest contracts with Mitsubishi Denshi. The legal side."
     "At your service."
     "Then,  if you have no objection, be  at our offices in a half hour. Is
that convenient?"
     "Perfect. In a half hour."
     Richard  Noonan  hung up,  stood, and rubbing his  plump hands,  walked
around the office.  He even began singing some pop ditty, but broke off on a
particularly sour  note and  jovially laughed at  himself. He picked up  his
hat, tossed his raincoat over his arm, and went out into the reception area.
     "Honey,"  he  said to the secretary, "I'm off to see  some clients. You
stay here, hold the fort, as they say, and I'll  bring  you 3 present when I
get back."
     She blossomed. Noonan blew her a kiss and rolled out into the corridors
of the institute. Attempts were  made  to stop him a few times -- he wangled
out of conversations, joking, asking people to hold the fort without him, to
keep  their  cool, and  finally  emerged unscathed  and uncaught, waving his
unopened pass under the nose of the sergeant on duty.
     Heavy  clouds  hung  low  over  the city. It was muggy  and  the  first
hesitant drops of  rain were scattering  on the sidewalk  like  little black
stars. Spreading his coat over his head  and shoulders,  Noonan trotted past
the long row of cars to his  Peugeot,  dove in, and tossed  the coat in  the
back seat. He took  out  the round  black  stick  of the so-so from his suit
pocket, put it in the jack in  the dashboard,  and pushed it  in to the hilt
with  his thumb. He wriggled  around, getting more  comfortable  behind  the
wheel,  and pressed the  accelerator pedal. The  Peugeot  silently drove out
into the middle of the street  and raced toward  the exit from the  Pre-Zone
Area.
     The  rain  came pouring  down suddenly,  as though  a bucket  had  been
overturned in the sky. The road got slippery and the car swerved at corners.
Noonan turned  on the wipers and slowed  down. So, he thought,  they got the
report. Now  they'll  be praising  me. Well, I'm all for that.  I like being
praised.  Especially by Mr. Lemchen  himself. In  spite of himself.  Strange
isn't it?  Why do we like being praised? It doesn't get you any more  money.
Glory? What kind of glory can we have? "He's famous: three people know about
him now." Well, let's say four, counting Bayliss.  What a funny creature man
is! It seems we  enjoy praise just  for  itself.  The way children  like ice
cream.  And  it's so  stupid.  How can  I be better in my own eyes? As if  I
didn't know myself? Good  old fat Richard H. Noonan?  By the  way, what does
that "H"  stand for? What do you know about that? And there's nobody to ask,
either.  I can't ask Mr. Lemchen about  it.  Oh, remember! Herbert!  Richard
Herbert Noonan. Boy, it's pouring.
     He turned onto Central and suddenly thought how the city had grown over
the  past few years.  Huge skyscrapers.  They're  building  another one over
there. What will it be? Oh, the Luna Complex-- the  world's best jazz, and a
variety  show, and so on. Everything for our  glorious troops and our  brave
tourists, especially the elderly ones, and for the noble knights of science.
And the suburbs are being emptied.
     Yes, I'd like to know how this will all end. Well, ten years ago, I was
sure I knew. Impenetrable  police lines. DMZ  twenty  miles wide. Scientists
and soldiers, and no one else. The horrible sore on the face of an odor that
he had long ago given  up trying  to identify, and he threw open the door at
the end of the corridor and went in. Instead of the  secretary  there was  a
very  tan, unfamiliar young man at  the desk. He was in shirtsleeves. He was
digging around in  the guts of some electronic device that was set up on the
desk instead  of the typewriter. Richard  Noonan hung up his  coat and  hat,
smoothed  what was  left of his hair with both hands, and looked inquiringly
at the young man. He nodded. Noonan opened the door to the office.
     Mr. Lemchen rose heavily from the big leather  armchair in front of the
draped window. His angular general's face was wrinkled either in a welcoming
smile  or in displeasure with the weather or,  perhaps, in a struggle with a
sneeze.
     "Here you are. Come in, make yourself comfortable."
     Noonan looked around for a  place to make himself comfortable and could
find nothing except for a hard, straight-backed chair tucked away behind the
desk. He  sat  on the edge of the desk. His jovial mood  was dissipating for
some reason--he himself did not understand why. Suddenly  he understood that
he was not going to  be praised today On  the contrary. The day of wrath, he
thought philosophically and steeled himself for the worst.
     "Please smoke,"  Mr. Lemchen offered,  lowering  himself back into  the
armchair.
     "No thank you, I don't smoke."
     Mr. Lemchen nodded  as though his worst suspicions had been  confirmed,
pressed  his  fingertips together  in  a steeple in  front of his face,  and
carefully examined them for a while.
     "I  suppose  that  we  won't be discussing the  legal  affairs  of  the
Mitsubishi Denshi Company," he finally said.
     That was a joke. Richard Noonan smiled readily.
     "As you like!"
     It was devilishly uncomfortable on the desk, and his feet did not reach
the floor.
     "I'm  sorry to tell you, Richard, that your report created an extremely
favorable impression upstairs."
     "Hmm," Noonan mumbled. Here it comes, he thought.
     "They were even going to  recommend you for a  decoration," Mr. Lemchen
continued. "However, I talked them into waiting  on it. And I was right." He
tore himself  away  from  contemplating the pattern of the  ten  fingers and
looked up at Noonan. "You ask why I behaved in such a cautious manner?"
     "You probably had some justification," Noonan said in a dull tone.
     "Yes, I  had.  What  are  the  results  of  your  report, Richard?  The
Metropole  gang is liquidated. Through  your efforts.  The Green Flower gang
was  apprehended  red-handed.  Brilliant  work. Also  yours. Quasimodo,  the
Wandering Musicians,  and all the other gangs,  I don't remember  the names,
disbanded because they knew the jig was up and  they would be taken any day.
All this  really did  happen, it's all been verified by  other  sources. The
battlefield  was cleared.  Your  victory,  Richard.  The enemy retreated  in
disarray, suffering heavy losses. Have I given an accurate account?"
     "In any case," Noonan said carefully, "during the last three months the
Bow of materials  from  the  Zone  through  Harmont  has  stopped. At  least
according to my information."
     "The enemy has retreated, is that not so?"
     "Well, if you insist on the metaphor, yes."
     "No! The point is that this enemy never retreats. I know that for sure.
In rushing a  victory  report, Richard, you have  demonstrated your  lack of
maturity. That is why I suggested they hold off rewarding you immediately."
     Go  blow, you and  your  awards,  thought Noonan, swinging his foot and
glumly  watching his shiny toe.  Stick  your awards  in  the  cobwebs in the
attic!  And all  I need is  a little  didacticism  from you. I know who  I'm
dealing with without your lectures. Don't tell me about the enemy. Just tell
me straight  out--when, where,  and how  I  messed up, what  those  bastards
managed to steal, where and how they found cracks  and without the bullshit,
I'm no raw recruit, I'm over half a century old and I'm not sitting here for
the sake of your stupid decorations and orders.
     "What  have  you  heard  about  the Golden Ball?" Mr. Lemchen  suddenly
asked.
     God, what does the Golden Ball have to do with all this, Noonan thought
in irritation. I wish you and your indirect manner would go to hell.
     "The Golden Ball is a legend," he reported in a dull voice. "A mythical
artifact located  in  the  Zone in  the  shape and form of  a gold ball that
grants human wishes."
     "Any wishes?"
     "According to the  canonic  version of the legend, any wish. There are,
however, variant versions."
     "All right. What have you heard about death lamps?"
     "Eight years ago  a  stalker by the name  of Stefan Norman, nick- named
Four-Eyes, brought out  an apparatus from  the  Zone that, as far  as can be
judged, was some kind of ray-emitting system  fatal to earth organisms. This
Four-eyes offered  the apparatus  to  the institute.  They did not agree  on
price.  Four-eyes  reentered  the  Zone  and never  came back.  The  present
whereabouts of  the apparatus  is unknown. People at the institute are still
tearing  their hair  out over  it. Hugh  from the Metropole, whom  you know,
offered any sum that could be written on a check."
     "Is that all?" Mr. Lemchen asked.
     "That's all." Noonan  was  blatantly looking around the room.  The room
was boring, there was nothing to look at.
     "All right. And what have you heard about lobster eyes?"
     "What kind of eyes?"
     "Lobster eyes. Lobsters. You know? With claws."  Lemchen  made clawlike
movements with his fingers.
     "I've never heard of them," Noonan said frowning.
     "And what about rattling napkins?"
     Noonan  climbed down from the desk and  stood before Lemchen,  hands in
pockets.
     "I don't know a thing about them. How about you?"
     "Unfortunately, neither  do  I.  Nor  about the  lobster  eyes  or  the
rattling napkins. Nevertheless, they exist."
     "In my Zone?" Noonan asked.
     "Sit  down,  sit down," Mr. Lemchen said  waving his  hand. "Our little
talk is just starting. Sit down."
     Noonan  walked around  the  desk and  sat on the  hard  chair with  the
straight back.
     What's he aiming at? he thought feverishly. What is all this new stuff?
They probably found it in the other Zones and he's trying to make a fool out
of  me,  the ass. He  never liked me,  the old  devil, he can't  forget  the
limerick.
     "Let's continue our little examination," Lemchen announced  as  he drew
aside an edge of the drape and peered  out the window. "It's pouring. I like
it."  He released  the  curtain, sat back in  his  chair, and looking at the
ceiling, asked: "How's old Burbridge getting along?"
     "Burbridge?  Buzzard Burbridge is under  surveillance. He's  a cripple,
well-to-do.  No connection with  the  Zone. He owns  four bars and  a  dance
school, and  he organizes  picnics  for  officers from  the garrison and for
tourists.  His daughter Dina leads  a dissolute life.  His son  Arthur  just
graduated from law school."
     Mr.  Lemchen nodded in  satisfaction.  "And what is  Creon the  Maltese
doing?"
     "He  is  one  of  the few active  stalkers.  He was mixed  up with  the
Quasimodo gang, and now he peddles his swag to the institute through me. I'm
giving him a free  rein:  somebody  will pick him off sooner or later.  He's
been drinking a lot lately, and I'm afraid he won't last too long."
     "Contact with Burbridge?"
     "He's courting Dina. No success."
     "Very good," Mr. Lemchen said. "What do you hear about Red Schuhart?"
     "He got  out of  prison last month. No financial difficulties. He tried
to emigrate,  but he  has. .  .  ."  Noonan was silent. "Well, he has family
problems. He has no time for the Zone."
     "Is that all?"
     "That's all."
     "Not much," Mr. Lemchen said. "How are things with Lucky Carter?"
     "He hasn't been a stalker for many years. He sells used cars and he has
a  shop that converts cars to run on so-so's.  Four kids, his wife died last
year. Has a mother-in-law."
     Lemchen nodded.
     "Well,  who  have I forgotten of the  oldsters?" he  asked in  a kindly
tone.
     "You  forgot  Jonathan Miles,  known  as Cactus.  He's in the hospital,
dying of cancer. And you forgot Gutalin."
     "Yes, yes, what about Gutalin?"
     "He's still the same. He has a gang of three men. They go into the Zone
for  days  at a  time,  destroying everything  they  come  across.  His  old
organization, the Fighting Angels, broke up."
     "Why?"
     "Well, as you recall,  they used to buy up swag and  Gutalin would take
it back into the Zone. The devil's  things to the devil. Now there's nothing
to  buy, and besides, the new  director of  the institute  got the  cops  on
them."
     "I understand," Mr. Lemchen said. "What about the young ones?"
     "Well,  the  young ones, they  come  and go. There are five or six with
some  experience, but lately there's  been  no one  to fence  the  swag  and
they're lost. I'm training them little by little.  I think that stalking has
almost disappeared  in my Zone, chief. The old  ones are retired,  the young
ones don't know how, and  the  prestige of the trade is slipping. Technology
is taking over. Now there are robot stalkers."
     "Yes, yes,  I've  heard about that.  But the machines  use up too  much
energy. Or am I mistaken?"
     "It's just a question of time. They'll be worth it soon."
     "How soon?"
     "Five or six years."
     Mr. Lemchen nodded again.
     "By  the  way you  probably  don't  know  that  the enemy  has  started
employing the automated stalkers?"
     "In my Zone?" Noonan asked, on guard.
     "In  yours,  too.  They  base themselves  in  Rexopolis,  transfer  the
equipment by helicopter  over the mountains  to Snake Canyon, to Black Lake,
and the foothills of Mount Boulder."
     "But that's the periphery of the Zone," Noonan said suspiciously.
     "It's empty there. What could they find?"
     "Little,  very  little. But they find it. Anyway, I was  just informing
you, it  doesn't  concern  you.  Let's recapitulate.  There  are  almost  no
professional  stalkers left  in  Harmont. The ones  who have  stayed have no
relationship to the Zone  any more. The young ones are lost and undergoing a
process  of being  tamed.  The enemy is shattered, scattered,  and lying low
somewhere licking his  wounds. There is no  swag,  and when it does  appear,
there's nobody to  sell it to.  The  illegal removal of  material  from  the
Harmont Zone ceased three months ago. Correct?"
     Noonan  was silent. Now, he  thought. Now he's going  to give it to me.
But where was the gap? It must have been a really big one, too. Well, do it,
you old fart! Don't drag it out.
     "I  don't hear  your reply," Mr. Lemchen said cupping  his hand to  his
wrinkled hairy ear.
     "All right, chief,"  Noonan said  somberly. "Enough.  You've boiled and
fried me, now serve me at the table."
     Mr. Lemchen harrumphed vaguely.
     "You  have  absolutely  nothing  to  say for  yourself,"  he said  with
unexpected bitterness. "You stand there flapping your ears before authority,
how do you think I  felt day before yesterday?" He interrupted himself,  got
up,  and started  for  the  safe.  "In short, during  the  last two  months,
according to the information  we have, the enemy has  received more than six
thousand items  from the  various Zones." He stopped before the safe, patted
its painted side, and turned  sharply toward Noonan. "Don't comfort yourself
with  illusions!"  he   shouted.  "The   fingerprints   of   Burbridge!  The
fingerprints of the Maltese!  The fingerprints of Ben  Halevy the Nose, whom
you  did not  even  bother to mention! The fingerprints of Hindus Heresh and
Pygmy Zmyg! So  that's how you're training your youths!  Bracelets! Needles!
White  whirligigs! And  on top of  that--these lobsters' eyes, and  bitches'
rattles, and rattling  napkins, whatever they  are! The hell with them all!"
He interrupted  himself again,  returned to his  arm- chair, made a  steeple
with  his fingers, and  asked politely: "What do you think about  all  this,
Richard?"
     Noonan mopped his neck with his handkerchief.
     "I don't think anything about  it," he honestly  answered. "Forgive me,
chief, I'm a little ... let me catch my breath ... Burbridge! Burbridge  has
nothing to do with  the  Zone any more!  I know  his every step! He arranges
picnics and  drinking  parties at lakesides. He's  hauling it  in,  he  just
doesn't need the money. Excuse me, I  know I'm blabbing  nonsense, but I can
assure  you  that  I haven't lost sight of Burbridge since he got out of the
hospital."
     "I won't keep you any  longer,"  Mr. Lemchen said.  "I'm  giving  you a
week. Come up with some ideas as to how the material from the Zone gets into
the hands of Burbridge--and all the others. Good- bye."
     Noonan rose, nodded to Lemchen's profile, and still wiping his sweating
neck,  went  out into the  reception area. The  tan  young man  was smoking,
thoughtfully gazing into the  bowels of  the mangled  electronic  device. He
glanced over at Noonan---his eyes were empty and seemed to gaze inward.
     Richard Noonan shoved his  hat on his head, grabbed his rain- coat, and
went outside. Nothing like this has ever happened to me before. His thoughts
were confused and  rambling. I must--Ben  Halevy the Nose! He's even  gotten
himself  a  nickname!  When? He's just a little punk, a snotty-nosed  little
punk.  No, there's some- thing else going on! You legless  shmuck.  Buzzard,
you really got me this time. Caught me with my pants down. How could it have
happened?  just  like that time in  Singapore-face flat on  the  table, then
slammed against the wall....
     He got in the car and for some time looked around the dashboard for the
ignition key, forgetting everything. Rain was dripping from his hat onto his
lap.  He took it off and tossed  it into the back without  looking. Rain was
streaming across the windshield,  and  Richard  Noonan  thought that  it was
keeping him from  understanding  what  his next step should be.  He  punched
himself in  the  head. He felt  better. He immediately remembered that there
was  no  key and couldn't  be any because the so-so  was in his  pocket. The
permanent battery. And  you have to take  it out  of your pocket, dummy, and
stick  it  into  the  jack,  and  then  at  least  you'll be  able  to drive
somewhere-somewhere  far away from this building where the  old bastard  was
probably watching from a window.
     Noonan's hand froze as it was reaching for the so-so. Now I know who to
begin with. I'll  begin with  him, oh how I'll begin with him. Nobody's ever
begun with anybody the way I'll begin with him. And it'll be  a pleasure. He
turned on the wipers  and drove down  the  avenue, seeing  almost nothing in
front of him, but slowly  calming down. All right. Let  it be like it was in
Singapore.  After  all, it ended  well in Singapore. So what, I got my  face
slammed down on the table one lousy time! It could have been worse. It could
have been some other part of me and it could  have been something with nails
in  it instead of a table. All right, let's stay  on the  track. Where's  my
little establishment?  Can't see a  damn  thing.  Ah, here it is.  It wasn't
business hours, but the Five Minutes was as lit up as the Metropole. Shaking
himself like a dog  coming  out of  the  water,  Richard Noonan entered  the
brightly  lit room that reeked of tobacco, perfume, and stale champagne. Old
Penny, not in uniform yet, was sitting  at the counter eating something, his
fork in his fist. Spreading out her  huge breasts  on  the counter among the
empty glasses,  Ma- dame watched him eat.  The room had not yet been cleaned
up from last night.  When Noonan walked in, Madame turned her broad, heavily
made-up face toward him.  It was  angry at first, but  immediately dissolved
into a professional smile.
     "Hi!" she  said  in her  deep  voice.  "Mr. Noonan himself! Missed  the
girls?"
     Benny went on eating; he was as deaf as a doornail.
     "Greetings,  old lady! What do I need with the girls when I have a real
woman in front of me?"
     Benny  finally  noticed him. His horrible face, covered  with  blue and
purple scars, contorted into a welcoming smile.
     "Hello, boss! Came in out of the rain?"
     Noonan smiled in return and waved. He did  not like talking with Benny:
he had to shout all the time.
     "Where's my manager, folks?" he asked.
     "in his room," Madame answered. "He has to pay the taxes tomorrow.
     "Oh, those taxes!  All  right. Madame, please fix my favorite. I'll  be
right back."
     Stepping soundlessly on the thick synthetic carpeting, he went down the
hallway past the draped  doorways of the  cubicles--a picture of some flower
painted  on the wall  next to each one--turned  into  a  quiet dead end, and
opened the leather-covered door without knocking.
     Mosul Kitty sat behind  the desk, examining a painful sore  on his nose
in the mirror. He did not give a damn that he had to pay the taxes tomorrow.
The completely bare desk top  held only a jar with mercury salve and a glass
with  a  clear liquid.  Mosul Kitty raised his bloodshot eyes  at Noonan and
lumped up, dropping the mirror. Wordlessly, Noonan settled into the armchair
opposite him and  silently watched, while  he  muttered something about  the
damn rain and his rheumatism. Then he said:
     "Why don't you lock the door, pal."
     Mosul, his flat  feet slapping the  floor, ran Lip to  the door, turned
the key, and returned  to the desk. His hairy  head towered over Noonan, and
he stared loyally into his mouth. Noonan kept watching him through half-shut
eyes.  For  some  reason  he remembered  that Mosul  Kitty's real  name  was
Raphael. Mosul was famous for his huge  bony fists, purplish  and bare, that
stuck out  from the  thick hair that covered his arms  like  sleeves. He had
called himself Kitty because  he was convinced that that was the traditional
name  of the  great  Mongol  kings.  Raphael. Well, Raphael baby, let's  get
started.
     "How are things?" he asked gently.
     "in perfect order, boss," Raphael-Mosul replied rapidly.
     "You smoothed over the problem at headquarters?"
     "It cost 150. Everybody is happy."
     "It comes out of  your pocket. It  was your fault,  pal. It should have
been taken care of."
     Mosul  made  a  pathetic  face  and  spread  his  hands in  a  sign  of
submission.
     "The parquet in the hall should be replaced," Noonan said.
     "It will be done."
     Noonan said nothing, puckered his lips.
     "Swag?" he asked, lowering his voice.
     "There's a little," Mosul replied in a low voice, too.
     "Let's see it."
     Mosul rushed over to the safe, took out a package, and opened it on the
desk  in front of Noonan. Noonan felt around with one finger in the pile  of
black sprays,  picked up a bracelet, examined it  from all sides  and put it
back.
     "This is all?"
     "They don't bring any," Mosul said guiltily.
     "They don't bring any," Noonan repeated.
     He  aimed  carefully  and  jabbed  his  toe with  all his strength into
Mosul's  shin. Mosul grunted  and bent  over  to grab the injured  spot, but
immediately straightened out and stood at attention. Then  Noonan jumped up,
grabbed  Mosul by his collar and came at him, kicking, rolling his eyes, and
whispering obscenities. Mosul, moaning and groaning, rearing his head like a
frightened horse, backed away from him until he fell onto the couch.
     "Working both  sides, eh? You son of a bitch." Noonan was hissing right
into his terrified eyes. "Buzzard Burbridge is swimming in swag and you give
me beads wrapped in paper?" He smacked him  in the face,  trying to hit  the
scab  on his nose. "I'll ship you off to jail. You'll be  living in  manure,
eating dry bread. You'll curse the day  you  were born!" He punched the sore
nose one more time. "Where does Burbridge get the swag? Why do they bring it
to  him,  and  not to you? Who brings it? Why don't I know anything? Who are
you working for, you filthy pig? Talk!"
     Mosul  soundlessly opened  and shut his mouth. Noonan  let go  of  him,
returned to the chair, and put his feet up on the desk.
     "Well?" he said. Mosul sniffled back the blood  from his nose and said:
"Honest, boss, what's the  matter? What  swag can Buzzard  have?  He doesn't
have any. Nobody's got swag."
     "What, are you going to argue with me?" Noonan asked gently, taking his
feet off the desk.
     "No,  no, boss,  honest," Mosul hurried to say. "Me argue  with  you? I
wouldn't dream of it."
     "I'm going  to get  rid of you," Noonan threatened. "You don't know how
to work. What the hell do I need you for, you so-and-so? Guys like you are a
dime a dozen. I need a real man for real work."
     "Hold  on, boss," Mosul  said reasonably,  smearing blood all  over his
face.  "Why  do  you attack  me all  of a  sudden? Let's work  this out." He
touched his  nose  gingerly. "You say Burbridge has a  lot of  swag? I don't
know, somebody's been lying  to  you. Nobody's got  any swag now. After all,
only punks go into the Zone now, and they're the only ones coming out. Nope,
boss, someone's lied to you."
     Noonan was watching him covertly. It  looked as  if Mosul really didn't
know a thing.  It wouldn't have paid him to lie, anyway--  Buzzard Burbridge
didn't pay very well.
     "These picnics, are they profitable?"
     "The  picnics? I don't think  so. You  won't shovel  in  the money. But
there aren't any profitable things left in town."
     "Where are these picnics held?"
     "Where?  You know, in different places.  By  White Mountain, at the Hot
Springs, at Rainbow Lake."
     "Who are the customers?"
     "The customers?" Mosul sniffed, blinked, and spoke confidentially.
     "If you're planning to get into the business yourself, boss, I wouldn't
recommend it. You won't make much up against Buzzard."
     "Why not?"
     "Buzzard's customers are the blue helmets, one." Mosul  was ticking the
points  off on  his fingers.  "Officers from the command post, two. Tourists
from the Metropole, the White Lily, and the Plaza, three. Then he's got good
advertising. Even the locals go to him. Honest, boss, it's not worth getting
mixed up in this  business.  He  doesn't pay us that much for the girls, you
know."
     "The locals go to him, too?"
     "The young people, mostly."
     "Well, what happens on these picnics?"
     "What  happens? We  go  there  on buses, see?  And when  we  get  there
everything  is set up--tables, tents, music.  And  everyone lives it up. The
officers usually go with the girls. The tourists go look at the Zone-if it's
at the Hot Springs, the Zone is just a stone's throw away, on the other side
of the Sulphur Gorge. Buzzard has thrown  a lot of horse bones around  there
and they look at them through binoculars."
     "And the locals?"
     "The  locals?  Well, that doesn't interest the locals,  of course. They
amuse themselves in other ways."
     "And Burbridge?"
     "Burbridge? Burbridge ... is like everybody else."
     "And you?"
     "Me? I'm like everybody else. I watch to see that the girls aren't hurt
... and, well, like everybody else, basically."
     "And how long does all this go on?"
     "Depends. Three days, sometimes, sometimes a whole week."
     "And how much does this  pleasure  trip  cost?" Noonan asked,  thinking
about something else entirely. Mosul answered something,  but  Noonan didn't
hear him.  That's the ticket, Noonan thought. Several days,  several nights.
Under  those conditions, it's simply impossible to keep an eye on Burbridge,
even  if you tried.  But still  he didn't understand. Burbridge was legless,
and there was the gorge. No, there was something else there.
     "Which locals are steady customers?"
     "Locals?  I  told you, mostly  the young ones. You know, Halevy, Rajba,
Chicken  Tsapfa, that Zmyg guy--and the Maltese  often goes.  A cute  little
group. They call it Sunday school. Shall we go to Sunday  school,  they say.
They concentrate on the old ladies, make pretty good money.  Some old  broad
from Europe...."
     "Sunday school," Noonan repeated.
     A strange thought came to him. School. He rose.
     "All right," he said. "The  hell with the  picnics.  That's not for us.
But  get it straight: Buzzard has swag,  and that's our business,  pal. Look
for it, Mosul, look for it, or I'll throw you to the dogs. Where does he get
it, who gives it to him? Find out and we'll give twenty percent more than he
does. Got it?"
     "Got  it, boss." Mosul was standing, too, at attention, loyalty on  his
blood-smeared face.
     "Move it! Use your brains, you animal!" Noonan shouted and left.
     Back at the bar he quickly drank his aperitif, had  a  chat with Madame
about  the  decline  in morality, hinted that he was planning to  expand the
operation, and lowering his voice for emphasis, asked for her advice on what
to do about Benny-the old  guy  was getting  old, he was  deaf, his reaction
time was off, and  he didn't get along like he used to. It  was  six already
and he was hungry. A  thought was drilling through his brain, out of nowhere
but at the same  time explaining a lot. Actually, a lot had become clear  by
now anyway  and  the  mystical aura that irritated  and frightened him about
this business  was gone. All that was left was disappointment in himself be-
cause he had not thought of the possibility  earlier. But the most important
thing was  the thought that kept floating in  his  head  and  giving him  no
peace.
     He said good-bye to Madame and shook  Penny's hand, and headed straight
for  the Borscht. The  whole  trouble  is  that we don't  notice  the  years
slipping  by, Noonan  thought.  The  hell with  the  years,  we don't notice
everything changing. We know  that everything  changes,  we're  taught  from
childhood that everything changes, and we've seen everything change with our
own eyes  many  a time, and  yet we're totally incapable of recognizing  the
moment  when the change comes  or else  we look for  the change in the wrong
place. There  are new stalkers  now, created by cybernetics. The old stalker
was a dirty,  sullen man who  crawled inch by inch through  the  Zone on his
belly with mulish stubbornness, gathering his nest  egg. The new stalker was
a dandy in  a silk tie, an engineer sitting a mile or so away from the Zone,
a cigarette in his mouth, a glass with a pleasant brew at his elbow, and all
he does is  sit and monitor  some  screens.  A salaried  gentleman.  A  very
logical picture. So logical that any alternative just did  not come to mind.
But there were other possibilities--the Sunday school, for one.
     And suddenly, from nowhere,  a wave of despair engulfed him. It was all
useless. Pointless.  My God, he thought, we won't be able  to do a thing! We
won't  have the power  to contain  this blight, he  thought  in  horror. Not
because we don't work  well. And not because they're smarter and more clever
either. It's just that  that's the way the world is.  And that's the way man
is  in this world.  If there had never been the Visitation, there would have
been something else. Pigs always find mud.
     The Borscht was lit up and gave  off a delicious smell. The Borscht had
changed,  too.  No more dancing,  no more  fun. Gutalin didn't go  there any
more, he was turned off  by it, and Redrick Schuhart probably had  stuck his
nose in, made a face, and left. Ernest  was still in  stir and his old  lady
finally got to  run the  place. She built up a  solid  steady clientele; the
entire  institute lunched there, including the  senior officers.  The booths
were cozy, the food good, the prices reasonable, and the beer bubbly. A good
old-fashioned pub.
     Noonan  saw Valentine Pilman  in one  of  the booths.  The laureate was
drinking  coffee and  reading  a  magazine he  had folded  in  half.  Noonan
approached him.
     "May I join you?"
     Valentine turned his dark glasses on him.
     "Ah," he said. "Please do."
     "Just a second, I'll wash up first." He had remembered Mosul's nose.
     He  was well known there. When he  got back to Valentine's booth, there
was a plate of steaming sausages  and a mug of beer--not cold and not  warm,
just the way he liked it--on the table. Valentine put down the  magazine and
took a sip of coffee.
     "Listen, Valentine," Noonan said, cutting the meat. "What do you think,
how will all this end?"
     "What?"
     "The  Visitation.  The  Zones,  the  stalkers, the  military-industrial
complexes--the whole lot. How can it all end'" Valentine looked at him for a
long time with his blind black lenses.
     "For whom? Be specific."
     "Well, say for our part of the planet."
     "That depends on whether we have luck or not.  We now know that in  our
part of the planet the Visitation left no aftereffects, for  the  most part.
That does not rule out, of course, the possibility that in pulling all these
chestnuts out of  the fire, we may pull  out some thing that  will make life
impossible not only for us,  but for the  entire planet. That  would  be bad
luck. But, you  must  admit, such  a  threat always hovers over mankind." He
chuckled. "You see,  I've long lost the  habit  of talking  about mankind in
general. Humanity as a whole is too fixed a system, there's no changing it."
     "You think so? Maybe, you're right, who knows?"
     "Be honest, Richard," Valentine said, obviously enjoying himself.
     "What has the Visitation changed  in your life? You're a business- man.
Now you  know there  is at least one other rational creature in the Universe
besides man. So what?"
     "What can I say?" Noonan was  mumbling. He was  sorry that  he had ever
started the conversation. There was nothing to talk about.
     "What has changed for me? Well, for several years now I've been feeling
uneasy, insecure. All right. So  they came and left right  away. And what if
they come again and  decide to stay? As a businessman,  I have to take these
questions  seriously: who are they, how do  they live, what do they need? On
the most basic level I have to think how to change my  product. I have to be
ready. And what if I turn out to be completely superfluous in their system?"
He livened up. "What if we are superfluous? Listen,  Valentine,  since we're
talking about  it,  are  there any answers to these questions? Who are they,
what did they want, will they return?"
     "There are  answers," Valentine said, smiling. "Lots of them, take your
pick."
     "And what do you think yourself?"
     "To  tell  the truth, I  never permitted myself the luxury  of thinking
about it seriously. For me the Visitation is primarily  a  unique event that
allows us to skip several steps in the  process  of  cognition.  Like a trip
into the future  of  technology. Like a quantum generator ending up in Isaac
Newton's laboratory."
     "Newton wouldn't have understood a thing."
     "You're wrong. Newton was a very perspicacious man."
     "Really? Well, who cares about him anyway. What do you  think about the
Visitation? You can answer unseriously."
     "All right, I'll  tell you.  But I  must warn you that  your  question,
Richard, comes under the heading of xenology. Xenology: an unnatural mixture
of science  fiction and  formal logic. It's based on the false  premise that
human psychology is applicable to extraterrestrial intelligent beings."
     "Why is that false?" Noonan asked.
     "Because  biologists  have  already  been  burned  trying to use  human
psychology on animals. Earth animals, at that."
     "Forgive  me,  but that's an  entirely different matter.  We're talking
about the psychology of rational beings."
     "Yes. And everything would be fine if we only knew what reason was.
     "Don't we know?" Noonan was surprised.
     "Believe it or  not, we  don't. Usually a  trivial definition  is used:
reason is  that  part  of  man's  activity that  distinguishes  him from the
animals. You  know,  an attempt to  distinguish the owner from  the dog  who
understands  everything  but  just  can't  speak.   Actually,  this  trivial
definition  gives  rise  to  rather  more  ingenious  ones.  Based on bitter
observation of the above-mentioned human activities.  For example: reason is
the ability of a living creature to perform unreasonable or unnatural acts."
     "Yes,  that's about  us, about  me, and those  like  me," Noonan agreed
bitterly.
     "Unfortunately. Or how about this hypothetical definition.  Reason is a
complex type of instinct  that  has  not yet formed completely. This implies
that  instinctual behavior is always purposeful and natural. A million years
from now our instinct will have matured and we will stop making the mistakes
that are probably integral to  reason. And then, if  something should change
in the universe, we  will all become extinct--precisely because we will have
forgotten  how  to make  mistakes, that  is,  to try various approaches  not
stipulated by an inflexible program of permitted alternatives."
     "Somehow you make it all sound demeaning."
     "All  right, how about another definition--a  very lofty and noble one.
Reason  is  the  ability  to  use  the  forces  of the  environment  without
destroying that environment." Noonan grimaced and shook his head.
     "No, that's not about us.  How about this: 'man, as opposed to animals,
is  a  creature  with an  undefinable  need  for  knowledge'?  I  read  that
somewhere."
     "So have  I,"  said Valentine. "But the whole problem with that is that
the average man--the one you have in mind  when you talk about 'us' and 'not
us'--very  easily manages to  overcome  this  need  for  knowledge. I  don't
believe that need even exists. There is  a need to understand, and you don't
need  knowledge  for that. The hypothesis  of God, for  instance,  gives  an
incomparably  absolute  opportunity   to  understand  everything  and   know
absolutely nothing. Give man an extremely simplified system of the world and
explain every phenomenon  away on the basis of that system. An approach like
that doesn't  require any  knowledge.  Just a  few  memorized formulas  pins
so-called intuition and so-called common sense."
     "Hold on," Noonan said. He finished his beer and set the mug noisily on
the table. "Don't get off the track. Let's get back to  the subject on hand.
Man meets an extraterrestrial creature. How do they find out  that  they are
both rational creatures?"
     "I haven't the slightest idea," Valentine said with great pleasure.
     "Everything I've read on the subject comes down to a vicious circle. If
they are capable of making contact, then they are rational. And  vice versa;
if  they  are rational, they are  capable  of contact. And in general: if an
extraterrestrial creature has the honor of possessing human psychology, then
it is rational. Like that."
     "There you  go.  And  I thought you boys had it  all  laid  out in neat
cubbyholes."
     "A monkey can put things into cubbyholes," Valentine replied.
     "No,  wait a minute."  For some  reason,  Noonan  felt cheated. "If you
don't  know  simple things  like that....  All right, the hell with  reason.
Obviously, it's a real quagmire. OK. But  what about the Visitation? What do
you think about the Visitation?"
     "My pleasure. Imagine a picnic."
     Noonan shuddered.
     "What did you say?"
     "A picnic. Picture a forest, a country road, a meadow. A car drives off
the country road into the meadow, a group of young people get out of the car
carrying  bottles,  baskets of food,  transistor radios,  and  cameras. They
light Fires, pitch tents, turn on the music. In the morning  they leave. The
animals, birds,  and insects that watched  in  horror through the long night
creep  out  from their hiding places. And  what  do they see?  Gas  and  oil
spilled  on the grass. Old spark  plugs and old filters strewn around. Rags,
burnt-out  bulbs, and a  monkey wrench left behind. Oil slicks on the  pond.
And of  course, the usual mess--apple cores, candy wrappers, charred remains
of  the  campfire,  cans,  bottles,   somebody's  handkerchief,   somebody's
penknife, torn newspapers, coins, faded Bowers picked in another meadow."
     "I see. A roadside picnic."
     "Precisely. A roadside picnic, on some road in the cosmos.  And you ask
if they will come back."
     "Let me have a smoke. Goddamn this pseudoscience! Somehow I imagined it
all differently."
     "That's your right."
     "So does that mean they never even noticed us?"
     "Why?"
     "Well, anyway, didn't pay any attention to us?"
     "You know, I wouldn't be upset if I were you."
     Noonan inhaled, coughed, and threw away the cigarette.
     "I don't care," he said stubbornly. "It can't be. Damn  you scientists!
Where  do you get your contempt  for man?  Why are you always trying  to put
mankind down?"
     "Wait a minute," Valentine said. "Listen: 'You ask  me  what makes  man
great?'"  he quoted.  "'That  he  re-created nature?  That  he has harnessed
cosmic forces?  That  in  a brief time he conquered  the planet and opened a
window  on  the universe? No! That,  despite all  this, he has  survived and
intends to survive in the future.'"
     There was a silence. Noonan was thinking.
     "Don't get  depressed," Valentine  said kindly.  "The picnic is my  own
theory. And not even a theory--just  a  picture. The serious xenologists are
working on much more  solid  and flattering  versions for human vanity.  For
example, that there has been no Visitation yet, that it is to come. A highly
rational culture  threw containers with artifacts  of  its civilization onto
Earth. They expect  us  to study  the artifacts, make  a giant technological
leap, and send a signal in response that will show we are ready for contact.
How do you like that one?"
     "That's much better," Noonan said.  "I see that there are decent people
among scientists after all."
     "Here's another one. The Visitation has taken place, but it is not over
by a long shot. We are in contact even as we speak, but we are riot aware of
it.  The  visitors are  living in  the  Zones and carefully observing us and
simultaneously preparing us for the 'cruel wonders of the future.' "
     "Now  that I  can understand!  At least  that  explains  the mysterious
activity in the  ruins  of  the factory.  By the  way, your  picnic  doesn't
explain it."
     "Why doesn't  it? One of the  girls could have forgotten  her  favorite
wind-up teddy bear on the meadow."
     "Just skip  it. That's some teddy bear. The earth around it is shaking!
On the other hand, maybe it is somebody's teddy. How  about a beer? Rosalie!
Two  beers for  the xenologists! You know, it really is  nice chatting  with
you," he said to Valentine. "Cleaning out the old brains, like pouring Epsom
salts under my  skull. You know, you work and work,  and lose sight of  why,
and what will happen, and how you'll soothe your savage breast."
     The beer came. Noonan took  a  sip, watching over the head  of foam  as
Valentine examined his mug with a look of distaste.
     "You don't like it?"
     "I usually don't drink," Valentine said hesitantly.
     "Really?"
     "The hell with it!" Valentine moved the mug of beer away from him. "Why
don't you order me a cognac in that case."
     "Rosalie!" Noonan called out, finally cheering up.
     The cognac arrived. Noonan spoke.
     "But you really shouldn't go on like that.  I'm  not talking about your
picnic--that's  too much--but even if we accept  the version that this  is a
prelude to contact,  I  still don't  like it. I can understand the bracelets
and the empties. But why  the witches'  jelly? The mosquito mange spots  and
that disgusting fluff?"
     "Excuse me," Valentine said, taking a slice  of lemon. "I  don't  quite
understand your terminology. What mange?"
     Noonan laughed.
     "That's folklore. Stalkers' slang. Shop talk. The mosquito  mange spots
are areas of heightened gravitation."
     "Ah. Graviconcentrates. Directed gravity. That's something  would enjoy
talking about for a couple of hours, but you wouldn't understand a thing."
     "Why wouldn't I? I'm an engineer, you know.'
     "Because I don't understand it myself. I have systems of equations, but
no way to interpret them. Witches' jelly, is that colloidal gas?"
     "The  very same. Did  you hear about the  catastrophe  at the  Currigan
labs?"
     "I heard something about it."
     "Those idiots put a porcelain container with the  jelly into  a special
room, highly insulated and isolated. That is, they  thought it was isolated.
And  when they opened the container with manipulators the jelly went through
metal  and plastic, like water through a sieve, and outside. And  everything
it touched also turned into jelly. Thirty-five people were killed, more than
a hundred were crippled, and the entire building was destroyed. Did you ever
go there? Marvelously equipped place! And now the jelly has seeped down into
the basement and the lower Boors. Some prelude to contact."
     Valentine made a face.
     "Yes, I know all  that. But you must agree, Richard, that  the visitors
had nothing to do with it. How  could they have known about the existence of
our military-industrial complexes?"
     "They should have known," Noonan insisted.
     "Their answer to  that would  be that the military-industrial complexes
should have been done away with a long time ago."
     "That's  for  sure. That's  what they  should  have taken  care  of, if
they're so powerful."
     "You mean you're suggesting interference in the internal affairs of the
human race?"
     "Hmmm,"  Noonan said.  "I guess  we're  going too  far. Let's drop  it.
Instead, let's go back to the beginning of our discussion. How will  it  all
end? Well, look at you, for instance, you're a scientist. Are you hoping for
something fundamental  to come out of  the Zone, some- thing that will alter
science, technology, our way of life?"
     Valentine shrugged.
     "You're barking up the wrong tree,  Richard. I don't like to indulge in
empty fantasizing. When the subject is something serious, I prefer to revert
to healthy careful skepticism. Based on what we've already received, a whole
range of possibilities is raised, and I can say nothing specific about it."
     "All  right, let's  try  another  approach.  What  do you  think you've
already received?''
     "You'll find this amusing--very little.  We've unearthed many miracles.
In a few  cases, we've  even learned  how to use these  miracles for our own
needs. A monkey pushes a red button and gets a banana, pushes a white button
and  gets an orange, but  it  doesn't  know  how  to get bananas and oranges
without the buttons. And it doesn't understand what relationship the buttons
have to the fruit. Take the so-so's, for example. We've  learned  how to use
them. We've even learned the circumstances under which they multiply through
a process similar to cell division. But we still haven't been able to make a
single so-so.  We don't know how they work, and judging by present evidence,
it will be a long time before we will."
     "I  would  put it this way. There are  objects for which we have  found
uses. We use them, but almost certainly not the way the visitors use them. I
am positive that in the vast majority of cases  we are hammering  nails with
microscopes.  But at  least  we're using some  things--the  so-so's, and the
bracelets   to   stimulate   life  processes.  And  the  various   types  of
quasibiological masses, which have created a revolution in medicine. We have
received new tranquilizers,  new types of mineral fertilizers, a  revolution
in agriculture. But why am I giving you  a list! You  know this  at ]east as
well as I--I notice  you  wear a bracelet.  Let's call this group of objects
beneficial.  It can be  said that  mankind has  benefited from  them in some
degree, even though it should never be forgotten that in our Euclidean world
every stick has two ends."
     "Undesirable applications?"
     "Precisely. Say the use of so-so's  in the defense industry. But that's
not  what  I'm talking about. The action of every beneficial object has been
more or less studied  and  more or less explained. Our technology is holding
us up In fifty years or so we'll know how to make them ourselves and then we
can crack nuts to our hearts' content. It's  more complicated with the other
group of objects--more complicated because  we have found no application for
them, and their qualities within  the  framework of our present concepts are
definitely  not  understandable. For instance, the  magnetic traps. We  know
that they're magnetic  traps, Panov has proven it very wittily. But we don't
know the source of  such a powerful  magnetic Field  and what  causes  their
superstability. We  don't understand a thing about  them. We can only  weave
fantastic theories about properties of space that we never suspected before.
Or the K-23. What  do you call it? The pretty black beads that are  used for
jewelry?"
     "Black sprays."
     "That's it, the black  sprays. That's a good name. Well, you know their
properties.  If  you shine  a  ray  of light  into one  of  those beads, the
transmission of  the light is delayed  and the delay  depends on  the bead's
weight, size, and several other parameters. And the unit of light coming out
is always smaller than the  one entering. What is this? Why? There is a wild
theory that the black sprays are gigantic expanses of  space with properties
different from  those of our space  and that they became curled up under the
influence  of our space." Valentine sighed deeply. "In short, the objects in
this group have absolutely  no applications to human life today. Even though
from a purely scientific point  of view  they are of fundamental importance.
They are answers  that have fallen  from  heaven to questions  that we still
can't pose. Perhaps Sir Isaac wouldn't have figured out lasers, but he would
at least have understood that such a thing is possible, and that  would have
influenced his  scientific outlook  greatly. I won't go into detail, but the
existence of such objects as  the  magnetic  traps, the K-23, and the  white
ring has invalidated most of our recently developed theories and has brought
forth completely new ideas. And there is still a third group."
     "Yes," Noonan said. "The witches' jelly and other goodies."
     "No, no.  Those fall either  into  the first  or second  category.  I'm
talking about  objects that we  know nothing  about  or  have  only  hearsay
information.  The things that the stalkers stole  from  under  our noses and
sold  to  God knows  who,  or have hidden.  The  things that they don't talk
about.  The  things that have  become  legends or  semi-  legends.  The wish
machine, Dick the Tramp, and the jolly ghosts."
     "Wait  a minute!  What are  those things?  I can figure  out  the  wish
machine, but. . . ."
     Valentine laughed.
     "You see, we have our own shop talk, too. Dick  the  Tramp--that's  the
hypothetical  wind-up  teddy bear wreaking havoc in  the old  plant. And the
jolly ghost  is a type of dangerous  turbulence that occurs in some parts of
the Zone."
     "First I've heard of it."
     "You understand,  Richard,  that we've been digging around in  the Zone
for twenty  years but we don't even  know a thousandth of what it  contains.
And  if  you want to talk  of the Zone's effect on man. ...  By the way,  it
looks as though we'll have to add another category, the fourth group. Not of
objects, but  of effects.  This group  has  been shamefully  neglected, even
though  as far  as  I'm  concerned, there  are  more than  enough  facts for
research.  And you  know, sometimes my  skin  crawls, Richard,  when I think
about those facts." Zombies," Noonan said.
     "What? Oh,  no, that's merely puzzling. How  can  I  put it--at  ]east,
that's  imaginable. I mean when  suddenly for no reason  at all things start
happening, nonphysical, nonbiological phenomena."
     "Oh, you mean the emigrants."
     "Exactly. Statistics is a  very precise science, you know, even  though
it  deals  with  random  occurrences.  And  besides,  it's  an eloquent  and
beautiful science."
     Valentine seemed to be  tipsy. His  voice was louder,  his cheeks  were
red, and his eyebrows had crept up high over his dark glasses, wrinkling his
forehead into a washboard.
     "I really like nondrinkers," Noonan said.
     "Don't get off the subject!" Valentine said. "Listen, what  can I  tell
you?  It's  very strange." He raised his glass, drank half in one gulp,  and
went on.  "We don't  know what  happened to the poor Harmonites at  the very
moment of the Visitation. But now one of them decides to emigrate. Your most
typical man in the street. A barber. The son of a barber and the grandson of
a barber. He moves, say,  to Detroit. He opens  up a barbershop and all hell
breaks loose. Over ninety percent of his clients die during a year: they die
in car crashes, fall out of windows, are cut down by gangsters  or  muggers,
drown in  shallow  waters,  and  so  on and  so  forth. A number  of natural
disasters hit  Detroit  and  its  suburbs. Typhoons and tornadoes, not  seen
since eighteen-oh-something,  suddenly appear in the area. And all that kind
of stuff. And such cataclysmic events take place in any city, any area where
an emigrant from a Zone area settles. The number of catastrophes is directly
proportional to the number of emigrants who have moved to the city. And note
that this  reaction  is caused  only by emigrants who actually lived through
the Visitation.  Those  born after  the  Visitation  have no  effect on  the
disaster and accident statistics. You've lived  here for  ten years, but you
moved in  after the Visitation and  it would be safe to relocate you even in
the  Vatican.  How  can  this  be explained?  What  should  we  reject?  The
statistics?  Or common sense?" Valentine grabbed the glass  and finished his
drink in a gulp.
     Richard Noonan scratched his head.
     "Hmmm, yes. Of course,  I'd heard  all that before, but I,  uh, assumed
that it was all, to put it  mildly, exaggerated. Really, from the  point  of
view of our highly developed science...."
     "Or,  for  instance,  the  mutagen  effect  of   the  Zone,"  Valentine
interrupted. He  removed his glasses  and  stared at  Noonan  with his dark,
myopic eyes.  "Everyone  who  spends  enough  time with the  Zone  undergoes
changes,  both of phenotype and  genotype.  You know  what kind  of children
stalkers can have and you know what happens to the stalkers themselves. Why?
Where is the mutation factor? There is no radiation  in  the Zone. While the
air and soil  in the Zone have their own  specific chemical  structure, they
pose no mutation dangers at all. What  should I  do under  the circumstances
--believe in sorcery? In the evil eye?"
     "I sympathize.  But, frankly, I am much more upset by  corpses come  to
life  than  by  your  statistics.  Especially  since  I've  never  seen  the
statistics, but I have seen the zombies--and smelled them."
     Valentine waved away the statement.
     "Bah, your zombies. Richard, you should be ashamed of yourself. You are
an  educated man, after  all. First of all, they are not corpses.  They  are
moulages - reconstructions on the skeletons, dummies. And I assure you, from
the point of  view  of fundamental  principles,  your  moulages  are no more
amazing than the eternal batteries. It's just  that the so-so's violate  the
first law of thermodynamics, and the moulages violate the second.  We're all
cave men in one  sense or  another. We can't imagine anything scarier than a
ghost.  But  the violation of the law of  causality is much more  terrifying
than a  stampede  of ghosts. And all the  monsters  of  Rubenstein, or is it
Wallenstein?"
     "Frankenstein."
     "Of  course. Frankenstein. Mrs. Shelley. The poet's wife. Or daughter."
He suddenly laughed. "Our  moulages have  a curious property--autonomic life
capability. For example, if you cut off  some part of their bodies, the part
will live on. Separately. Without any physiological solutions to nourish it.
They brought one like that to the  institute  recently. A lab assistant from
Boyd told me about it."
     Valentine laughed uproariously.
     "Isn't  it time we headed  for home, Valentine?" Noonan asked, glancing
at his watch. "I still have some important business."
     "Let's go." Valentine  tried hard to insert  his face  into the glasses
and finally had to take the frame with both hands to put  them on his  nose.
"Do you have a car?"
     "Yes. I'll drive you."  They paid the  check  and headed for the  door.
Valentine kept making mock salutes,  greeting lab workers who were curiously
watching  one of the  great men of world physics. At the door, greeting  the
broadly smiling doorman, he  knocked off  his glasses, and all three of them
scrambled to catch them.
     "Tomorrow  I'm running  an  experiment.  You know,  it's an interesting
thing...." Valentine was muttering as he climbed into the Peugeot.
     He went on to describe the experiment.  Noonan drove him to the science
complex.
     They're  afraid,  too,  he  thought,  getting back  into the  car.  The
highbrows are also scared. And  that's the way it should be.  They should be
more  afraid  than all us regular folk  put together.  We don't understand a
thing,  and  they  understand  how  much  they  don't.  They  look  into the
bottomless pit and know that it's  inevitable, they  must  go  down into it.
Their hearts catch, but they must go down, and descend they do, but how, and
what will they find at the bottom, and most important, will  they be able to
climb  out? Meanwhile,  we mere mortals look  the other  way,  so  to speak.
Listen, maybe  that's how it should be. Let it all run its course, and we'll
just get  by  on  our  own. He was right: humanity's  most  heroic  deed was
surviving and intending to survive. But  he'd still tell  the visitors to go
to  hell, if  he could. Why couldn't they have  had their  picnic  somewhere
else. Like the Moon. Or Mars. You heartless trash, he thought, just like all
the rest, even if you do know how to curl up space. So they had themselves a
picnic. A picnic.
     What's the best  way  to deal with my  picnickers? he thought,  driving
slowly down the brightly lit wet streets. What would be the cleverest way to
handle  it? Following the law of least action,  like in mechanics.  What the
hell use is my blankety-blank engineering degree if I can't  even figure out
the best way to trap that legless son of a bitch?
     He parked in front of the house in which Redrick Schuhart lived and sat
in the car, planning his  opening gambit. Then he removed the so-so, got out
of  the car, and only then noticed that the house looked uninhabited. Almost
all the windows were dark, there was nobody in the park, and even the lights
in  the park were out. It reminded  him of what he was about to see,  and he
shivered. He even considered the possibility of phoning Schuhart and talking
with  him in the  car or in some quiet bar, but  he rejected the idea. For a
whole lot of reasons. And besides, he said to himself, let's not behave like
all those characters who ran out like rats deserting a sinking ship.
     He went into the main entrance and slowly up the unswept stairs. It was
quiet and many  of the doors leading  from the landings  were  ajar  or wide
open.  It  smelled  damp  and  dusty in  the  apartments. He stopped  before
Redrick's  door, smoothed his hair, sighed deeply, and rang the bell. It was
still behind the door for a while,  then the floor creaked, the lock turned,
and the door opened quietly. He hadn't heard the footsteps.
     Monkey, Schuhart's daughter, stood in the doorway. A  bright light fell
from the foyer  onto  the landing,  and at first  Noonan could only see  the
girl's dark silhouette. He thought how much she  had grown  in the last  few
months. Then she stepped back into the foyer and he saw her face. His throat
went dry for a second.
     "Hello, Maria," he said, trying  to be  as gentle as possible. "How are
you, Monkey?"
     She  did not reply. Silently and soundlessly  she  backed away from the
door into the  living  room, looking  at him  from under her eye-  brews. It
looked as  though she did not recognize him. To tell the truth, he  couldn't
recognize her either. It's the Zone, he thought. Damn.
     "Who's there?" Guta asked, looking out of the kitchen. "God, it's Dick!
Where did you disappear to? You know, Redrick is back!"
     She hurried over to him drying her hands with the  towel slung over her
shoulder.  Still  as beautiful, energetic,  strong, but  she looked strained
somehow: her face was thinner, and her eyes looked ... feverish, perhaps?
     He kissed her cheek, gave her his raincoat and hat.
     "I'm  sorry, I'm  sorry.  I just  couldn't get away to come over. Is he
in?"
     "He's in," Guta said.  "There's somebody with him. We should be leaving
soon, they've been talking a long time. Go on, Dick.
     He took several  steps down  the  hall and  stopped ill the door to the
living  room. An old man  was sitting  at the table. A mileage. Motion- less
and listing slightly. The  pink light from the lampshade  fell on  his broad
dark face, his sunken, toothless mouth, and his still, lusterless  eyes. And
Noonan  smelled it immediately.  He knew  that  it was just his imagination,
that  the  odor  lasted  only  the  first  few  days  and  then  disappeared
completely, but Richard Noonan smelled  it with his  memory--the fetid heavy
smell of turned-up earth.
     "We could go to the kitchen," Guta said quickly. "I'm cooking there and
we could chat."
     "Yes,  of course!"  he said  cheerily. "It's been such a long time! You
haven't forgotten that I like a drink before dinner, I hope?"
     They went  to the kitchen.  Guta opened the refrigerator and Noonan sat
at  the table and looked around.  As usual, it was clean and shiny and steam
was  rising  from  the  pots  and  pans on  the  stove. The  oven  was  new,
semiautomatic. That meant they had money.
     "Well, how is he?" Noonan asked.
     "The same. He lost weight in prison, but I'm fattening him up."
     "His hair still red?"
     "You bet!"
     "Hot-tempered?"
     "What else! He'll be that way to the grave."
     Guta gave him a Bloody Mary. The clear layer of Russian vodka seemed to
float on the layer of tomato juice.
     "Too much?"
     "Just right." Noonan poured the drink down. He  realized that  that was
his first real drink all day. "Now that's better."
     "Is  everything  all right  with you?"  Guta asked.  "Why  haven't  you
dropped by for such a long time?"
     "Damn  business.  Every week I intended to come over or at  least call,
but first I had to  go to Rexopolis,  then there was a big to-do, and then I
heard that Redrick was back and I thought I'd let you two  have some time to
yourselves. I'm  really hassled, Guta. Sometimes I ask myself, what the hell
are we all running  around for,  anyway? To make money? But what the hell do
we need money if all we do is run around making it?"
     Guta clattered  the  pot  covers,  took a pack  of  cigarettes from the
shelf,  and  sat  at  the table across  from  Noonan. Her eyes were lowered.
Noonan  pulled out  his lighter  and  lit  her cigarette. And again, for the
second time  in his  life, he saw  her hands  trembling, like the  time when
Redrick  had just  been sentenced  and  Noonan came over  to  give  her some
money--she was in a lot of trouble at first with no money at all, and no one
in  the building would lend her any. Then there  was  suddenly money in  the
house, and quite  a bit of it, judging by  everything, and Noonan had a good
guess as to its source, but he continued  coming over, bringing Monkey candy
and  toys, spending  whole evenings over  coffee with  Guta, planning a new,
happy life  for Redrick.  And then, having heard her stories, he would go to
the neighbors and try to reason with them, explaining, coaxing, and finally,
at the end of his patience, threatening  them: "You know  Red will be coming
back, and he'll break you all in half." But nothing helped.
     "How's your girlfriend?" Guta asked.
     "What girlfriend?"
     "The one you came over with that time, the blonde."
     "That's  no  girlfriend! That  was  my  secretary.  She got married and
quit."
     "You ought to get married, Dick. You want me to find a girl for you?"
     Noonan  was about to give  the standard reply: "Well, I'm just  waiting
for Monkey to  grow up." But he stopped himself. It just  wouldn't have come
off any more.
     "I need a secretary, not a wife," he bumbled. "Why don't you leave your
red  devil and  come be my secretary. You  used to  be an excellent one. Old
Harris still reminisces about you."
     "I'll bet. My hand was always black and blue from beating him off."
     "Oh,  so it  was  like that?" Noonan  tried to  look  surprised.  "That
Harris!"
     "God!" Guta said. "I could never get  past him. My  only worry was that
Red would find out."
     Monkey  walked in silently,  hovering near the  door. She looked at the
pots,  at Richard,  then came  up  to her  mother  and leaned  against  her,
averting her face.
     "Well, Monkey," Richard Noonan said heartily. "Like some chocolate?"
     He  took  a  chocolate  bar  out of his  vest  pocket  and extended the
plastic-wrapped package  to  the girl.  She  did not  stir.  Guta  took  the
chocolate from him and put it on the table. Her lips were white.
     "Well, Guta, you know I've decided to move." He  spoke on  in a  hearty
tone. "I'm tired of hotel living. And it's too far from the institute."
     "She  understands  less and  less--almost nothing any more,"  Guta said
softly.  He  stopped  talking,  picked up  the  glass with both  hands,  and
absently twirled it.
     "You're not asking how we're doing,"  she continued. "And you're right.
Except that you're an old friend, Dick, and we have no secrets from you. And
there's no way to keep it a secret anyway."
     "Have you seen a doctor?" he asked without looking up.
     "Yes.  They can't do  a thing.  And  one  of them said...." She stopped
talking.
     He was silent too. There was nothing to say about it and he didn't want
to  think  about it either. Suddenly  he  had  a horrible thought: it was an
invasion.  Not a  roadside picnic,  not  a  prelude to  contact.  It was  an
invasion. They can't change us, so they get into the bodies of our  children
and change them in their own image.  He felt a chill, but then he remembered
that he had read something like that  in a paperback with a lurid cover, and
he felt better. You can imagine anything at all. And real life is never what
you imagine.
     "And one of them said that she's no longer human."
     "Nonsense," Noonan said hollowly. "You should go to a  real specialist.
Go see James  Cutterfield. Do  you want me to talk  to  him? I'll arrange an
appointment."
     "You mean  the Butcher?" She laughed nervously.  "Don't bother. Thanks,
Dick, but he's the one who said so. I guess it's fate."
     When  Noonan dared to  look  up  again,  Monkey was gone  and Guta  was
sitting motionless, her mouth half-open, her eyes empty, and a long gray ash
on her cigarette. He pushed his glass over to her.
     "Make me another, please, and one for yourself. We'll have a drink."
     The  ash fell and she looked around for a place for the butt. She threw
it into the garbage can.
     "Why? That's what I can't understand! We're not the worst people in the
city."
     Noonan thought  that she was going to cry,  but she didn't.  She opened
the refrigerator, got the vodka and juice, and took  another glass down from
the cabinet.
     "Don't give  up hope. There's nothing in the world that can't be fixed.
And believe me, Guta, I  have very important connections. I'll do everything
that I can."
     He believed what he was saying and  he was mentally going over the list
of his  connections ill various  cities, and it seemed  to him  that he  had
heard about similar cases, and that they  had seemed  to have ended happily.
He just had to remember where it was and who the  physician was. But then he
remembered Mr. Lemchen, and  he remembered why he had befriended  Guta,  and
then he didn't want  to think about anything at all.  He  scattered all  his
thoughts of connections, got  comfortable  in his chair, relaxed, and waited
for his drink.
     There were shuffling steps and a thumping in the hall and he could hear
the more-than-ever repulsive voice of Buzzard Burbridge.
     "Hey, Red! Looks like your Guta is entertaining  someone. I see  a hat.
If I were  you, I wouldn't leave them alone." Red's voice: "Watch your false
leg, Buzzard. Shut your mouth. There's the door, don't forget to leave. It's
time for my dinner."
     "Damn it, can't even make a little joke."
     "We've had all the jokes we'll ever have. Period. Now get going!"
     The lock clicked  and the voices were  quieter. Obviously they had gone
out  on  the landing. Burbridge said something in an undertone, and  Redrick
replied: "That's all, we've had our talk!" More grumbling from Burbridge and
Redrick's harsh:  "I said that's it!" The door slammed, there were loud fast
steps in  the hall,  and Redrick Schuhart appeared in  the  kitchen doorway.
Noonan rose to greet him, and they warmly shook hands.
     "I  was sure  it was  you," Redrick said, looking Noonan over  with his
quick greenish eyes. "Putting on weight,  fatso! Keep putting it away, eh? I
see you're passing the  time of day pleasantly enough. Guta,  old love, make
one for me, too. I've got to catch up."
     "We haven't even started yet. How can anyone get ahead of you?" Redrick
laughed harshly and punched Noonan in the shoulder.
     "Now we'll see who  catches up and who  gets ahead! Come on, let's  go,
what are we doing out here in the kitchen? Guta, bring on the dinner."
     He  reached  into  the refrigerator and  came out with  a bottle with a
bright label.
     "We'll have ourselves a  feast!"  he announced. "We  have to  treat our
best friend Richard Noonan royally, for he does not desert his pals in their
moment of need! Even though he is of no help whatever. Too bad Gutalin's not
here."
     "Why don't you call him?" Noonan suggested.
     Redrick shook his bright red head.
     "They haven't laid the phone lines to where he is tonight. Let's go.
     He went into the living room and slammed the bottle on the table.
     "We're going to celebrate,  pops!" he said  to the motionless old  man.
"This  here is Richard Noonan,  our friend!  Dick, this is  my pop, Schuhart
Senior."
     Richard  Noonan, his mind rolled up  into an impenetrable ball, grinned
from ear to ear, waved, and said in the direction of the moulage:
     "Glad to  meet  you, Mr. Schuhart. How  are  you? You  know,  we've met
before, Red," he said to Schuhart, Jr.,  who  was puttering at  the bar. "We
saw each other once, but very briefly, of course."
     "Sit down," Redrick said to  him, indicating the chair opposite the old
man. "If you're going to talk to him, speak up. He can't hear a thing."
     He set up the glasses, quickly opened the bottle, and turned to Noonan.
     "You pour. Just a little for pops, just cover the bottom."
     Noonan  took his time pouring. The  old man sat in the  same  position,
staring at the wall. And he did not react when Noonan moved his glass closer
to him.  Noonan  had already adjusted to the new  situation.  It was a game,
terrible and pathetic. Red was playing the game, and he joined in, as he had
always joined  other peoples' games  all his  life-terrifying ones, pathetic
ones, shameful ones, and ones much more  dangerous than this. Redrick raised
his glass and said: "Well, I guess we're off?" Noonan looked over at the old
man in a  completely natural manner. Redrick impatiently clinked  his  glass
against  Noonan's  and  said:  "We're  off, we're off."  Then Noonan nodded,
completely naturally, and they drank.
     Redrick, eyes  shining,  began  to  talk in his  excited  and  slightly
artificial tone.
     "That's it, brother! jail will never see me again. If you only knew how
good  it is to be home; I have the dough and  I've  picked out a new  little
cottage  for myself, with a garden--as good as Buzzard's place. You know,  I
had wanted to emigrate,  I had  decided when was still in jail. I mean, what
was I sitting in this lousy two-bit town for? I thought, let the whole place
drop dead. So I get back, and there's a surprise for me--emigration has been
forbidden! Have we suddenly become plague-ridden during the last two years?"
     He  talked  and  talked,  and  Noonan nodded,  sipped  his whiskey, and
interjected  sympathetic  noises  and rhetorical questions. Then  he started
asking  about  the cottage--what  kind was it,  where was it,  what  did  it
cost?--and  then they argued. Noonan insisted that the cottage was expensive
and inconveniently located. He took out  his  address book, flipped  through
it, and named the locations of abandoned cottages that were being sold for a
song. And  the repairs would be  almost free,  because he  could  apply  for
emigration, be turned down,  and sue  for compensation, which would pay  for
the repairs.
     "I see that you're involved in nonemigration, too."
     "I'm involved in everything a little," Noonan replied with a wink.
     "I know, I know, I've heard all about your affairs."
     Noonan put  on a  wide-eyed look of surprise,  raised his finger to his
pursed lips, and nodded in the direction of the kitchen.
     "All right, don't worry, everybody knows about it," Redrick said.
     "Money never stinks.  I know that for sure now. But getting Mosul to be
your manager. I almost fell  on the floor laughing  when I heard! Letting  a
bull into  the china  shop. He's a psyche, you know. I've known him since we
were kids."
     He  fell silent and looked at the old man. A shudder  crossed his face,
and  Noonan was amazed to see the look of real, sincere love and  tenderness
on that tough freckled mug of his.
     Watching  him,  Noonan remembered  what  had happened  when Boyd's  lab
workers showed up here for  the moulage. There were two lab assistants, both
strong young men, athletes and all that, and a doctor from the city hospital
with  two  orderlies, tough  and  rough  burly  guys  used to  lugging heavy
stretchers and overpowering hysterical patients.  One  of the lab assistants
later told him  that "that redhead" at first didn't  seem to understand what
was going on, because he let them into the  apartment to examine his father.
They probably would  have  gotten the old man away, because it looked as  if
Redrick  thought that they  were putting  his old  man in the  hospital  for
observation. But the stupid orderlies, who had spent  their time  during the
preliminary  negotiations  gawking  at  Guta  washing the  kitchen  windows,
grabbed the old man like a log when they were called in--and  dropped him on
the floor. Redrick went  crazy.  Then  the jerk of a doctor  volunteered  an
explanation of what was going on. Redrick listened  for a minute or two  and
suddenly exploded without any warning like a hydrogen bomb The assistant who
told the story did not remember how he ended up on the street. The red devil
got them  all down the stairs, all five of them, and not one left under  his
own  power. They all  shot out of the foyer like cannonballs. Two  ended  up
unconscious  on the  sidewalk and  Redrick  chased the  other three for four
blocks.  Then he returned and bashed  in  all  the windows on the  institute
car--the driver had made a run for it when he saw what was happening.
     "I learned how to make a  new cocktail at this bar," Redrick was saying
as  he poured more whiskey. "It's called  Witches'  Jelly, I'll make you one
later, after we've eaten. Brother, it's not  something you should have on an
empty stomach--it's dangerous to the health: one  drink makes  your arms and
legs  numb. I don't care what you say, Dick, I'm going to treat you  royally
today. We'll remember the good  old days and  the Borscht. Poor old Ernie is
still in the cooler, you know that?" He drank, wiped his mouth with the back
of his hand  and casually asked: "What's new at  the  institute?  Have  they
tackled witches' jelly yet? You know, sort of fell behind science a bit."
     Noonan understood why  Redrick was bringing up the  topic. He threw  up
his hands in dismay.
     "Are you kidding? Did  you know what happened with that jelly? Have you
heard of the Currigan Labs? There's this little private supplier.. . So they
got themselves some jelly...."
     He  told  him  about the catastrophe. And about the shocking  fact that
they never tied up the loose ends, never found  out where the lab had gotten
it. Redrick listened, Feigning distraction, clucking his tongue, and shaking
his head. He decisively splashed more whiskey into their glasses.
     "That's what they deserve, the bloodsuckers. I hope they all choke."
     They drank. Redrick looked over at his father and a shudder crossed his
face once more.
     "Guta!" he  shouted. "Are you going  to  starve  us much  longer? She's
knocking herself out for you, you know," he told  Noonan. "She wants to make
your favorite salad, with crabmeat. She bought a  supply a while ago just in
case you  turned up. Well, how are things at the institute in general? Found
anything new? I hear  you have robots working full force but not getting too
much out of it."
     Noonan  started in on institute business,  and  while he  was  talking,
Monkey appeared noiselessly at  the table  by the old man.  She  stood there
with her hairy paws on the table and then  in a perfectly childlike way, she
leaned against the moulage and put her head  on his shoulder. Noonan went on
chatting but thought, as he looked at those two horrors born of the Zone: My
God,  what else? What else has to be done to us  before we understand? Isn't
this enough? But he knew that it wasn't. He knew that millions upon millions
of people knew nothing and wanted  to know nothing, and  even  if they found
out  would ooh and  aah  for five minutes  and then go  back  to  their  own
routines. It was time to go,  he thought  wildly. The hell with Bur- bridge,
the hell with Lemchen, and the hell with this goddamned family!
     "What are you staring at them for?" Redrick asked softly. "Don't worry,
it won't harm her. They even say that they generate good health."
     "Yes, I know," Noonan said and drained his glass.
     Guta came in, ordered  Redrick to set the table, and set a large silver
bowl with Noonan's favorite salad on the table.
     "Well, friends," Redrick announced. "Now we're going  to have ourselves
a feast!"