INTRODUCTION


     Good science fiction is good fiction
     This  assertion is one which must be  made again, and over again, until
the  general  reader  and  the  "serious" critic  cease to associate science
fiction  solely  with  girls  in  brass  brassieres being rescued  from  the
advances of bug-eyed monsters by zap-gun-toting heroes in space armor. There
is as much of a spectrum of excellence in science fiction as there is in any
other field. Mickey Spillane is  not Dorothy Sayers or Ngaio Marsh. Hopalong
Cassidy is not  Shane or True Grit. And the best of science fiction is quite
as good as the best of any literature.
     It happens also to be the most explosively popular genre on the current
scene. American and English science fiction is widely read in France, Italy,
and Scandinavia, increasingly in Spain, Portugal,  and Latin America, and is
attaining  new  peaks  in  Germany  and  the  Netherlands. New  writers  are
appearing  in Europe, especially in France and  Italy,  and the translations
are beginning to Bow the other  way into the English-speaking world. And the
rise in printed science fiction  is reflected in  the  increasing  number of
cinema and television productions in the field
     There  are several reasons--and a great many more hypotheses-- for this
upsurge, but they are not within  the  purview of these  remarks and can  be
left to the dozens of postgraduate theses being written  on the  subject and
to the teachers of  high-school and  college courses in science  fiction (of
which there are,  at this writing,  over 1,500 in the U.S.A. alone). Suffice
it to say that there  has never been a  field of literature so limitless, so
flexible, so  able  to  evoke  astonishment  and  wonder,  so  free  of  the
boundaries of time and space and that arbitrary fantasy  we call reality, as
science fiction. Not since the invention of poetry.
     What is  not  generally  known  to  the  readers  of science fiction in
English is that the most widely read science-fiction writer in  the world is
not Heinlein  or  Bradbury or  Clarke, but  Stanislaw Lem, a  Pole; that the
largest science-fiction  section of  a writers'  union  is  in Hungary; that
excellent science fiction is being produced in East Germany, Czechoslovakia,
and  especially  in  the  Soviet  Union.  Some Of this--far  too  little--is
beginning to trickle into the English-speak- ing  world,  and, sad to say, a
certain portion suffers  from execrable translation. Some works have had the
hazards of translation more  than doubled by passing from the original  to a
second language before being  rendered from that  into English, a process in
which  the style  and  character  of  even a  laundry  list  could hardly be
expected to  survive. Keeping  that in mind, however, the  discerning reader
will find,  even  in the most brutalized  of translations,  a  strength  and
inventiveness marvelous to behold.
     In the  highest  echelon of Soviet  science-fiction  writers  stand the
names of Boris  and Arkady  Strugatsky. I first  encountered these  talented
brothers in a novel called Hard  to Be a Cod Remarkable, purely as a  novel,
for structure, characterization,  pacing, and  its  perceptive statements of
the human condition,  it  touches also on almost every  single quality  most
avidly sought by the science-fiction reader. It has space flight and  future
devices; it has  that wondrous  "what if ... ?" aspect in its  investigation
into  sociology; by  its richly detailed  portraiture of an alien culture it
affords a new perspective on the nature  of ours and ourselves; it even  has
that exciting hand-to- hand conflict so dear to the hearts of that cousin of
science fiction called swords-and-sorcery. And among  its highest virtues is
this:  though  there are battles and fights and  blood  and death  where the
narrative calls  for  them,  the super-potent protagonist  never  kills any-
body. Writers  everywhere,  keeping in  mind  in  these violent times  their
responsibility  for their influence, should  take note. It  can be done, and
done well, at no expense to tension and suspense.
     And  now comes Roadside Picnic. . . . In  the  so-called Golden Age  of
American  science   fiction,   when  the  late  John  W.  Campbell,   editor
extraordinary, gathered around  him in  a handful of  months the  great- est
stable of science fiction talent ever seen, he would throw out challenges to
his writers, like: "Write me a story about a man who will die in twenty-four
hours unless he  can answer this question: 'How do you know you're sane?' ";
and this one--surely one of the  most provocative of all: "Write me a  story
about a creature that  thinks as  well as a man but not  like  a man."  (The
answer "Woman" is disallowed as too obvious a rejoinder.)
     The Strugatskys  posit  that  the Earth experiences  a brief visit from
extraterrestrials, who  leave behind them--well,  call  it  litter, such  as
might be left by you and me (in  one of our less socially conscious moments)
after a  roadside picnic.  The nature of these discards,  pro- ducts  of  an
utterly alien  technology, defies most  earthly  logic,  to  say nothing  of
earthly analytical  science, and their  potential is  limitless.  Warp these
potentials into  all-too-human goals--the  quest for pure  knowledge for its
own sake, the search for new devices, new techniques, to achieve new heights
in  human   well-being;  the  striving  for   profit,  with  its  associated
competitiveness;  and  the  ravening  thirst  for  new  and   more  terrible
weapons--and you  have the framework of  this amazing  short novel.  Add the
Strugatskys' deft  and supple  handling  of loyalty and greed, of friendship
and love,  of despair and frustration  and loneliness, and  you have a truly
superb tale, ending most poignantly in  what can  only be called a blessing.
You won't forget it.
     Tale of a Troika is a very different thing indeed--so different that it
might have been  written by  quite different  authors--which  is the highest
possible  tribute  to the authors'  versatility. How much you  like  it will
depend  on your taste for satire and lampoon. It is, in nature,  reminiscent
of Lem's Memoirs Found in  a Bathtub, with  (and  here I confess to a highly
subjective  evaluation) one  important  difference: Lem's approach and style
are,  in  comparison, unleavened, no matter how deeply  he  plunges into the
surrealistic and the absurd. The cumulative effect is Kafkaesque horror. The
Strugatsky fury--and it is fury:  disgust  with hypocrisy, with bureaucratic
bumbling, with self-serving,  self-saving distortions of logic and  of truth
and  of  initially  decent  human  motivations--their  fury  is  laced  with
laughter, rich with  scorn,  effervescent with  the comic spirit. One has to
search back to  Alice's tea party to find a scene as  mad as  the chamber of
the Troika; yet, in  retrospect,  one  realizes  that one  has experienced a
profoundly serious  work, since every bent line illuminates a  straight one,
all illogic signifies the purity from which it has departed.
     A word of appreciation must  be extended to Ms.  Antonina W. Bouis, the
translator of these short novels. Russian I do not know; fiction I do; and I
must honor anyone who can so deftly pass emotion, character  dimension, even
conversational idiom, through so formidable a barrier. Theodore Sturgeon San
Diego, California 1976


     Arkady  and  Boris  Strugatsky  Translated from Russian by Antonina  W.
Bouis MacMillan Publishing Co., Inc, New York


     Roadside Picnic


     You have to make the good out  of the bad because that  is all you have
got to make it out of. * Robert Penn Warren


FROM AN INTERVIEW BY  A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FROM  HARMONT RADIO  WITH
DOCTOR VALENTINE PILMAN, RECIPIENT OF THE NOBEL PRIZE IN PHYSICS FOR 19..


     "I suppose that  your  first  serious  discovery, Dr. Pilman, should be
considered what is now called the Pilman Radiant?"
     "I don't think  so.  The Pilman  Radiant wasn't the first, nor  was  it
serious,  nor  was  it really  a discovery. And it wasn't  completely  mine,
either."
     "Surely you're joking, doctor. The Pilman Radiant is a concept known to
every schoolchild."
     "That  doesn't  surprise  me.  According  to some  sources,  the Pilman
Radiant was discovered by a  schoolboy. Unfortunately, I don't re member his
name. Look it up in Stetson's  History of the Visitation --it's described in
full  detail there.  His version  is  that the radiant  was discovered by  a
schoolboy, that a  college student published the coordinates,  but that  for
some unknown reason it was named after me."
     "Yes,  many amazing things can  happen with a discovery. Would you mind
explaining it to our listeners, Dr. Pilman?"
     "The Pilman Radiant  is simplicity itself. Imagine that you spin a huge
globe and you  start firing bullets into it.  The bullet  holes would lie on
the  surface in a smooth curve.  The whole point of  what you call my  first
serious discovery lies in  the simple fact that all six Visitation Zones are
situated on the surface  of our planet as though someone had taken six shots
at Earth from a pistol located somewhere  along the Earth-Deneb  line. Deneb
is the alpha  star  in  Cygnus. The Point in  the heavens  from which, so to
speak, the shots came is the Pilman Radiant."
     "Thank you, doctor. My fellow Harmonites! Finally we have heard a clear
explanation of the Pilman Radiant! By the way, the day before  yesterday was
the thirtieth  anniversary of the Visitation.  Dr  Pilman, would you care to
say a few words to Your fellow townsmen on the subject?"
     "What in particular interests you? Remember, I wasn't in Harmont at the
time."
     "That makes it even more  interesting to hear what you  felt when  your
hometown  became  the site  of  an  Invasion  from a  supercivilization from
space."
     "To  tell the  truth,  I first thought  it was  a hoax.  It was hard to
imagine that anything like that could possibly happen In our little Harmont.
Gobi or Newfoundland seemed more likely than Harmont."
     "Nevertheless, you finally had to believe it."
     "Finally--yes."
     "And then?"
     "It suddenly occurred to  me that Harmont and the other five Visitation
Zones--sorry, my mistake, there were only  four  other  sites  known  at the
time-that  all  of  them  fit  on a  very smooth  curve.  I  calculated  the
coordinates and sent them to Nature. "
     "And you weren't at all concerned with the fate of your hometown?"
     "Not really. You see,  by then I had come to believe in the Visitation,
but  I simply could not force myself to believe the hysterical reports about
burning  neighborhoods  and monsters  that selectively devoured only old men
and children and about bloody battles between the invulnerable invaders  and
the highly vulnerable but steadfastly courageous Royal Tank Units."
     "You were right.  I  remember that our  reporters  really  botched  the
story. But let's return to science. The discovery of the Pilman Radiant  was
the first, but probably not the last, of your contributions to our knowledge
of the Visitation!"
     "The first and last."
     "But  surely  you  have  been  carefully  following  the  international
research in the Visitation Zones?"
     "Yes. Once in a while I read the Reports. "
     "You   mean   the   Reports   of   the   International   Institute   of
Extraterrestrial Cultures?"
     "Yes."
     "And what,  in  your opinion, has been the  most important discovery in
these thirty years?"
     "The fact of the Visitation itself."
     "I beg your pardon?"
     "The fact of the Visitation itself is  the most important discovery not
only of the past thirty years but of the entire history of mankind. It's not
so  important to  know just who  these visitors were. It's not important  to
know where they came from,  why  they  came, why  they spent so  little time
here,  or  where  they disappeared  to since.  The  important  thing is that
humanity now knows for sure: we are not alone in  the universe. I  fear that
the Institute of Extraterrestrial Cultures will never be fortunate enough to
make a more fundamental discovery."
     "This is very fascinating, Dr Pilman, but  actually I was thinking more
of advances and discoveries of a technological nature.  Discoveries that our
earth  scientists and engineers could use.  After  all,  many very important
scientists have proposed  that the discoveries made in the Visitation  Zones
are capable of changing the entire course of our history."
     "Well,  I don't subscribe  to that  point of view. And as for  specific
discoveries--that's not my field."
     "Yet for  the past two years you've been Canadian  consultant to the UN
Commission on Problems of the Visitation."
     "Yes.  But I  have  nothing  to do  with the  study of extraterrestrial
cultures. On the commission my colleagues and I represent the inter national
scientific community  when questions  come up  on implementing UN  decisions
regarding the internationalization of the Zones.  Roughly  speaking, we make
sure  that  the  extraterrestrial marvels found  in the Zones come into  the
hands of the International Institute."
     "Is there anyone else after these treasures?"
     "Yes."
     "You probably mean stalkers!"
     "I don't know what they are."
     "That's what we in Harmont call the thieves who risk their lives in the
Zone to grab everything they can lay their hands on. It's become a whole new
profession."
     "I understand. No, that's not within our competence."
     "I should think  not. That's police business. But I would be interested
in knowing just what does fall within your competence, Dr. Pilman."
     "There is a steady leak of materials from the Visitation Zones into the
hands  of irresponsible persons and  organizations. We deal with the results
of these leaks."
     "Could you be a little more specific, doctor?"
     "Can't  we talk about the arts instead? Wouldn't the  listeners care to
know my opinion of the incomparable Godi Muller?"
     "Of  course!  But I would  like  to  Finish with  science  first. As  a
scientist, aren't  you drawn to dealing with the extraterrestrial  treasures
yourself?"
     "How can I put it? I suppose so."
     Then,  we can  hope that one fine  day Harmonites will see their famous
fellow citizen on the streets of his home town?"
     "It's not impossible."