Chapter 01


So many impossible things. Ravna is dreaming. She knows that, but there is no waking. She can only watch and absorb and choke on horror. The Blight's fleet hangs all around her, ships clustered here and there like bugs stuck in slime. Originally, the fleet was a hundred fifty starships, and clouds of drones. The drones have been cannibalized. Many ships are gone, some cannibalized. Where it serves the Blight, crews have been cannibalized, too, or simply cast out. Her dreaming eyes can see hundreds of corpses, humans, dirokimes, even skrodeless riders.
   The Blight's prey is almost thirty light-years away, an ordinary solar system ... where Ravna and the Children have fled. And that is part of the reason this vision must be a dream. Thirty light-years is impossibly far in this part of the universe, where nothing goes faster than light. There is no way she can know what is happening in the enemy fleet.
   The fleet floats in death, but is not itself dead. Look closer at the clustered ships. Things move. Construction proceeds. The fleet was once the hand of a living god; now it exists to resurrect that god. Even trapped here, in this encystment of pain, it plans and builds, second on second, year on year, working as hard as its living crews can be driven. If necessary it can do this for centuries, breeding more crew to replace natural losses. This program will eventually produce ramscoop vessels. They will be the best that can exist Down Here, capable of reaching near light speed.
   Now perhaps none of that effort is necessary, for the Blight can see Ravna as she sees it, and the encysted god is saying to her: Rules change. I am coming. I am coming. And much sooner than you think.






Ravna woke with a start, gasping for breath.
   She was lying on the floor, her right arm painfully bent. I must have fallen. What a terrible dream. She struggled back into her chair. She wasn't in her cabin aboard the Out of Band II. The automation aboard Oobii would


have turned the floor soft before she ever hit it. She looked around, trying to orient herself, but all she could remember was the dream.
   She ran her hand across the side of her chair. It was wood, local Tinish manufacture, as was the table. But the walls had a greenish cast, gently curving into the equally greenish floor. Okay, she was inside the Children's landing craft, under Woodcarver's castle. That took long enough to recognize! She leaned her head into her hands, and let the cabin spin around to a stop. When her dizziness had passed, she sat back and tried to think. Except for the last few minutes, everything seemed reasonable:
   She had come down to the catacombs to inspect the Children's caskets. This part of the castle spanned a range of technology from the pre- gunpowder to fallen transcendence, the walls carved with chisels and mallets, the light provided by lamps from Oobii. Two years ago, the coldsleep containers had been removed from the Straumer Lander and laid out with enough space between them to dissipate the waste heat of the refrigeration.
   Half of the caskets were empty now, their passengers awakened. That included almost all the oldest Children. Nowadays, the kids lived in or near the new castle, some were in school classes in this castle. If she listened carefully, she could hear occasional shrieks of laughter mixed with the gobble of Tinish packs.
   So why did I enter the Lander? Oh yes. She'd spent a only few minutes outside, looking through the casket windows at the faces of little ones who still slept, who waited unknowing for there to be enough grownup caregivers. Most of those revivals would be routine, but some of the caskets tested as borderline defective. How could she save the kids in those withered caskets? That had been the reason for today's visit, to review the results on Timor Ristling, her first attempt with the withered caskets.
   The Lander was originally Top-of-the-Beyond technology. Much of that could not function down here in the Slow Zone; she'd never been able to transfer the Lander's maintenance records to the stable technology of her own ship. She had to come onboard to access those records. Her gaze slid uneasily around the Lander's freight cabin. Too much had happened in this green-walled room. The Lander wasn't just Top of the Beyond. It had been at the High Lab, in the Low Transcend, and it had been ... modified. If she looked up she would see some of that, the fungus hanging from the ceiling.


The magical Countermeasure. Nowadays, it seemed to be as dead as a dusty cobweb, but Countermeasure had dimmed the sun, and killed her dearest love, and maybe saved the galaxy. The remains of the fungus bothered even the Straumer Children.
This was not a surprising place to have a really bad dream.
   But now she remembered what she had been doing just before the crazy dream overtook her. The last two days had been a nonstop guilt trip, with far too little sleep. It was clear that she had screwed up Timor's chances. Not deliberately, not through incompetence. But I did pick him for the first problem revival. Someone had to be the first, or else all the damaged casket kids would be at risk. And I picked Timor. The problem wasn't the boy's twisted leg, it wasn't the fact that he might not be quite as brilliant as the other children. The problem was that in the two hundred days since his revival, Timor had not grown.
   Ravna Bergsndot was thousands of light-years from reliable advice. Oobii and this strang Lander were all she had. She remembered pounding on the data for almost an hour, combining Timor's casket records with Oobii's latest medical tests, and finally understanding what had gone wrong. No one and no machine Down Here could have known that ahead of time. In cold, cruel truth, Timor had turned out to be a very valuable ... experiment.
   When she'd finally realized that, Ravna had put her head in her arms, too tired to look for any more technical fixes and raging against the possibility that she had become a player with other people's lives.
   So then I just fell asleep and had the nightmare? She stared at the greenish bulkheads. She had been very tired, and totally beaten down. Ravna sighed. She often had nightmares about the Blighter fleet, though this was the most bizarre ever. A tip of the hat then to the subconscious mind; it had dug up something that could distract her from Timor, if only briefly.
   She disconnected her tiara interface from the Lander, and climbed down from the freight cabin. Three years ago, when Sjana and Arne Olsndot had brought the children here, this ground had been open meadow. She stood for a moment by the spidery pylons, looking round the cool, dry catacombs. Imagine a spacecraft with a castle built over it. Only in the Slow Zone.


   She would have to come back here again and again until all the Children were revived-but she was grateful to be done with this place for today. Up two flights of stairs and she would be in the castle yard, in the summer sunlight. There would be the Children just leaving class, playing with each other and with their Tinish friends. If she stayed to chat, she would likely be in the new castle all afternoon. It might be the sunny evening before she had to be back in her cabin aboard the Oobii. As she started up the steps, she could imagine feeling light-hearted. She would take some time off, just to play with the Children. Somehow she would make things right for Timor.
   She was still in the dark of the stairs when she remembered something else about the dream. She paused, steadying herself with a hand against the cool stonework. The mind in the fleet had said, "Rules change." Yes, if the Zone shifted and faster-than-light transport became possible again-well, the Blight could arrive very soon indeed. It was a possibility she obsessed upon both awake and in her dreams. She had zonographs aboard the Oobii that monitored the relevant physical laws, had done so since the Battle on Starship Hill. There had never been an alarm.
   Still leaning against the wall, Ravna queried Out of Band II, requesting a window on the zonograph. The graphic came up, a stupidly self-formatted plot. Yes, there was the usual noise. Then she noticed the scaling. That couldn't be right! She slewed her gaze back five hundred seconds, and saw that the trace had spiked. For almost ten milliseconds, Zone physics had shot above the probe's calibration, so high it might have been Transcendent. Then she noticed the pulsing red border. It was the Zone alarm she had so carefully set-the alarm she should have received at the instant of the spike. Impossible, impossible. This had to be some sort of screw-up. She rummaged in diagnostics, horror rising. Yes, there had been a screw-up: she had only enabled the Zone alarm for when she was local to Oobii. Why hadn't ship logic caught that stupid error? She knew the answer to that question. She'd explained it to the Children dozens of times. The kids could not understand that when you scrape your knee, it might be your own fault. We're living in the Slow Zone. We have virtually no automation, and what we have is painfully simple, devoid of common sense. Down Here, if you wanted something done right, you had to provide the good judgment


yourself. The kids didn't like that answer. Where they came from, it was a far more alien idea than it was even for Ravna Bergsndot.
   She glared at the displays that hung in the dark all around her. This was clearly a Zone alarm, but it could be a false alarm. It had to be! The spike had been so brief, less than ten probe samples. An instrumental transient. Yes. She turned and continued up the stairs, still searching back and forth along the timeline's trace, looking for evidence of an innocuous explanation. There were a number of system diagnostics she could run.
   She thought about this for five more steps, making a turn from one flight of stairs to the next. Up ahead she could see a square of daylight.
   Since the Battle on Starship Hill, the Zone physics had been as solid as a mountain's roots ... but that was a comparison with fatal consequence. Earthquakes happen. Foreshocks happened. What she was seeing could be a tiny, sudden slip in the foundation of the local universe. She looked at the times on the Zone trace. The spike occurred about when she took her odd little nap down in the Children's Lander. So then. For almost one hundredth of a second, maybe c had not been the ultimate speed, and the Lander could have known the current state of the Blighter fleet. For almost one hundredth of a second, Countermeasure could have functioned.
And her dream was simply news.
   Even so, she still didn't know how much time they had left. It might be just hours. But if it was years, or decades-then every moment must be made to count. Somehow.
   "Hei, Ravna!" came a childish shout from across the yard, in the direction of the school. They would be around her in a moment.
   I can't do this. She half-turned, retreating toward the stairway. Nightmares can be the truth. It wasn't just villains who have to make the hard decisions.








TOR BOOKS BY VERNOR VINGE


The Tatja Grimm's World The Witling
The Peace War Marooned in Realtime Rainbows End
COLLECTIONS
True Names and the Opening of the Cyberspace Frontier The Collected Stories of Vernor Vinge
THE ZONES OF THOUGHT SERIES
A Fire upon the Deep A Deepness in the Sky The Children of the Sky








about the author






Vernor Vinge is the author of the Hugo Award-winning novels A Fire upon the Deep, A Deepness in the Sky, and Rainbows End, the seminal short novel True Names, The Peace War, and Marooned in Realtime, as well as others. He has also won two Hugo Awards for shorter works, and has won other awards, including two Prometheus Awards for best libertarian fiction. A mathematician and computer scientist noted as a visionary proponent of the technological Singularity, he lives in San Diego, California. You can sign up for email updates here.




  Thank you for buying this Tom Doherty Associates ebook.


   To receive special offers, bonus content, and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.




Or visit us online at us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup


For email updates on the author, click here.






























Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe.
And related subjects.


*
More than just a publisher's website, Tor.com is a venue for original fiction, comics, and discussion of the entire field of SF and fantasy, in all media and from all sources. Visit our site today-and join the conversation yourself.








This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.


A FIRE UPON THE DEEP


Copyright (c) 1992 by Vernor Vinge Introduction copyright (c) 2020 by John Clute All rights reserved.
Map by Ellisa Mitchell Edited by James Frenkel
A Tor Essentials Book
Published by Tom Doherty Associates 120 Broadway
New York, NY 10271 www.tor-forge.com
Tor(r) is a registered trademark of Macmillan Publishing Group, LLC.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the first Tor trade paperback edition as follows: Vinge, Vernor.
A fire upon the deep / Vernor Vinge.-1st ed.
p. cm.
"A Tom Doherty Associates book."
ISBN 978-1-250-25583-9 (trade paperback) ISBN 978-1-4299-8198-9 (ebook)
1. Life on other planets-Fiction. 2. Science fiction. I. Title. PS3572.I534 F57 1992
813'.54-dc23
91039020


ISBN 978-1-250-23775-0 (trade paperback)


Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.


First Edition: April 1992
First Tor Essentials Edition: May 2020


eISBN: 9781429981989








contents


Title Page Copyright Notice Introduction Dedication Acknowledgments Prologue
Part I
One Two Three Four Five Six Seven Eight Nine Ten Eleven Twelve
Thirteen Fourteen Fifteen Sixteen
Part II
Seventeen Eighteen Nineteen Twenty


Twenty-One Twenty-Two Twenty-Three Twenty-Four Twenty-Five Twenty-Six Twenty-Seven Twenty-Eight Twenty-Nine Thirty
Thirty-One Thirty-Two Thirty-Three Thirty-Four Thirty-Five Thirty-Six
Part III
Thirty-Seven Thirty-Eight Thirty-Nine Forty