thirty-six


Kjet Svensndot was alone on ÿlvira's bridge when the surge passed. They had long since done all the preparations that were meaningful, and the ship had no realistic means of propulsion in the Slowness that surrounded it. Yet the Group Captain spent much of his time up here, trying to program some sort of responsiveness into the automation that remained. Half-assed programming was a time-filler that, like knitting, must date to the beginning of the human experience.
   Of course, the actual transition out of Slowness would have been totally unnoticed if not for all the alarms he and the Dirokimes had installed. As it was, the noise and lights blew him out of a half-drowse into hair-raised wakefulness. He punched the ship's comm: "Glimfrelle! Tirolle! Get your tails up here."
   By the time the brothers reached the command deck, preliminary nav displays had been computed and a jump sequence was awaiting confirmation. The two were grinning from ear to ear as they bounced in and strapped themselves down at action posts. For a few moments there was little chitchat, only an occasional whistle of pleasure from the Dirokimes. They had rehearsed this over and over during the last hundred plus hours, and with the poor automation there was a lot for them to do. Gradually the view from the deck's windows sharpened. Where at first there had only been vague blurs, the ultrawave sensors were posting individual traces with steadily improving information on range and rates. The communication window showed the queue of fleet comm messages getting longer and longer.
   Tirolle looked up from his work "Hei, Boss, these jump figures look okay-at least as a first cut."
   "Good. Commit and allow autocommit." In the hours after the Surge, they had decided that their initial priority should be to continue with the


pursuit. What they did then ... they had talked long on that, and Group Captain Svensndot had thought even longer. Nothing was routine anymore.
   "Yes, sir!" The Dirokime's longfingers danced across the controls, and 'Rolle added some verbal control. "Bingo!"
   Status showed five jumps completed, ten. Kjet stared out the true-view window for a few seconds. No change, no change ... then he noticed that one of the brightest stars in the field had moved, was sliding imperceptibly across the sky. Like a juggler getting her pace, ÿlvira was coming up to speed.
   "Hei, hei!" Glimfrelle leaned over to see his brother's work. "We're making 1.2 light-years per hour. That's better than before the surge."
   "Good. Comm and Surveillance?" Where was everybody else and what were they up to?
   "Yup. Yup. I'm on it." Glimfrelle bent his slender frame back to the console. For some seconds, he was almost silent. Svensndot began paging through the mail. There was nothing yet from Owner Limmende. Twenty- five years Kiet had worked for Limmende and SjK Commercial Security. Could he mutiny? And if he did, would any follow?
   "Okay. Here's the situation, Boss." Glimfrelle shifted the main window to show his interpretation of the ship's reports. "It's like we guessed, maybe a little more extreme." They had realized almost from the beginning that the surge was bigger than anything in recorded history; that's not what the Dirokime meant by "extreme." He swept his shortfingers down, making a hazy blue line across the window. "We guessed that the leading edge of the surge moved normal to this line. That would account for it taking Boss Limmende out four hundred seconds before it hit the Out of Band, and hitting us ten seconds after that.... Now if the trailing edge were similar to ordinary surges"-upgraded a million times-"then we, and then the rest of the pursuing fleets should come out well before Out of Band." He pointed at a single glowing dot that represented the ÿlvira. Around and just ahead of it dozens of points of light were popping into existence as the ship's detectors reported seeing the initiation of ultradrive jumps. It was like a cold fire sweeping away from them into the darkness. Eventually Limmende and the heart of the anonymous fleet would all be back in business. "Our pickup log shows that's about what happened. Most all the pursuing fleets will be out of the surge before the Out of Band."


"Hm. So it'll lose part of its lead."
   "Yup. But if it's going where we think"-a G star eighty light-years ahead of the fugitive-"it'll still get there before they kill it." He paused, pointed at a haze that was spreading sideways from the growing knot of light. "Not everybody is still chasing."
   "Yeah...." Svensndot had been reading the News even as he listened to 'Frelle's summary. "... according to the Net, that's the Alliance for the Defense departing the battlefield, victorious."
   "Say what?" Tirolle twisted abruptly in his harness. His large, dark eyes held none of their usual humor.
   "You heard me." Kjet put the item where the brothers could see it. The two read rapidly, 'Frelle mumbling phrases aloud, "... courage of Alliance commanders.... substantial destruction of escaping forces...."
   Glimfrelle shuddered, all flippancy departed. "They don't even mention the surge. Everything they say is a cowardly lie!" His voice shifted up to its normal speaking range and he continued in his own language. Kjet could understand parts of it. The Dirokimes that left their dream habitats were normally lighthearted folk, full of whimsy and gentle sarcasm. Glimfrelle sounded almost that way now, except for the high edges to his whistling and the insults more colorful than Svensndot had ever heard from them: "... get from a verminous cow-pie ... killers of innocent dreams..." Even in Samnorsk the words were strong, but in Dirokime "verminous cow-pie" was drenched in explicit imagery that almost brought the smell of such a thing into the room. Glimfrelle's voice went higher and higher, then beyond the human register. Abruptly he collapsed, shuddering and moaning low. Dirokimes could cry, though Svensndot had never seen such a thing before. Glimfrelle rocked in his brother's arms.
   Tirolle looked over Glimfrelle's shoulder at Kjet. "Where does revenge take us now, Group Captain?"
   For a moment, Kjet looked back silently. "I'll let you know, Lieutenant." He looked at the displays. Listen and watch a little longer, and maybe we'll know. "Meantime, get us nearer the center of pursuit," he said gently.
   "Aye, sir." Tirolle patted his brother's back gently and returned to his console.






During the next five hours, ÿlvira's crew watched the Alliance fleet race helter-skelter for the higher spaces. It could not even be called a retreat, more a panicked dissolution. Great opportunists, they had not hesitated to kill by treachery, and to give chase when they thought there might be treasure at the end. Now that they were confronted with the possibility of being trapped in the Slowness, of dying between the stars, they raced for their separate safety. Their bulletins to the newsgroups were full of bravado, but their maneuver couldn't be disguised. Former neutrals pointed to the discrepancy; more and more it was accepted that the Alliance was built around the Aprahanti Hegemony and perhaps had other motives than altruistic opposition to the Blight. There was nervous speculation about who might next receive Alliance attention.
   Major transceivers still targeted the fleets. They might as well have been on a network trunk. The news traffic was a vast waterfall, totally beyond ÿlvira's present ability to receive. Nevertheless, Svensndot kept an eye on it. Somewhere there might be some clue, some insight.... The majority of War Trackers and Threats seemed to have little interest in the Alliance or the death of Sjandra Kei, per se. Most were terrified of the Blight that was still spreading through the Top of the Beyond. None of the Highest had successfully resisted, and there were rumors that two more interfering Powers had been destroyed. There were some (secret mouths of the Blight?) who welcomed the new stability at the Top, even one based on permanent parasitation.
   In fact, the chase down here at the Bottom, the flight of the Out of Band and its pursuers, seemed the only place where the Blight was not completely triumphant. No wonder they were the subject of 10,000 messages an hour.
   The geometry of emergence was enormously favorable to ÿlvira. They had been on the outskirts of the action, but now they had hours headstart on the main fleets. Glimfrelle and Tirolle were busier than they had ever been in their lives, monitoring the fleets' emergence and establishing ÿlvira's identity with the other vessels of Commercial Security. Until Scrits and Limmende emerged from the Slowness, Kjet Svensndot was the ranking officer of the organization. Furthermore, he was personally known to most


of the commanders. Kjet had never been the admiral type; his Group Captaincy had been a reward for piloting skills, in a Sjandra Kei at peace. He had always been content to defer to his employers. But now ...
   The Group Captain used his ranking status. The Alliance vessels were not pursued. ("Wait till we can all act together," ordered Svensndot.) Possible game plans bounced back and forth across the emerging fleet, including schemes that assumed HQ was destroyed. With certain commanders, Kjet hinted that this last might be the case, that Limmende's flagship was in enemy hands, and that the Alliance was somehow just a side effect of that true enemy. Very soon Kjet would be committed to the "treason" he planned.
   The Limmende flagships and the core of the Blighter fleet came out of the Slowness almost simultaneously. Comm alarms went off across ÿlvira's deck as priority mail arrived and passed through the ship's crypto. "Source: Limmende at HQ. Star Breaker Priority," said the ship's voice.
   Glimfrelle put the message on the main window, and Svensndot felt a chill of certainty spread up his neck.


... All units are to pursue fleeing vessels. These are the enemy, the killers of our people. WARNING: Masquerades suspected. Destroy any vessels countermanding these orders. Order of Battle and validation codes follow....


   Order of Battle was simple, even by Commercial Security standards. Limmende wanted them to split up and be gone, staying only long enough to destroy "masqueraders." Kjet said to Glimfrelle, "How about the validation codes?"
   The Dirokime seemed his usual self again. "They're clean. We wouldn't be receiving the message at all unless the sender had today's one-time pad.
... We're beginning to receive queries from the others, Boss. Audio and video channels. They want to know what to do."
   If he hadn't prepared the ground during the last few hours, Kjet's mutiny wouldn't have had a chance. If Commercial Security had been a real military organization, the Limmende order might have been obeyed without question. As it was, the other commanders pondered the questions that


Svensndot had raised. At these ranges, video communication was easy and the fleet had one-time ciphers large enough to support enormous amounts of it. Yet "Limmende" had chosen printed mail for her priority message. It made perfect military sense given that the encryption was correct, but it was also what Svensndot had predicted: The supposed HQ was not quite willing to show its face down here where perfect visual masquerades were not possible. Their commands would be by mail, or evocations that any sharp observer might suspect.
   Such a slender thread of reason Kjet and his friends were hanging from. Kjet eyed the knot of light that represented the Blighter fleet. It was suffering from no indecision. None of its vessels were straggling back toward safer heights. Whatever commanded there had discipline beyond most human militaries. It would sacrifice everything in its single-minded
pursuit of one small starship. What next, Group Captain?
   Just ahead of that cold smear of light, a single tiny gleam appeared. "The Out of Band!" said Glimfrelle. "Sixty-five light-years out now."
   "I'm getting encrypted video from them, Boss. The same half-crocked xor pad as before." He put the signal on the main window without waiting for Kjet's direction.
   It was Ravna Bergsndot. The background was a jumble of motion and shouting, the strange human and a Skroderider arguing. Bergsndot was facing away from the pickup and doing her share of shouting. Things looked even worse than Kjet's recollection of the first moments of his ship's emergence.
"It doesn't matter just now, I tell you! Let him be. We've got to contact
-" She must have seen the signal Glimfrelle was sending back to her. "They're here! By the Powers, Pham, please-" She waved her hand angrily and turned to the camera. "Group Captain. We're-"
   "I know. We've been out of the Surge for hours. We're near the center of the pursuit now."
   She caught her breath. Even with a hundred hours of planning, events were moving too fast for her. And for me too. "That's something," she said after an instant. "Everything we said before holds, Group Captain. We need your help. That's the Blight that's coming behind us. Please!"
   Svensndot noticed a telltale by the window. Sassy Glimfrelle was retransmitting this to all the fleet they could trust. Good. He had talked


about the situation with the others these last hours, but it meant something more to see Ravna Bergsndot on the comm, to see someone from Sjandra Kei who still survived and needed their help. You can spend the rest of your life chasing revenge in the Middle Beyond, but all you kill will be the vultures. What's chasing Ravna Bergsndot may be the first cause.






The butterflies were long gone, still singing their courage across the Net. Less than one percent of Commercial Security had followed "Limmende's" order to chase after them. Those were not the problem: it was the ten percent that stayed behind and arrayed themselves with the Blight's forces that bothered Kjet Svensndot. Some of those ships might not be subverted, might simply be loyal to orders they believed. It would be very hard to fire on them.
   And there would be fighting, no doubt of that. Maneuvering for conflict while under ultradrive was difficult-if the other side attempted to evade. But the Blight's fleet was unwavering in its pursuit of the Out of Band. Slowly, slowly the two fleets were coming to occupy the same volume. At present they were scattered across cubic light-years, but with every jump the Group Captain's Aniara fleet was more finely tuned to the stutter of their quarries' drives. Some ships were actually within a few hundred million kilometer of the enemy-or where the enemy had been or would be. Targeting tactics were set. First fire was only a few hundred seconds away.
   "With the Aprahanti gone, we have numerical superiority. A normal enemy would back off now-"
   "But of course, that is one thing the Blight fleet is not." It was the red- haired guy who was doing the talking now. It was a good thing Glimfrelle hadn't relayed his face to the rest of Svensndot's fleet. The guy acted edgy and alien most of the time. Just now he seemed intent on bashing every idea Svensndot advanced. "The Blight doesn't care what its losses are as long as it arrives with the upper hand."
   Svensndot shrugged. "Look, we'll do our best. First fire is one hundred and fifty seconds off. If they don't have any secret advantage, we may win this one." He looked sharply at the other. "Or is that your point? Could the Blight-" Stories were still coming down about the Blight's progress across


the Top of the Beyond. Without a doubt it was a transhuman intelligence. An unarmed man might be out-numbered by a pack of dogs, yet still defeat them. So might the Blight...?
   Pham Nuwen shook his head. "No, no, no. The Blight's tactics down here will probably be inferior to yours. Its great advantage is at the Top, where it can control its slaves like fingers on a hand. Its creatures down here are like badly synched waldos." Nuwen frowned at something off- camera. "No, what we have to fear is its strategic cleverness." His voice suddenly had a detached quality that was more unsettling than the earlier impatience. It wasn't the calm of someone facing up to a threat; it was more the calm of the demented. "One hundred seconds to contact.... Group Captain, we have a chance, if you concentrate your forces on the right points." Ravna floated down from the top of the picture, put one hand on the redhead's shoulder. Godshatter, she said he was, their secret edge against the enemy. Godshatter, a Power's dying message; garbage or treasure, who really knew?
   Damn. If the other guys are badly synched waldos, what does following Pham Nuwen make us? But he motioned Tirolle to mark the targets that Nuwen was saying. Ninety seconds. Decision time. Kjet pointed at the red marks Tirolle had scattered through the enemy fleet. "Anything special about those targets, 'Rolle?"
   The Dirokime whistled for a moment. Correlations popped up agonizingly slowly on the windows before him. "The ships he's targetting aren't the biggest or the fastest. It's gonna take extra time to position on them." Command vessels? "One other thing. Some of 'em show high real velocities, not natural residuals at all." Ships with ram drives? Planet busters?
   "Hm." Svensndot looked at the display just a second more. Thirty seconds and Jo Haugen's ship Lynsnar would be in contact, but not with one of Nuwen's targets. "Get on the comm, Glimfrelle. Tell Lynsnar to back off, retarget." Retarget everything.
   The lights that were Aniara fleet slid slowly around the core of the Blighter fleet, searching for their new targets. Twenty minutes passed, and not a few arguments with the other captains. Commercial Security was not built for military combat. What had made Kjet Svensndot's appeal successful  was  also  the  cause  of  constant  questioning  and


countersuggestions. And then there were the threats that came from Owner Limmende's channel: kill the mutineers, death to all those disloyal to the company. The encryption was valid but the tone was totally alien to the mild, profit-oriented Giske Limmende. Everyone could now see that disbelieving Limmende was one correct decision, anyway.
   Johanna Haugen was the first to achieve synch with the new targets. Glimfrelle opened the main window on the Lynsnar's data stream. The view was almost natural, a night sky of slowly shifting stars. The target was less than thirty million kilometers from Lynsnar, but about a millisecond out of synch. Haugen was arriving just before or just after the other had jumped.
   "Drones away," Haugen's voice said. Now they had a true view of Lynsnar from a few meters away, from a camera aboard one of the first drones launched. The ship was barely visible, a darkness obscuring the stars beyond-a great fish in the depths of an endless sea. A fish that was now giving spawn. The picture flickered, Lynsnar disappearing and reappearing as the drone lost synch momentarily. A swarm of blue lights spilled from the ship's hold. Weapon drones. The swarm hung by Lynsnar, calibrating itself, orienting on the enemy.
   The light faded from around Lynsnar as the drones moved fractionally out of synch in space and time. Tirolle opened a window on a hundred- million klick sphere centered at Lynsnar. The target vessel was a red dot that flickered around the sphere like a maddened insect. Lynsnar was stalking prey at eight thousand times the speed of light. Sometimes the target disappeared for a second, synch almost lost; other times Lynsnar and the target merged for an instant as the two craft spent a tenth of a second at less than a million kilometers' remove. What could not be accurately displayed was the disposition of the drones. The spawn diffused on a myriad trajectories, their sensors extended for sign of the enemy ship.
   "What about the target, is it swarming back? Do you need backup?" said Svensndot. Tirolle gave a Dirokime shrug. What they were watching was three light-years away. No way he could know.
   But Jo Haugen replied, "I don't think my bogie is swarming. I've lost only five drones, no more'n you'd expect from near misses. We'll see-" She paused, but Lynsnar's trace and signal remained strong. Kjet looked out the other windows. Five of Aniara were already engaged and three had


completed swarm deploy. Nuwen looked on silently from Out of Band. The godshatter had had its way, and now Kjet and his people were committed.
And now good news and bad came in very fast:
   "Got him!" from Jo Haugen. The red dot in Lynsnar's swarm was no more. It had passed within a few thousand kilometers of one of the drones. In the milliseconds necessary to compute a new jump, the drone had discovered its presence and detonated. Even that would not have been fatal if the target had jumped before the blast front hit it; there had been several near misses in earlier seconds. This time the jump did not reach commit in time. A mini-star was born, one whose light would be years in reaching the rest of the battle volume.
Glimfrelle gave a rasping whistle, an untranslatable curse. "We just lost
Ablsndot and Holder, Boss. Their target must have counter-swarmed." "Send in Gliwing and Trance." Something in the back of his head
curled up in a knot of horror. These were his friends who were dying. Kjet had seen death before, but never like this. In police action no one took lethal chances except in a rescue. And yet ... he turned from the field summary to order more ships on a target that had acquired defending vessels. Tirolle was moving in others on his own. Ganging up a few nonessential targets might lose in the long run, but in the short term ... the enemy was being hurt. For the first time since the fall of Sjandra Kei, Commercial Security was hurting someone back.
   Haugen: "Powers, that guy was moving! Secondary drone got EM spectrum on the kill. Target was going 15,000 kps true speed." A rocket bomb ramping up? Damn. They should be postponing those till after they controlled the battlefield.
   Tirolle: "More kills, far side of battle volume. The enemy is repositioning. Somehow they've guessed which we're after-"
   Glimfrelle: Triumph whistle. "Get 'em, get 'em-oops. Boss, I think Limmende has figured we're coordinating things-"
   A new window had opened over Tirolle's post. It showed the five million kilometers around ÿlvira. Two other ships were there now. The window identified them as Limmende's flag and one of the vessels that had not responded to Svensndot's recruiting.
   There was an instant of stillness on ÿlvira's command deck. The voices of triumph and panic coming from the rest of the fleet seemed suddenly far


away. Svensndot and his crew looked at death close up. "Tirolle! How long till swarm-"
"They're on us already-just missed a drone by ten milliseconds." "Tirolle! Finish running current engagements. Glimfrelle, tell Lynsnar
and Trance to chain command if we lose contact." Those ships had already spent their drones, and Jo Haugen was known to all the other captains.
   Then the thought was gone, and he was busy coordinating ÿlvira's own battle swarm. The local tactics window showed the cloud dissipating, taking on colors coded by whether they were lagging or leading relative to ÿlvira.
   Their two attackers had matched pseudospeeds perfectly. Ten times per second all three ships jumped a tiny fraction of a light-year. Like rocks skipping across the surface of a pond, they appeared in real space in perfectly measured hops-and the distance between them at every emergence was less that five million kilometers. The only thing that separated them now were millisecond differences in jump times and the fact the light itself could not pass between them in the brief time they spent at each jump point.
   Three actinic flashes lit the deck, casting shadows back from Svensndot and the Dirokimes. It was second-hand light, the display's emergency signal of nearby detonation. Run like hell was the message any rational person should take from that awful light. It would be easy enough to break synch ... and lose tactical control of Aniara fleet. Tirolle and Glimfrelle bent their heads away from the local window, shying from the glare of nearby death. Their whistling voices scarcely broke cadence, and the commands from ÿlvira to the others continued. There were dozens of other battles going on out there. Just now ÿlvira was the only source of precision and control available to their side. Every second they remained on station meant protection and advantage to Aniara. Breaking off would mean minutes of chaos till Lynsnar or Trance could pick up control.
   Nearly two-thirds of Pham Nuwen's targets were destroyed now. The price had been high, half of Svensdot's friends. The enemy had lost much to protect those targets, yet much of its fleet survived.
   An unseen hand smashed ÿlvira, driving Svensndot hard against his combat harness. The lights went out, even the glow from the windows. Then dim red light came from the floor. The Dirokimes were silhouetted by


one small monitor. 'Rolle whistled softly. "We're out of the game, Boss, least while it counts. I didn't know you could get misses that near."
   Maybe it wasn't a miss. Kjet scrambled out of his harness and boosted across the room to float head-down over the tiny monitor. Maybe we're already dead. Somewhere very close by a drone had detonated, the wave front reaching ÿlvira before she jumped. The concussion had been the outer part of the ship's hull exploding as it absorbed the soft-X-ray component of the enemy ordnance. He stared at the red letters marching slowly across the damage display. Most likely, the electronics was permanently dead; chances were they had all received a fatal dose of gamma. The smell of burnt insulation floated across the room on the ventilator's breeze.
   "Iiya! Look at that. Five nanoseconds more and we wouldn't have been clipped at all. We actually jumped after the front hit!" And somehow the electronics had survived long enough to complete the jump. The gamma flux through the command deck had been 200 rem, nothing that would slow them down over the next few hours, and easily managed by a ship's surgeon. As for the surgeon and all the rest of the ÿlvira's automation ...
   Tirolle typed several long queries at the box; there was no voice recognition left. Several seconds passed before a response marched across the screen. "Central automation suspended. Display management suspended. Drive computation suspended." Tirolle dug an elbow at his brother. "Hei, 'Frelle, it looks like 'Vira managed a clean disconnect. We can bring most of this back!"






Dirokimes were known for being drifty optimists, but in this case Tirolle wasn't far from the truth. Their encounter with the drone bomb had been a one-in-a-billion thing, the tiniest fraction of an exposure. Over the next hour and a half the Dirokimes ran reboots off the monitor's hardened processor, bringing up first one utility and then another. Some things were beyond recovery. Parsing intelligence was gone from the comm automation, and the ultradrive spines on one side of the craft were partially melted. (Absurdly, the burning smell had been a vagrant diagnostic, something that should have been disabled along with all the rest of ÿlivra's automation.) They were far behind the Blighter fleet.


   ... and there was still a Blighter fleet. The knot of enemy lights was smaller than before, but on the same unwavering trajectory. The battle was long over. What was left of Commercial Security was scattered across four light-years of abandoned battlefield; they had started the battle with numerical superiority. If they'd fought properly, they might have won. Instead they'd destroyed the vessels with significant real velocities-and knocked out only about half the others. Some of the largest enemy vessels survived. These outnumbered the corresponding Aniara survivors by more than four to one. The Blight could have easily destroyed all that remained of Commercial Security. But that would have meant a detour from the pursuit, and that pursuit was the one constant in the enemy's behavior.
   Tirolle and Glimfrelle spent hours reestablishing communications and trying to discover who had died and who might be rescued. Five ships had lost all drive capability but still had surviving crew. Some ships had been hit at known locations, and Svensndot dispatched vessels with drone swarms to find the wrecks. Ship-to-ship warfare was a sanitary, intellectual exercise for most of the survivors, but the rubble and the destruction were as real as in any ground war, only spread over a trillion times more space.






Finally the time for miracle rescues and sad discoveries was passed. The SjK commanders gathered on a common channel to decide a common future. It might better have been a wake-for Sjandra Kei and Aniara fleet. Partway through the meeting a new window appeared, a view onto the bridge of the Out of Band. Ravna Bergsndot watched the proceedings silently. The erstwhile "godshatter" was nowhere in evidence.
   "What more to do?" said Johanna Haugen. "The damn butterflies are long gone."
   "Are we sure we have rescued everyone?" asked Jan Trenglets. Svensndot bit back an angry reply. The commander of Trance had become a recording loop on that issue. He had lost too many friends in the battle; all the rest of his life Jan Trenglets would live with nightmares of ships slowly dying in the deep night.
   "We've accounted for everything, even to vapor," Haugen spoke as gently as the words allowed. "The question is where to go now."


Ravna made a small throat-clearing sound. "Gentlemen and ladies, if
-"
Trenglets looked up at her transceived image. All his hurt transformed
into a blaze of anger. "We're not your gentlemen, slut! You're not some princess we happily die for. You deserve our deadly fire now, nothing more."
The woman shrank from Trenglets's rage. "I-"
   "You put us into this suicidal battle," shouted Trenglets. "You made us attack secondary targets. And then you did nothing to help. The Blight is locked on you like a dumshark on a squid. If you had just altered your course the tiniest fraction, you could have thrown the Blighters off our path."
   "I doubt that would have helped, sir," said Ravna. "The Blight seems most interested in where we're bound." The solar system a few dozen light- years beyond the Out of Band. The fugitives would arrive there just over two days before their pursuers.
   Jo Haugen shrugged. "You must realize what your friend's crazy battle plan has done. If we had attacked rationally, the enemy would be a fraction of its present size. If it chose to continue, we might have been able to protect you at this, this Tines World." She seemed to taste the strange name, wondering at its meaning. "Now ... no way am I going to chase them there. What's left of the enemy could wipe us out." She glanced at Svensndot's viewpoint. Kjet forced himself to look back. No matter who might blame the Out of Band, it had been Group Captain Kjet Svensndot's word that had persuaded the fleet to fight as they did. Aniara's sacrifice had been ill-spent, and he wondered that Haugen and Trenglets and the others talked to him at all now. "Suggest we continue the business meeting later. Rendezvous in one thousand seconds, Kjet."
"I'll be ready."
   "Good." Jo cut the link without saying anything more to Ravna Bergsndot. Seconds later, Trenglets and the other commanders were gone. It was just Svensndot and the two Dirokimes-and Ravna Bergsndot looking out her window from the Out of Band.
   Finally, Bergsndot said, "When I was a little girl on Herte, sometimes we would play kidnappers and Commercial Security. I always dreamed of being rescued from fates worse than death by your company."


   Kjet smiled bleakly. "Well, you got the rescue attempt." And you're not even a currently subscribed customer. "This was far the biggest gun fight we've ever been in."
"I'm sorry, Kje-Group Captain."
   He looked into her dark features. A lass from Sjandra Kei, down to the violet eyes. No way this could be a simulation, not here. He had bet everything that she was not; he still believed she was not. Yet-"What does your friend say about all this?" Pham Nuwen had not been seen since his so-impressive godshatter act at the beginning of the battle.
   Ravna's glance shifted to something off-camera. "He's not saying much, Group Captain. He's wandering around even more upset than your Captain Trenglets. Pham remembers being absolutely convinced he was demanding the right thing, but now he can't figure out why it was right."
   "Hmm." A little late for second thoughts. "What are you going to do now? Haugen is right, you know. It would be useless suicide for us to follow the Blighters to your destination. I daresay it's useless suicide for you, too. You'll arrive maybe fifty-five hours before them. What can you do in that time?"
   Ravna Bergsndot looked back at him, and her expression slowly collapsed into sobbing grief. "I don't know. I ... don't know." She shook her head, her face hidden behind her hands and a sweep of black hair. Finally she looked up and brushed back her hair. Her voice was calm but very quiet.
   "I ... don't know. But we are going ahead. It's what we came for. Things could still work out.... You know there's something down there, something the Blight wants desperately. Maybe fifty-five hours is enough to figure out what it is and tell the Net. And ... and we'll still have Pham's godshatter."
   Your worst enemy? Quite possibly this Pham Nuwen was a construct of the Powers. He certainly looked like something built from a second-hand description of humanity. But how can you tell godshatter from simple nuttery?
   She shrugged, as if acknowledging the doubts-and accepting them. "So what will you and Commercial Security do?"
   "There is no Commercial Security anymore. Virtually all our customers got shot out from under us. Now we've killed our company's owner-or at


least destroyed her ship and those supporting her. We are Aniara fleet now." It was the official name chosen at the fleet conference just ended. There was a certain grim pleasure in embracing it, the ghost from before Sjandra Kei and before Nyjora, from the earliest times of the human race. For they were truly cast away now, from their worlds and their customers and their former leaders. One hundred ships bound for.... "We talked it over. A few still wanted to follow you to Tines World. Some of the crews want to return to the Middle Beyond, spend the rest of their lives killing butterflies. The majority want to start the races of Sjandra Kei over again, some place where we won't be noticed, some place where no one cares if we live."
   And the one thing everyone agreed on was that Aniara must be split no further, must make no further sacrifices outside of itself. Once that was clear, it was easy to decide what to do. In the wake of the Great Surge, this part of the Bottom was an incredible froth of Slowness and Beyond. It would be centuries before the zonographic vessels from above had reasonable maps of the new interface. Hidden away in the folds and interstices were worlds fresh from the Slowness, worlds where Sjandra Kei could be born again. Ny Sjandra Kei?
   He looked across the bridge at Tirolle and Glimfrelle. They were busy bringing the main navigation processors out of suspension. That wasn't absolutely necessary for the rendezvous with Lynsnar, but things would be a lot more convenient if both ships could maneuver. The brothers seemed oblivious to Kjet's conversation with Ravna. And maybe they weren't paying attention. In a way, the Aniara decision meant more to them than to the humans of the fleet. No one doubted that millions of humans survived in the Beyond (and who knew how many human worlds might still exist in the Slowness, distant cousins of Nyjora, distant children of Old Earth). But this side of the Transcend, the Dirokimes of Aniara were the only ones that existed. The dream habitats of Sjandra Kei were gone, and with them the race. There were at least a thousand Dirokimes left aboard Aniara, pairs of sisters and brothers scattered across a hundred vessels. These were the most adventurous of their race's latter days, and now they were faced with their greatest challenge. The two on ÿlvira had already been scouting among the survivors, looking for friends and dreaming a new reality.
   Ravna listened solemnly to his explanations. "Group Captain, zonography is a tedious thing ... and your ships are near their limits. In this


froth you might search for years and not find a new home."
   "We're taking precautions. We're abandoning all our ships except the ones with ramscoop and coldsleep capability. We'll operate in coordinated nets; no one should be lost for more than a few years." He shrugged. "And if we never find what we seek"-if we die between the stars as our life support finally fails-"well then, we will have still lived true to our name." Aniara. "I think we have a chance." More than can be said for you.
Ravna nodded slowly. "Yes, well. It ... helps me to know that."
   They talked a few minutes more, Tirolle and Glimfrelle joining in. They had been at the center of something vast, but as usual with the affairs of the Powers, no one knew quite what had happened, nor the result of the strivings.
"Rendezvous Lynsnar two hundred seconds," said the ship's voice. Ravna heard it, nodded. She raised her hand. "Fare you well, Kjet
Svensndot and Tirolle and Glimfrelle."
   The Dirokimes whistled back the common farewell, and Svensndot raised his hand. The window on Ravna Bergsndot closed.
   ... Kjet Svensndot remembered her face all the rest of his life, though in later years it seemed more and more to be the same as ÿlvira's.






part III