twenty-one


Ravna knew that-under his bluster-Blueshell was at least as much a worrier as she. Worse, he was a nitpicker. The next time Ravna asked him about their progress, he retreated into technicalities.
   Finally Ravna broke in, "Look. The kid is sitting on something that just might blow the Blight sky high, and all he has are bows and arrows. How long will it be till we get down there, Blueshell?"
   Blueshell rolled nervously back and forth across the ceiling. The Skroderiders had reaction jets; they could maneuver in free fall more adroitly than most humans. Instead they used stick-patches, and rolled around on the walls. In a way, it was kind of cute. Just now, it was irritating. At least they could talk; she glanced across the bridge to where Pham Nuwen sat facing the bridge's main display. As usual, all his attention was fixed on the slowly moving stars. He was unshaven, his reddish beard bright on his skin; his long hair floated snarled and uncombed. Physically he was cured of his injuries. Ship's surgeon had even replaced the muscle mass that Old One's communication equipment had usurped. Pham could
dress and feed himself now, but he still lived in a private dreamworld.
   The two riders twittered at each other. It was Greenstalk who finally answered her question: "Truly, we're not sure how long. The quality of the Beyond changes as we descend. Each jump is taking us a fraction longer than the one before."
   "I know that. We're moving toward the Slow Zone. But the ship is designed for that; it should be an easy matter to extrapolate the slowing."
   Blueshell extended a tendril from ceiling to floor. He diddled with the matte corrugations for a second and then his voder made a sound of human embarrassment. "Ordinarily you would be correct, my lady Ravna. But this is a special case.... For one thing, it appears that the zones themselves are in flux."


"What?"
   "It's not that unheard of. Small shifts are going on all the time. That's a major purpose for bottom-lugger ships: to track the changes. We're having the bad luck to run through the middle of the uncertainty."
   Actually, Ravna had known that interface turbulence was high at the Bottom below here. She just didn't think of it in grandiose terms like "zone shifting"; she also hadn't realized it was serious enough to affect them yet.
"Okay. How bad can it get then? How much can it slow us?"
   "Oh my." Blueshell rolled to the far wall; he was standing on starry sky now. "It would be nice to be a Lesser Skroderider. So many problems my high calling brings me. I wish I could be deep in surf right now, thinking on olden memories." Of other days in the surf.
   Greenstalk carried on for him: "It's not 'the tide, how high can it rise?' It's 'this storm, how bad can it get?' Right now it is worse than anything in this region during the last thousand years. However, we have been following the local news; most agree that the storm has peaked. If our other problem gets no worse, we should arrive in about one hundred and twenty days."
   Our other problem. Ravna drifted to the center of the bridge and strapped onto a saddle. "You're talking about the damage we took getting out of Relay. The ultradrive spines, right? How are they holding up?"
   "Quite well, apparently. We've not tried to jump faster than eighty percent of design max. On the other hand, we lack good diagnostics. It's conceivable that serious degradation might happen rather suddenly."
"Conceivable, but unlikely," put in Greenstalk.
   Ravna nodded. Considering all their other problems, there was no point in contemplating possibilities beyond their control. Back on Relay, this had looked like a thirty- or forty-day trip. Now ... the boy in the well might have to be brave for a long time yet, no matter how much she wished otherwise. Hmm. Time for Plan B then. Time for what someone like Pham Nuwen might suggest. She pushed off the floor and settled by Greenstalk. "Okay, so the best we can plan on is one hundred and twenty days. If the Zone surge gets worse or if we have to get repairs..." Get repairs where? That might be only a delay, not an impossibility. The rebuilt OOB was supposed to be repairable even in the Low Beyond. "Maybe even two hundred days." She glanced at Blueshell, but he didn't interrupt with his


usual amendments and qualifications. "You've both read the messages we're getting from the boy. He says the locals are going to be overrun, probably in less than one hundred days. Somehow, we have to help him ... before we actually arrive there."
Greenstalk rattled her fronds in a way Ravna took for puzzlement.
   She looked across the deck at Pham and raised her voice a trifle. Hey you, you should be an expert on this! "You Skroderiders may not recognize it, but this is a problem that's been seen a million times in the Slow Zone. Civilizations are separated by years-centuries-of travel time. They fall into dark ages. They become just as primitive as the pack creatures, these 'Tines.' Then they get visited from outside. In a short time, they have technology back again." Pham's head did not turn; he just looked out across the starscape.
The Skroderiders rattled at each other, then:
   "But how can that help us? Doesn't rebuilding a civilization take dozens of years?"
   "And besides, there's nothing to rebuild on the Tines World. According to the child, this is a world without antecedents. How long does it take to start a new civilization from scratch?"
   Ravna waved a hand at the objections. Don't stop me, I'm on a roll. "That's not the point. We are in communication with them. We have a good general library on board. Original inventors don't know where they're going; they're groping in the dark. Even the archaeologist/engineers of Nyjora had to reinvent much. But we know everything about making airplanes and such; we know hundreds of ways of going at it." Now faced with necessity, Ravna was suddenly sure they could do it. "We can study all the development paths, eliminate the dead ends. Even more, we can find the quickest way to go from medieval to specific inventions, things that can beat whatever barbarians are attacking Jefri's friends."
   Ravna's speech tumbled to a stop. She stared, grinning, first at Greenstalk and then at Blueshell. But a silent Skroderider is one of the universe's more impassive audiences. It was hard even to tell if they were looking at her. After a moment Greenstalk said, "Yes, I see. And rediscovery being so common in the Slow Zone, most of this may already be worked out in the ship's library."


   That's when it happened. Pham turned from the window. He looked across the deck at Ravna and the Riders. For the first time since Relay, he spoke. Even more, the words weren't nonsense, though it took her a moment to understand. "Guns and radios," he said.
   "Ah ... yes." She looked back at him. Think of something to make him say more. "Why those in particular?"
Pham Nuwen shrugged. "It worked on Canberra."
   Then damn Blueshell started talking, something about doing a library search. Pham stared at them for moment, his face expressionless. He turned back to watch the stars, and the moment was lost.