JULES VERNE








AROUND THE






MOON






In New, Complete Translation by






FREDERICK PAUL WALTER










Lifelong thanks to








WALTER JAMES MILLER






poet, teacher,


mentor, friend, and


father of Verne studies


in North America










JULES VERNE








AROUND THE






MOON






A SEQUEL TO: FROM THE EARTH TO THE MOON










First published in 1869






Here Verne tackles one of the trickiest technical challenges for a storyteller: Around the Moon takes place in a severely restricted setting. His whole travel narrative unfolds inside a projectile ten feet high and with fifty-four square feet of floor area—not much bigger than an elevator with a high ceiling. Looking out the portholes of their space capsule, his characters are almost as confined as if they were aboard an amusement park ride. To spin a lively, varied tale under these claustrophobic conditions will take stupendous skill—what can Verne do? A good deal, as it turns out: he milks every action and suspense possibility from his material … mines it for gags and fascinating tidbits … makes the most of the moon's scientific mysteries … gives full play to his theatrical and comic instincts … and keeps us on tenterhooks about the outcome.


His concerns are different from those in the earlier moon novel: no more antiwar satire, no more gallows humor, though he still has plenty of hijinks up his sleeve. His three astronauts—two stiff-necked Yankee engineers and a motor-mouthed French adventurer—return from the first book, and their lopsided interactions are a prime source of comedy. The Americans view things with scientific fussiness, the Frenchman lets his imagination run away with him. So when the former get too technical, the latter steps in with a zany analogy for the general public—explaining, for instance, the relative sizes of the sun and planets with a lineup of pumpkins, apples, peas, and other produce.


Verne hatches plot complications both inside and outside his space capsule. Outside, his projectile is twice threatened by near collisions with meteors, the second one resulting in a gorgeous light show. Inside, meanwhile, his astronauts discover that their takeoff speed was miscalculated, cope with an outer-space burial, suffer a respiratory catastrophe, and grapple with temporary weightlessness. This last they treat blasphemously: floating above the floor, the Frenchman compares the experience to the Virgin Mary's assumption into Heaven; to which one of the Yankees replies: “This assumption isn't likely to hold up.”


And all the while Verne peppers his yarn with question marks. Is there air on the moon? How about water? Active volcanoes? Does she have any colors or are they optical illusions? Are there any plants, animals, or sentient creatures? Did sheever have any life? Verne hems, haws, cops out, and keeps his options open. Finally he stages an amusing academic inquiry in Chapter 18 and emerges with some cunningly phrased conclusions. The upshot is that we can read this story today and still find it plausible, whereas the luscious floral descriptions, top-heavy moonpeople, and B-movie chase scenes in Wells's First Men in the Moon (1901) come off as fantasy.


Underneath it all Verne keeps us wondering how the journey will turn out. Will they reach the moon? Get back to earth safely? Or orbit our satellite forever? Verne seems to set this last possibility aside in his Preliminary Chapter, calling it “a total contradiction of the laws of rational mechanics.” Yet he keeps revisiting the issue, suggesting that his projectile will “sweep in an elliptical orbit around the moon,” that his astronauts will be left “revolving forever around that silver orb.” We remain on pins and needles.


The book stumbles only when its factual tidbits and educational passages aren't dramatized or enlivened but simply doled out: the rundown of moonwatchers tacked onto Chapter 10, for example, or the stats on moon mountains versus earth mountains at the close of Chapter 16. Otherwise this oracular little novel has many marvels and few missteps. That metaphor above of an amusement park attraction is completely appropriate: for the vast majority of us, Verne's tale is the closest we'll ever come to an authentic aerial tour of the moon. And he takes us on quite a ride.










CHAPTER 0








Preliminary Chapter






Which summarizes


the first part of this business


as an introduction to the second


DURING THE COURSE of the year 186–, a scientific endeavor unprecedented in the annals of science had the whole world unusually excited. Members of the Gun Club, an association of artillerymen formed in Baltimore after the Civil War, had come up with the idea of making contact with the moon—that's right, the moon—by firing a shell at her. After consulting astronomers at the Cambridge Observatory on this subject, Barbicane—the undertaking's promoter and the club's president—took every step necessary for the success of this extraordinary undertaking, which had been deemed feasible by most qualified individuals. After he'd launched a funding drive that raised almost $6,000,000, he started in on his gigantic task.


According to a memo drafted by members of the observatory, the cannon that was to fire the projectile had to be stationed in an area located between latitude 0° and 28° north or south, so as to target the moon at the zenith. The shell's initial velocity had to be 12,000 yards per second. Fired on December 1 at 10:46:40 in the evening, it was to meet up with the moon four days after its departure, exactly at midnight on December 5 and just as the moon had reached her perigee—in other words, her closest point to the earth, a distance of just 216,025 miles away.


Over several sessions the Gun Club's chief members—President Barbicane, Major Elphiston, the club's secretary J. T. Maston, and other experts—discussed the shape and makeup of the shell, the positioning and nature of the cannon, and the quality and quantity of gunpowder to be used. They decided: 1) that the projectile would be an aluminum capsule with a diameter of 108 inches, with walls a foot thick, and with a weight of 19,250 pounds; 2) that the cannon would be a cast-iron, 900-foot columbiad that had been poured right into the ground itself; 3) that the charge would use 400,000 pounds of guncotton, which would generate some 1.5 billion gallons of gaseous matter under the projectile, easily propelling it up to that silver orb.


These issues settled, President Barbicane, aided by Murchison the engineer, picked a Florida location in latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 5° 7' west. At this site, thanks to marvelous workmanship, they cast the columbiad with complete success.


That's where things stood, when an incident occurred that made this huge undertaking a hundred times more interesting.


A Frenchman—a Parisian eccentric, a witty and daring showman— asked to be closed up inside the shell in order to reach the moon and conduct a scouting expedition on our planet's satellite. This stalwart adventurer was named Michel Ardan. He arrived in America, got an enthusiastic welcome, held rallies, was carried in triumph, reconciled President Barbicane with his mortal foe Captain Nicholl, and as a token of their reconciliation, urged both men to travel along with him inside the projectile.


They accepted his proposition. The shell underwent a change of shape. It took on a cylindro-conical form. A sort of airborne coach, it boasted powerful springs and collapsible partitions to deaden the recoil at departure. It carried a year's supply of food, water for a few months, gaslight for a few days. An automatic device produced and circulated air for the three travelers to breathe. Simultaneously the Gun Club had a gigantic telescope built on one of the loftiest peaks in the Rocky Mountains, allowing members to follow the projectile's flight through space. Everything was ready.


On November 30, at the appointed hour and in the midst of an extraordinary gathering of spectators, the departure took place, and for the first time three human beings left the earth and shot into interplanetary space with a near certainty of reaching their destination. These daring travelers, Michel Ardan, President Barbicane, and Captain Nicholl, were to accomplish their flight in 97 hours, 13 minutes, and 20 seconds. Consequently they couldn't arrive on the surface of the lunar disk till midnight on December 5, right when the moon would be full, rather than on the 4th as some misinformed newspapers had announced.


But there was one unexpected circumstance: the explosion produced by the columbiad immediately had a disruptive effect on the earth's atmosphere, filling the skies with an enormous number of clouds. This phenomenon caused wholesale exasperation, because it hid the moon from the eyes of skywatchers for several nights.


Dear old J. T. Maston, the staunchest friend of the three travelers, left for the Rocky Mountains along with the honorable J. M. Belfast, the Cambridge Observatory's director, and he reached the outpost on Long's Peak where the telescope had been set up, an instrument that brought the moon within a viewing distance of five miles. The honorable secretary of the Gun Club personally wanted to keep an eye on the space vehicle of his daring friends.


The heavy cloud cover prevented any skywatching on December 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. The skywatchers themselves figured they would have to cool their heels till January 3 of the new year, because the moon would enter her last quarter on the 11th and would display only a shrinking portion of her disk, not enough light for tracking the projectile's course.


But to everybody's delight a fierce storm finally cleared the skies on the night of December 11–12, and a half moon stood out clearly against the black background of the heavens.


That same night Belfast and J. T. Maston sent a telegram from the outpost on Long's Peak to staff members at the Cambridge Observatory.


Now then, just what did their telegram announce?


It announced this: that on December 11 at 8:47 in the evening, Messrs. J. M. Belfast and J. T. Maston had sighted the projectile fired by the Stony Hill columbiad; that the shell had gone off course for some unknown reason and hadn't reached its destination but had passed so close to the moon, it had gotten caught in her gravitational pull; that its vertical motion had changed into a circular one; and that it had gone into an elliptical orbit around the moon and was now her satellite.


The telegram added that it wasn't yet possible to establish the characteristics of this new heavenly body—and in fact it was essential to take three sights, each of the heavenly body at a different position, in order to learn these characteristics. Then the wire noted that the distance separating the projectile from the lunar surface “could be put” at about 2,833 miles, hence some 1,100 geographic leagues.


Finally the telegram concluded with this twofold theory: either the moon's gravity would end up winning out and the travelers would reach their destination; or the projectile would stay in an unchanging orbit and would revolve around the moon's disk till the end of time.


Given these different alternatives, what would happen to the travelers? True, their food would last them a good while. But even assuming their reckless undertaking was a success, how would they come back? Would it ever be possible to come back? Would the earth hear from them again? Debated in print by the most scholarly pens of the day, these questions held the public spellbound.


It's appropriate to make a comment here that eager skywatchers would do well to ponder. When an expert announces a highly speculative discovery to the public, he can't exercise too much discretion. Nobody has to discover a planet, comet, or satellite, and anybody who makes a mistake in this activity is fair game for public ridicule. So it's best to bide your time, and that's what our impatient J. T. Maston should have done before firing off this telegram to the world, a telegram he believed was the last word on the undertaking.


In reality this telegram contained two kinds of errors, as was later confirmed: 1) eyewitness errors regarding the projectile's distance from the surface of the moon, because it couldn't possibly have been sighted on that particular date of December 11—so what J. T. Maston saw, or thought he saw, couldn't have been the shell fired by the columbiad; 2) theoretical errors with regard to the fate in store for the aforesaid projectile, because calling it the moon's satellite was a total contradiction of the laws of rational mechanics.


Just one theory offered by the skywatchers on Long's Peak had the potential to come true: the prediction that the travelers—if still alive— could combine their efforts with the moon's gravitational pull to reach the surface of the lunar disk.


Now then, these shrewd, bold men had survived the dreadful recoil at their departure, and what follows is the story of their journey in the projectile coach down to its strangest, most dramatic details. This account will shatter a good many illusions and surmises; but it will also give a fair idea of the complications in store for such an undertaking, and it will showcase Barbicane's scientific instincts, Nicholl's energetic resourcefulness, and the playful daring of Michel Ardan.


Beyond this, it will also demonstrate that their dear old friend J. T. Maston was wasting his time when, bending over his gigantic telescope, he watched the moon making her way through the starry void.










CHAPTER 1








From 10:20 to 10:47 in the Evening






AT THE STROKE OF ten o'clock, Michel Ardan, Barbicane, and Nicholl said good-bye to the many friends they were leaving on the earth. The two dogs—who had the job of getting the canine race acclimated to those lunar landmasses—were already confined inside the projectile. The three travelers went up to the mouth of that enormous cast-iron tube, and a crane lowered them to the shell's conical cap.


There an opening had been contrived for the purpose of giving them access to the aluminum coach. The crane hauled its tackle back outside, and the last pieces of scaffolding were immediately cleared away from the columbiad's muzzle.


After entering the projectile with his companions, Nicholl started to close the opening, lowering a heavy hatch plate that was firmly fastened from inside simply by tightening its screws. Other securely fitting plates covered the biconvex glass of the portholes. Hermetically sealed in their metal prison, the travelers were plunged in total darkness.


“And now, my dear companions,” Michel Ardan said, “let's make ourselves at home. Me, I'm the indoor type and housekeeping is my strong suit. It's time we made the most of our new quarters and got comfortable. But first let's try to get a little clearer view of things. Hell's bells, if we're supposed to be moles, God wouldn't have invented gaslight!”


With that the carefree fellow lit a match by striking it on the sole of his boot; then he went over to the gas jet, which was attached to a container storing enough high-pressure acetylene to light and heat the shell for 144 hours, hence six days and six nights.


The gas lit up. Illuminated in this way, the projectile looked like a cozy room furnished with padded walls, circular couches, and a dome-shaped ceiling.


The articles it contained—weapons, instruments, utensils—were fastened securely and held in place against the curves of the padding, where they would brave the impact of departure with impunity. The club had taken every precaution humanly possible to make this reckless endeavor a success.


Michel Ardan examined everything and stated he was highly pleased with the arrangements.


“It's a prison,” he said, “but a traveling prison, and so long as I can stick my nose out the window, I wouldn't mind signing a hundred-year lease. You're smiling, Barbicane? So you're having second thoughts? Are you telling yourself this prison could turn into our coffin? So be it, but I wouldn't trade it for Mohammed's, which floats in midair but stays put!”


While Michel Ardan rattled on in this way, Barbicane and Nicholl were making their final preparations.


By the time our three travelers were closed up in their shell for good, Nicholl's timepiece said it was 10:20 in the evening. This chronometer and the one belonging to Murchison the engineer had been synchronized to within a tenth of a second. Barbicane checked it.


“My friends,” he said, “it's 10:20. At 10:47 Murchison will shoot an electric spark down the wire that connects to the columbiad's powder charge. At that exact moment we'll part company with our globe. Therefore we still have twenty-seven minutes left on earth.”


“Twenty-six minutes and thirteen seconds,” replied the meticulous Nicholl.


“Fine!” Michel Ardan exclaimed in a good-humored tone. “In twenty-six minutes you can do many things! You can discuss the most serious ethical and political issues, and even settle them! Twenty-six minutes put to good use are worth more than twenty-six years with nothing to show for them. A few seconds of Pascal or Newton are more valuable than the lifetimes of a whole pack of your average dimwits—”


“And what do you conclude from this, you eternal chatterbox?” President Barbicane asked.


“I conclude we've got twenty-six minutes left,” Ardan answered.


“Only twenty-four,” Nicholl said.


“Twenty-four if you say so, my gallant captain,” Ardan replied, “twenty-four minutes in which we can delve into—”


“Michel,” Barbicane said, “during our trip we'll have all the time we need to delve into the knottiest questions. Right now let's concentrate on our departure.”


“Aren't we ready?”


“Certainly. But there are a few precautions we still need to take, to lessen the initial impact as much as possible.”


“That cushion of water between the collapsible partitions—hasn't it enough elasticity to protect us?”


“I hope so, Michel,” Barbicane replied softly, “but I'm not quite sure.”


“Oh, what a trickster!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “He hopes! He's not sure! And he waits till right when we're locked in to make this dismal confession! Excuse me, but I want out!”


“And how will you manage that?” Barbicane countered.


“There are difficulties, it's true,” Michel Ardan said. “We're aboard the train, and the conductor will blow his whistle before twenty-four minutes are up …”


“Twenty,” Nicholl put in.


For a few seconds the three travelers looked at each other. Then they examined the articles locked in along with them.


“Everything's in place,” Barbicane said. “Now it's time to decide on our most effective position for handling the impact at departure. Our postures can't be a casual matter, and as much as possible, we need to keep the blood from suddenly rushing to our heads.”


“Right,” Nicholl put in.


“In that case,” Michel Ardan replied, ready to suit the action to the word, “let's put our heads down and feet in the air, like clowns at the big top!”


“No,” Barbicane said, “let's lie on our sides. We'll withstand the impact better that way. Don't forget, even though we're riding inside it rather than standing in front of it, when the shell's fired, it's still going to be a bit of a shock.”


“So long as it's only ‘a bit,’ I have no complaints,” Michel Ardan remarked.


“You approve of my idea, Nicholl?” Barbicane asked.


“Completely,” the captain replied. “13½ minutes to go.”


“That Nicholl isn't human!” Michel exclaimed. “He's a chronometer with a second hand, escape wheel, lever, roller, and eight jewels …”


But his companions weren't listening anymore and were making their final arrangements with inconceivable composure. They acted like two meticulous travelers on a train, folks who had taken their seats in a passenger car and were trying to get as comfortably situated as possible. Honestly, you have to wonder what substances these Americans are made of, when the most appalling danger can draw near and not make their hearts pound one beat faster!


Three sturdy, securely assembled pallets had been put in the projectile. Nicholl and Barbicane positioned them in the middle of the disk that formed the movable floor. There the three travelers were to lie down a few moments before departure time.


Meanwhile Ardan, incapable of sitting still, paced around his cramped prison like a wild animal in a cage, exchanging chitchat with his friends, talking to the dogs Diana and Satellite, whom he'd given meaningful names some time before, as you can see.


“Hey, Diana! Hey, Satellite!” he called out, taunting them. “So you're going to show your lunar relatives what good manners earth dogs have? That'll be a triumph for the canine race! By God, if we ever do get home again, I want to bring back a cross-bred ‘moon mongrel,’ and it'll cause a sensation!”


“Assuming there are dogs on the moon,” Barbicane said.


“There are,” Michel Ardan asserted, “along with horses, cows, donkeys, and chickens. I'll put money on the chickens!”


“A hundred dollars says we won't find a single one,” Nicholl said.


“Done, my dear captain,” Ardan replied, shaking Nicholl's hand. “But while we're on the subject, you've already lost three bets with our president, since he raised the funds needed for the undertaking, since the casting operation succeeded, and lastly since they loaded the columbiad without any accidents; hence you're out $6,000.


“Yes,” Nicholl replied. “It's 10:37 and six seconds.”


“Very good, captain. Well, in less than fifteen minutes you'll have to hand over an additional $9,000 to our president—$4,000 because the columbiad won't blow up and $5,000 because the shell will rise higher than six miles into the air.”


“I've got the money,” Nicholl replied, slapping his coat pocket. “I'll be only too happy to pay up.”


“Nice going, Nicholl, I can see you're an orderly man, something I could never be; but let me point out that all in all, you've made a series of bets here that won't be very profitable for you.”


“How so?” Nicholl asked.


“Because if you win the first one, that means the columbiad will have blown up and the shell along with it, so Barbicane will no longer be around to dole out your money.”


“My stake is deposited at the Bank of Baltimore, and if Nicholl can't collect, it will go to his heirs,” Barbicane merely replied.


“Oh, what sensible men! What practical minds!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “I marvel at you all the more because you're so beyond my understanding!”


“Ten forty-two,” Nicholl said.


“Five minutes to go,” Barbicane responded.


“Yes, five tiny minutes!” Michel Ardan remarked. “And we're closed up inside a shell at the bottom of a 900-foot cannon! And piled under this shell are 400,000 pounds of guncotton, which is equivalent to 1,600,000 pounds of regular gunpowder! And our friend Murchison, holding his chronometer, eye focused on its second hand, finger resting on the electrical device, is counting off the seconds and preparing to launch us into interplanetary space … !”


“Enough, Michel, enough!” Barbicane said in a stern voice. “Let's get ready. Only a few seconds separate us from this crowning moment. Let's shake hands, my friends.”


“Yes!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, more affected than he wanted to let on.


The three bold companions came together and clasped hands one last time.


“May God be with us!” said the reverent Barbicane.


Michel Ardan and Nicholl stretched out on the pallets positioned in the middle of the disk.


“Ten forty-seven,” the captain muttered.


“Twenty seconds to go!” Barbicane quickly turned off the gas and lay down near his companions.


The heavy silence was broken only by the chronometer's ticking as it marked the seconds.


Suddenly there was a frightful jolt; under the thrust of 1.5 billion gallons of gaseous matter generated by the pyroxile's combustion, the projectile took off into space.










CHAPTER 2








The First Half Hour






WHAT HAD HAPPENED? What was the result of that awful lurch? Had the projectile's manufacturers brought about a favorable outcome with their clever safeguards? Had the impact been deadened by the springs, the four buffers, the cushion of water, the collapsible partitions? Had they tamed the fearful thrust of that initial velocity of 12,000 yards per second, which was fast enough to cross Paris or New York City in the blink of an eye? Clearly these were the questions worrying the thousand witnesses of this gripping drama. They forgot about the trip's purpose and thought only of the travelers! And if one man among them—J. T. Maston, for instance— could have taken a look inside the projectile, what would he have seen?


Nothing just then. It was completely dark inside the shell. But its cylindro-conical walls had held up splendidly. Not a gash, dent, or bulge. The wonderful projectile wasn't even affected by the gunpowder's violent combustion, nor, as some seemed to fear, had it changed into liquid and rained aluminum.


All in all there was little disorder inside. A few items had been roughly hurled to the ceiling; but the most important didn't seem to have suffered from that jolt. Their fastenings were intact.


The movable disk had sunk to the bottom of the shell after the partitions had collapsed and the water escaped; on it lay three motionless bodies. Were Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan still breathing? Was the projectile nothing more than a metal coffin carrying three corpses into space?


A few minutes after the shell's departure, one of these bodies stirred; it moved its arms, raised its head, and managed to get on its knees. It was Michel Ardan. He checked himself for broken bones, uttered a resonant “ahem,” then said:


“Michel Ardan is present and accounted for. Let's see about the others!”


The courageous Frenchman tried to get up but couldn't keep his balance. His head was spinning, the blood was rushing violently to his brain, he couldn't see, he was like a man who'd had one too many.


“Whew!” he said. “I feel like I've polished off two bottles of Corton. Only it maybe didn't go down as smoothly!”


He mopped his brow several times, massaged his temples, then called out in a forceful voice:


“Nicholl! Barbicane!”


He waited anxiously. No answer. Not even a groan to show that his companion's hearts were still beating. He repeated his appeal. The same silence.


“Holy smoke!” he said. “They act like they've fallen on their heads from a fifth-floor window. Phooey,” he added with that unflappable confidence nothing could shake. “If a Frenchman can get on his knees, two Americans won't have any trouble getting on their feet! But first of all let's shed some light on the situation.”


Ardan felt life coursing through his veins again. His blood settled down and resumed its normal circulation. With additional exertions he got his balance back. He managed to stand, took a match out of his pocket, struck its phosphorous tip, and watched it flare up. Then he went over and lit the gas jet. The container hadn't suffered in the slightest. No gas had escaped. If it had, the smell would have given it away, the place would be full of hydrogen, and Michel Ardan wouldn't be waltzing around match in hand with impunity. Mixed together, the air and gas would have formed an explosive combination, and maybe the blast would have finished what the jolt hadn't.


After lighting the gas, Ardan stooped over his companions’ bodies. They'd toppled on top of each other, inanimate objects, Nicholl above, Barbicane below.


Ardan sat the captain up, leaned him against a couch, and gave him an energetic massage. Shrewdly executed, this back rub revived Nicholl, who opened his eyes, instantly came to his senses, and clutched Ardan's hand. Then, looking around:


“What about Barbicane?” he asked.


“One at a time,” Michel Ardan replied serenely. “I started with you, Nicholl, because you were on top. Now let's move on to Barbicane.”


With that Ardan and Nicholl picked up the Gun Club's president and dropped him off on the couch. He seemed to have suffered more than his companions. There had been some bleeding, but Nicholl was relieved to confirm that it was only from a mildly hemorrhaging cut on Barbicane's shoulder. A mere scratch, which the captain dressed carefully.


Nevertheless Barbicane didn't come to for a good while—which alarmed his two friends, who didn't skimp on the massaging.


“He's breathing, though,” Nicholl said, putting his ear close to the ailing man's chest.


“Yes,” Ardan replied, “he's breathing like a man who's fairly used to that everyday operation. Let's rub him harder, Nicholl, harder.”


And the two makeshift healers worked so long and so well, Barbicane recovered the full use of his faculties. He opened his eyes, sat up, clutched the hands of his two friends, and delivered this opening remark:


“Nicholl,” he asked, “are we in motion?”


Nicholl and Ardan traded looks. As yet they hadn't given a thought to the projectile. Their primary concern hadn't been the vehicle but its passengers.


“Are we actually in motion?” Michel Ardan repeated.


“Or still sitting quietly on the ground in Florida?” Nicholl asked.


“Or on the floor of the Gulf of Mexico?” Michel Ardan added.


“By thunder!” exclaimed President Barbicane.


And this twofold theory suggested by his companions had the immediate result of snapping him back to reality.


Be that as it may, they still couldn't say what the shell's circumstances were. Its seeming stillness and the lack of any outside contact didn't allow them to settle this issue. Maybe the projectile was tooling along its flight path through space; maybe, after a brief ascent, it had fallen back to the earth—or even into the Gulf of Mexico, a real possibility given the narrowness of Florida's peninsula.


The situation was serious, the problem intriguing. It needed to be settled before much longer. Stirred into action, overcoming his bodily weakness with strength of mind, Barbicane got up. He cocked an ear. It was totally silent outside. But the padding on the walls was heavy enough to block any sounds from the earth. But one circumstance struck Barbicane. The temperature inside the projectile was unusually hot. The Gun Club's president took a thermometer out of its case and checked it. The instrument read 113° Fahrenheit.


“Yes!” he exclaimed. “Yes, we are in motion! This suffocating heat is seeping through the projectile's walls. It comes from our friction against the layers of air. It will soon cool down, because we're already cruising in space; then, after nearly suffocating, we'll be subjected to intense cold.”


“What!” Michel Ardan asked. “Barbicane, are you saying we're already outside the bounds of the earth's atmosphere?”


“No doubt about it, Michel. Hear me out. It's 10:55. We left about eight minutes ago. Now then, if the friction hadn't reduced our initial velocity, we would have taken only six seconds to pass through the forty miles of atmosphere around our globe.”


“Exactly,” Nicholl replied, “but how much has the friction reduced our velocity, do you figure?”


“By a third, Nicholl,” Barbicane replied. “It's a considerable reduction, but according to my calculations, that's the truth of the matter. So if our initial velocity was 12,000 yards per second, by the time we'd left the earth's atmosphere, we would have slowed down to 8,018 yards per second; be that as it may, we've already crossed this expanse, and—”


“—and in that case,” Michel Ardan said, “our friend Nicholl has lost his other two bets: $4,000 since the columbiad didn't blow up, $5,000 since the projectile has risen higher than six miles into the air. Come on, Nicholl, fork over.”


“Let's verify it first,” the captain replied, “then I'll produce the money. It's quite possible Barbicane's analysis is correct and I've lost my $9,000. But another theory occurs to me, and it could invalidate the wager.”










“What?” Barbicane asked instantly.


“The theory that for some reason or other, the gunpowder never got ignited, and we haven't left.”


“By God, captain,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, “that theory isn't even worthy of my brain! You can't be serious! Didn't that jolt knock us half silly? Didn't I revive you? Isn't our president's shoulder still bleeding from something it banged into?”


“Agreed, Michel,” Nicholl echoed, “but I've got one question.”


“Ask it, my good captain.”


“There had to have been a fearsome explosion—did you hear it?”


“No,” Ardan replied, quite surprised. “As a matter of fact, I didn't hear any explosion.”


“How about you, Barbicane?”


“I didn't either.”


“Well then?” Nicholl put in.


“It's true,” muttered the Gun Club's president. “Why didn't we hear an explosion?”


The three friends looked at each other with rather flustered expressions. They were faced with a bewildering phenomenon. Yet the projectile had left, consequently there should have been an explosion.


“First let's lower the panels,” Barbicane said, “and find out where we are.”


This extremely simple operation instantly got under way. Using a monkey wrench, they loosened the nuts securing the bolts of the plate outside the right-hand porthole. They pushed the bolts out, and india-rubber plugs stopped up the holes that admitted those bolts. Instantly the outside plate fell back on its hinges like a hatch lid, revealing biconvex glass inset in the porthole. There was an identical porthole in the heavy wall on the opposite side of the projectile, another in its dome above, and finally a fourth in the middle of its base. So they could look out in four different directions—at the firmament through the side windows, and closer to hand, at the moon or the earth through the shell's openings overhead or underneath.


Barbicane and his two companions instantly rushed to the uncovered window. Not a single ray of light livened things up. Utter darkness surrounded the projectile. Which didn't keep President Barbicane from exclaiming:


“No, my friends, we haven't fallen back to the earth! And no, we aren't submerged under the Gulf of Mexico! And yes, we're ascending into space! Look at those stars twinkling in the night, and that impregnable darkness coming between us and the earth!”


“Hooray, hooray!” Nicholl and Michel Ardan shouted in unison.


In essence this intense blackness proved the projectile had left the earth, because if the travelers were still sitting on its surface, then the ground would have been visible in the bright moonlight. This darkness also showed that the projectile had gone through the atmospheric layers, because the diffuse light scattered in the air would have reflected off the metal walls, an effect also lacking. This light would have shone on the porthole window, but the window was dark. There was no more room for doubt. The travelers had left the earth.


“I've lost,” Nicholl said.


“And I offer my congratulations!” Ardan replied.


“Here's your $9,000,” the captain said, pulling a roll of dollar bills out of his pocket.


“Would you like a receipt?” Barbicane asked, taking it all.


“If you don't mind,” Nicholl answered. “It's just good business.”


As seriously and stoically as if he'd been at his desk, President Barbicane took out his notebook, tore off a blank page, wrote an official receipt in pencil, dated, signed, and initialed it, then handed it over to the captain, who placed it carefully in his wallet.


Michel Ardan tipped his hat and bowed to his two companions without saying a word. These financial formalities under such unusual circumstances left him literally speechless. He'd never seen anything so American.


This transaction completed, Barbicane and Nicholl took their places again by the window and looked at the constellations. The stars stood out like brilliant sparks against the black background of the sky. But from that side they couldn't see the earth's satellite, which was moving from east to west while gradually rising to the zenith. Accordingly her absence caused Ardan to remark:


“What about the moon?” he said. “By any chance will she miss our appointment?”


“Rest assured,” Barbicane replied, “our future world is in position, we just can't see her from this side. Let's open the opposite porthole.”


Just as Barbicane was about to leave the window and start uncovering the porthole on the other side, a glowing object came into view and caught his attention. It was an enormous disk whose dimensions were too colossal to calculate. It was facing the earth and shining brightly. You would have sworn it was some smaller moon reflecting light from the bigger one. It was coming on with prodigious speed and seemed to be orbiting the earth along a route that would intercept the projectile's flight path. As it followed its orbit, this moving object was spinning on its axis. So it was behaving like any heavenly body running loose in space.


“Hey!” Michel Ardan called out. “What's that? Another projectile?”


Barbicane didn't reply. The appearance of this enormous object surprised and alarmed him. A collision was possible and it would have had deplorable results: either the projectile would be driven off course, or the impact would break its momentum and knock it back down to the earth, or it would end up being irresistibly dragged along in the asteroid's gravitational field.


President Barbicane was quick to grasp the consequences of these three theoretical possibilities, which, one way or another, meant that his endeavor was doomed to failure. His speechless companions looked out into space. The object grew prodigiously as it came nearer, and by some sort of optical illusion, the projectile seemed to be rushing to meet it.


“Ye gods and little fishes!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “It's going to be a real train wreck!”


Instinctively the travelers shrank back. They were in tremendous fear, but not for much longer than a few seconds. Several hundred yards away from the projectile, the asteroid shot by and vanished— which was due less to its speed and more to the fact that it faced the moon and was suddenly lost in the absolute darkness of space.


“Good riddance!” Michel Ardan called, heaving a sigh of relief. “Imagine that! Infinity isn't big enough for this poor little shell to take a carefree stroll in! Drat, what was that overbearing sphere that almost ran us down?”


“I know what it is,” Barbicane replied.


“Of course. You know everything.”


“It's simply a meteor,” Barbicane said, “but an enormous one that the earth's gravity keeps up here in the capacity of a satellite.”


“It can't be!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “So the earth has two moons like Neptune?”


“That's right, my friend, two moons, though it's generally believed to have only one. But this second moon is so small and fast moving, people on earth can't see it. By accounting for certain disturbances, a French astronomer named Frédéric Petit was able to detect the presence of this second satellite and to determine its characteristics. His findings indicate that this meteor will orbit the earth in just three hours and twenty minutes, which implies a prodigious rate of speed.”


“Do all astronomers,” Nicholl asked, “accept the existence of this satellite?”


“No,” Barbicane replied, “but if they'd met up with it as we just did, they wouldn't have any further doubts. In fact, though this meteor could have caused major problems if it had hit the projectile, I think it will allow us to pinpoint our position in space.”


“How?” Ardan said.


“Because its distance is a matter of record, so when we met up with it, we were exactly 5,058 miles from the surface of our planet.”


“Over 2,000 geographic leagues!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Which would be a tall order for express trains back on that pitiful globe we call the earth.”


“I imagine so,” Nicholl replied, checking his chronometer. “It's eleven o'clock, just thirteen minutes since we left the continent of North America.”


“Only thirteen minutes?” Barbicane said. “Yes,” Nicholl replied, “and if we've kept up our initial velocity of 12,000 yards, we'll have been doing nearly 25,000 miles per hour.”


“That's all well and good, my friends,” said the Gun Club's president, “but we're still left with that unanswered question. Why didn't we hear the columbiad's explosion?”


No reply was forthcoming, so the conversation ground to a halt; his thoughts elsewhere, Barbicane set about lowering the lid from that second porthole on the opposite side. He was successful in this activity and radiant moonlight poured into the projectile through the uncovered glass. Nicholl, a thrifty fellow, turned off the gaslight, now unnecessary and furthermore too bright to allow any scrutiny of interplanetary space.


At that point the lunar disk was shining with incomparable clarity. No longer diluted by the earth's hazy atmosphere, moonlight filtered through the glass, and the air inside the projectile was steeped in silvery glimmers. The black curtain of the firmament actually heightened the moon's brightness—though, since there isn't any diffuse light in this ethereal void, she didn't outshine the stars nearby. Viewed under these conditions, the heavens had a whole new look no human eye could have anticipated.


The reader can imagine how intently these daredevils contemplated that silver orb, their journey's ultimate destination. Moving along her orbit, the earth's satellite was inching closer to the zenith, the mathematical point she was to reach some ninety-six hours later. Her mountains, her plains, and all her surface features didn't stand out any more clearly than if the men had been eyeing them from somewhere on the earth; but her light radiated through space with incomparable intensity. Her disk was shining like a platinum mirror. Already our travelers had forgotten about the earth, which was now receding beneath their feet.


It was Captain Nicholl who first reminded them about their vanishing planet.


“Yes,” Michel Ardan replied, “let's show it a little gratitude! Since we're leaving our homeland, we owe it one last look. I want to see the earth again before it's completely out of sight.”


To fulfill his companions’ wishes, Barbicane set about uncovering the window in the projectile's base, which would give them a direct view of the earth. Not without some difficulty, he dismantled the movable disk, which the powerful thrust at takeoff had driven to the bottom of the shell. Set carefully against the walls, its separate parts could still come in handy on occasion. A circular opening then appeared, about twenty inches across and cut into the shell's underside. It was covered by six-inch glass reinforced with brass fastenings. Attached underneath was an aluminum plate secured by bolts. Once the nuts were unscrewed and the bolts removed, the plate fell open, and visual contact was restored between inside and outside.


Michel Ardan knelt on the glass. It was so dark, it seemed opaque.


“Well,” he exclaimed, “what happened to the earth?”


“The earth,” Barbicane said, “is over there.”


“What!” Ardan put in. “That skinny sliver, that silvery crescent?”


“Undoubtedly, Michel. In four days, right when we reach her, the moon will be full and the earth will be new. Our planet will be visible only in the form of a slender crescent, which will soon vanish and be submerged for a few days in impregnable blackness,”


“That's the earth?” Michel Ardan repeated, his eyes popping at that skinny remnant of his home planet.


President Barbicane's explanation was correct. In relation to the projectile, the earth had entered its last phase. It was in its octant and looked like a lightly sketched crescent against the black background of the sky. Tinted a bluish color by the heavy layer of atmosphere, the light it gave off wasn't as bright as that from a crescent moon. This particular crescent boasted considerable dimensions. It reminded you of an enormous longbow stretching across the firmament. A few parts—especially in its concave portion —were brightly lit and proclaimed the presence of lofty mountains; but they sometimes vanished behind dense patches unlike anything seen on the surface of the moon's disk. These came from belts of clouds forming concentric rings around the earth.


However, due to a natural phenomenon—identical to what occurs on the moon during her octants—you could make out our planet's full contours. The shape of its entire disk was fairly easy to see, thanks to an effect comparable to earthshine on the moon but less pronounced. And the reason for this lesser intensity is simple to understand. When earthshine occurs on the moon, it's caused by the sun's rays reflecting off the earth onto its satellite. Here the opposite applies: the sun's rays reflect off the moon onto the earth. Now then, light coming from the earth is about thirteen times stronger than that from the moon, due to the different sizes of these two entities. Ergo the result that in this phenomenon of reflected light, the dark part of the earth's disk is less clearly outlined than that of the moon's disk, since the phenomenon's intensity is directly proportional to the illuminating power of these two heavenly bodies. We should add that the earth's crescent seemed to form a longer curve than that of its


disk. Simple irradiation at work. 1


While the travelers were trying to peer through the intense darkness of space, a dazzling bouquet of shooting stars blossomed in front of their eyes. Ignited by contact with the atmosphere, hundreds of meteors streaked the blackness with their light trails, scrawling fiery stripes across the dark part of the earth's disk. During this time the earth was at its perihelion, and the month of December is so conducive to the appearance of shooting stars, astronomers have counted up to 24,000 per hour. But Michel Ardan, sneering at all scientific logic, preferred to think the earth was saying good-bye to three of its children with a glittering display of fireworks.


In short, this was all they saw of that sphere vanishing into the darkness, that minor member of the solar system, which rises and sets on the horizons of the bigger planets like a humble morning or evening star! A barely visible speck in space, it was nothing more than a fading crescent, this globe where they'd left everything they loved!


For a good while the three friends kept watch, silent but single-minded, while the projectile moved farther away at a speed that was steadily decreasing. Then an irresistible drowsiness came over them. Were they exhausted in body and mind? Surely, after the high excitement of those last hours spent on the earth, a reaction was bound to set in.


“Well,” Michel said, “since we're sleepy, let's sleep.”


And stretching out on their pallets, all three of them were soon deep in slumber.


But they hadn't been dozing for more than fifteen minutes, when Barbicane suddenly sat up and roused his companions with a fearsome shout:


“I've got it!” he yelled.


“Got what?” Michel Ardan asked, bounding from his pallet.


“The reason why we didn't hear the columbiad's explosion.”


“And it's because … ?” Nicholl put in.


“It's because our projectile traveled faster than the speed of sound!”










CHAPTER 3








In Which They Take Up Residence






AFTER THIS UNUSUAL but unquestionably accurate explanation, the three friends fell sound asleep again. Where could they have found a calmer spot, a more peaceful setting in which to bed down? On the earth both urban homes and rustic cottages feel every tremor running through the planet's crust. Out at sea a ship tossing on the waves goes by fits and starts. In the sky a hot air balloon shifts continually between wind currents of different densities. Only this projectile, cruising in a perfect void, surrounded by perfect silence, could offer its guests the ideal retreat.


Accordingly our three venturesome travelers maybe would have slept on indefinitely, if an unexpected sound hadn't woken them up near seven o'clock in the morning on December 2, eight hours after their departure.


It was the unmistakable sound of barking.


“The dogs! It's the dogs!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, getting up immediately.


“They're hungry,” Nicholl said.


“By God,” Michel replied, “we forgot about them!”


“Where are they?” Barbicane asked.


They looked around and found one of the animals cowering under the couch. Unnerved and immobilized by that initial jolt, it had stayed in its hideout till the point where it had gotten hungry enough to announce the fact.


It was sweet Diana, still pretty dispirited, who emerged from her cubbyhole after some persuasion. Michel Ardan had to coax her with his most honeyed words.


“Here, Diana!” he said. “Here, girl! You're about to go down in the history of hounds! You're a pooch that pagans would have made a house pet of the god Anubis, Christians a mascot for St. Roch! You deserve to be cast in bronze by the lord of the underworld, like that magic mutt Jupiter gave lovely Europa in exchange for a kiss! You'll be more famous than the sleuthhound of Montargis or the heroic rescuers of the St. Bernard passes! You're shooting into interplanetary space and maybe you'll be the Eve of moondogs! Out here you're going to live up to that saying of Professor Toussenel's: ‘In the beginning God created man, then saw how imperfect he was and created dog.’ Here, Diana, here!”


Flattered or not, Diana came out little by little, whimpering plaintively.


“Good,” Barbicane put in. “I can see Eve all right, but where's Adam?”


“Adam?” Michel responded. “Adam can't be far off! He's around somewhere, let's give him a call! Satellite! Come here, Satellite!”


But Satellite didn't appear. Diana kept on whimpering. They verified, however, that she hadn't been hurt in any way, and a tasty serving of dog chow put a stop to her complaints.


As for Satellite, he seemed to have vanished completely. They had to search a good while before finding him in one of the projectile's upper compartments, where, in some bewildering manner, the recoil had forcefully hurled him. The poor animal was badly injured and in pitiful condition.


“Holy blazes!” Michel said. “So much for acclimating a race of canines!”


They carefully lowered the unfortunate dog. He'd cracked his skull against the ceiling and didn't seem likely to recover from such a blow. All the same they stretched him out comfortably on a cushion, where he gave a moan.


“We'll take care of you,” Michel said. “We're responsible for your existence. I would rather lose a whole arm than one paw of my poor Satellite!”


And with that he offered a few sips of water to the injured animal, who lapped them up eagerly.


After tending to him, the travelers studied the earth and moon intently. The earth was now represented only by a disk of reflected light ending in a crescent that was narrower than on the previous evening; but its size was still enormous compared to that of the moon, which was nearer and nearer to becoming a perfect circle.


“Actually,” Michel Ardan said, “it's a shame we didn't take off just as the earth was full, in other words, when our globe was in opposition to the sun.”


“Why is that?” Nicholl asked.


“Because we could have viewed our continents and oceans from a new perspective, the former shining in the direct sunlight, the latter looking darker, just as they're shown on some world maps. I wish I could have seen those poles of rotation that mankind still hasn't clapped eyes on!”


“No doubt,” Barbicane replied, “but if the earth had been full, the moon would have been new, in other words, invisible in the midst of the sun's rays. Now then, it's better for us to see our scheduled destination rather than our starting point.”


“You're right, Barbicane,” Captain Nicholl replied. “And besides, once we've reached the moon, we'll have some leisure time during those long lunar nights and we can examine that globe crowded with folks like us.”


“Folks like us!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Why, they're no more like us now than moonpeople are! We live in a new world populated only by ourselves—this projectile! I'm like Barbicane and Barbicane's like Nicholl. Over and beyond ourselves, humanity is no more, and we're the only citizens of this miniature cosmos till the time we turn into regular moonpeople.”


“In about eighty-eight hours,” the captain remarked.


“What do you mean?” Michel Ardan asked.


“That it's 8:30 in the morning,” Nicholl answered.


“All right,” Michel shot back, “then I can't see even the shadow of a reason for not eating breakfast this second.”


In essence the citizenry of this new heavenly body had to eat to live, and their bellies had to abide by the all-powerful laws of hunger. Being the only Frenchman on the premises, Michel Ardan elected himself chief cook, a high office for which he ran uncontested. The gas jet furnished the few degrees of heat needed for his culinary artistry, and the supply chest provided the ingredients for this first-time feast.


Breakfast started with three cups of excellent beef broth, brewed by dissolving in hot water some of those invaluable Liebig cubes that are made with the best cuts from the cattle of the Pampas. After the soup came some slices of steak, shaped into patties by a hydraulic press, as tender and juicy as if they hailed from the kitchen of the Café Anglais. Michel, a man with an imagination, even claimed they were “pink inside.”


Canned vegetables (“fresher tasting than nature's,” added the tolerant Michel) followed the meat course, and after that came cups of tea with bread and butter in the American style. This drink, which they found superb, was an herbal tea made with the choicest leaves, and the Tsar of Russia had donated a couple cases for the travelers’ consumption.


Finally, to top off this meal, Ardan dug up a splendid bottle of Nuits-Saint-Georges, which “just happened” to be in the supply chest. The three friends drank to the partnership of the earth and its satellite.


And as if it hadn't done enough by fermenting this full-bodied wine on the slopes of Burgundy, the sun decided to join the party. Just then the projectile had emerged from the conical shadow cast by our planet, and thanks to the angle that the moon's orbit makes with the earth's, the solar rays struck the base of the shell head-on.


“The sun!” Michel Ardan exclaimed.


“Certainly,” Barbicane replied. “I've been expecting it.”


“But,” Michel said, “what about this conical shadow the earth casts in space—does it reach beyond the moon?”


“A good distance beyond, if you don't count the atmosphere's refraction,” Barbicane said. “But when the moon is covered by this shadow, it's because the centers of three heavenly bodies, the sun, earth, and moon, are lying in a straight line. Then the nodes coincide with the phases of the full moon and we get an eclipse. If we'd departed just as there was a lunar eclipse, our whole flight would have taken place in the dark, which would have been a nuisance.”


“Why?”


“Because, though we're cruising in space, our projectile is bathing in the sun's rays, getting both light and heat. This saves on gas, an invaluable savings in every respect.”


In fact, under these rays whose temperature and intensity no atmosphere can tame, the projectile got warmer and brighter as if winter had suddenly changed into summer. The moon above and the sun below were flooding it with light.


“It's pleasant in here,” Nicholl said.


“I think so too!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “If we spread a little vegetable soil over our aluminum planet, we could grow green peas in twenty-four hours. I've got only one fear, namely that the shell's walls might melt.”


“No need to worry, my good friend,” Barbicane replied. “Our projectile handled a much higher temperature as it flew through the atmospheric layers. To the eyes of those spectators in Florida, I wouldn't be surprised if it looked like a fiery meteor.”


“Then J. T. Maston must have figured we'd roasted to death.”


“What does surprise me,” Barbicane responded, “is that we didn't. It was a danger we hadn't anticipated.”


“I worried about it,” Nicholl merely replied.


“And you didn't say a thing, O noblest of captains!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, shaking his companion's hand.


Meanwhile Barbicane proceeded to take up residence inside the projectile as if he were destined to live there in perpetuity. You'll recall that this airborne coach had a base with a surface area of fifty-four square feet. Twelve feet high at the apex of its ceiling, cleverly laid out inside, instruments and traveling gear kept out of the way in their specific places, it gave its three guests reasonable freedom of movement. The heavy window inset in part of the base could bear a considerable amount of weight with impunity. Accordingly Barbicane and his companions walked on its surface as if it were solid flooring —but the sun's rays, striking it head-on, illuminated the projectile's interior from underneath and created some unusual lighting effects.


They started by double-checking the condition of their water tank and supply chest. These containers hadn't suffered at all, thanks to the measures taken to deaden the impact at takeoff. They held ample provisions, enough to feed three travelers for a whole year. Barbicane wasn't taking any chances in case the projectile landed in a sector of the moon that was completely barren. As for the water and their fifty-gallon stock of brandy, they had enough for just two months. But according to the latest research by astronomers, the moon maintained a low, dense, heavy atmosphere—at least in her deep valleys—and there would be no shortage of brooks or springs. For the remainder of their flight, then, and for the first year of their residence in that lunar landscape, these venturesome explorers wouldn't suffer from hunger or thirst.


One issue remained: the air inside the projectile. Again there was no problem. The Reiset and Regnault device for producing oxygen had a two month supply of potassium chlorate. Inevitably it consumed a fair amount of gas, because it needed to keep the producing compound hotter than 750° Fahrenheit. But here, too, they were on firm footing. Besides, the device required minimal attention. It functioned automatically. At that high temperature the potassium chlorate turned into potassium chloride, releasing all the oxygen it contained. Now then, how much oxygen would eighteen pounds of potassium chlorate provide? The exact seven pounds that made up the daily oxygen requirement of each of the projectile's guests.


But it wasn't enough to replenish the spent oxygen: they also had to consume the carbon dioxide produced by exhaling. Now then, some twelve hours had gone by and the shell's air was full of this absolutely noxious gas, which ultimately results from the combustion of the blood's elements by the inhaled oxygen. Nicholl realized the air was in this state when he saw Diana panting laboriously. In essence, due to the same phenomenon that occurs inside the renowned “Dog's Cave” near Mt. Vesuvius, the carbon dioxide— being heavier than air—had collected close to the floor of the projectile. Poor Diana carried her head much lower than did her masters, so she was bound to suffer sooner from the presence of this gas … but Captain Nicholl was quick to remedy this state of affairs. On the projectile's floor he placed several containers of potassium hydroxide, which he shook for a while, and this substance consumed all the carbon dioxide with great eagerness, thus cleansing the air inside.


Next they started in on an inventory of the instruments. Their thermometers and barometers had made it safely, except for a minimum thermometer whose glass had shattered. They took an excellent aneroid barometer out of its padded case and hung it on one of the walls. Naturally it could sense and measure only the air pressure inside the projectile. However it also showed how much moisture the shell contained. Just then its needle was wavering between 29.9 and 30.1 inches. This promised “fair weather.”


Barbicane had also packed several compasses that were in one piece. You can appreciate that under the current circumstances their needles were going berserk, in other words, they weren't pointing in one continuous direction. At the shell's distance from the earth, in fact, the magnetic pole couldn't have exercised any noticeable control over the devices. But if they were transferred to the lunar disk, maybe these compasses could record some unusual phenomena. In any event it would be interesting to see if the earth's satellite was subject to magnetic influences just like the planet itself.


A hypsometer for measuring the elevations of lunar mountains, a sextant for taking the sun's altitude, a surveyor's theodolite for mapping terrain and plotting angles at a distance, spyglasses that were bound to come in handy as the projectile neared the moon— the travelers carefully inspected all these instruments and found them in good condition, despite the force of that initial jolt.


As for the utensils, picks, mattocks, and assorted tools that Nicholl had expressly selected, plus the shrubs and various sacks of grain that Michel Ardan banked on transplanting to those lunar lands, they occupied their proper places in the projectile's upper reaches. A sort of loft gaped up there, piled with things the extravagant Frenchman had crammed into it. What they were nobody knew, and the lighthearted fellow wasn't telling. Every so often he climbed the iron steps clamped to the wall, then crept into this hideaway that he alone was allowed to visit, his own private Capernaum. He tidied, he organized, he rummaged through various mysterious boxes, livening things up with an old French song crooned in a voice hopelessly out of tune.


Barbicane was interested to note that his rockets and other explosives hadn't suffered any damage. With their powerful charges these important items were meant to break the projectile's fall, once it had gone past the point of neutral attraction and the moon's gravity started pulling it down to the ground. Besides, the shell was due to fall only a sixth as fast as it would on the earth's surface, thanks to the difference in mass between these two heavenly bodies.


So their inspection ended on an overall note of satisfaction. Then everybody went back and peered into space through the side windows and the glass below.


Same sight as before. The whole dome of the heavens swarmed with stars and constellations of such wonderful clarity, an astronomer would have come unhinged. On one side was the sun, like the open maw of a blazing furnace, a brilliant disk without its earthly halo, standing out from the black background of the sky! On the other side, the moon threw back this radiance by reflecting it, seemingly motionless in the middle of the starry universe. Then, fairly prominent and still edged with a silvery border, a dark patch seemed to puncture the firmament: it was the earth. Here and there floated cloudy masses like huge flakes of interstellar snow, and from zenith to nadir stretched an immense ring made up of infinitesimal powdery stars—that Milky Way galaxy in which the sun ranks as a star of merely the fourth magnitude!


Our skywatchers couldn't take their eyes off this unique sight, which no description can hint at. What thoughts it brought to mind! What strange feelings it aroused in their souls! Barbicane wanted to keep a record of his journey while under the sway of these impressions, and hour after hour he took notes on all the events that distinguished this first stage of his undertaking. He wrote serenely in his large square script and matter-of-fact style.


In the meantime Nicholl the calculating machine was reviewing his flight formulas, manipulating figures with matchless skill. Michel Ardan chatted in turn with Barbicane who didn't answer him, with Nicholl who didn't hear him, with Diana who didn't grasp any of his theories, then finally with himself, asking and answering, coming and going, busy with a thousand details, sometimes bent over the glass below, sometimes perched high in the projectile, singing constantly all the while. In this miniature cosmos he stood for Gallic talkativeness and impulsiveness, and believe me, these attributes were adequately represented.


That day—or more accurately, that lapse of the twelve hours making up daytime on the earth—ended with a bounteous, nicely cooked supper. As yet no incident of any kind had occurred to shake the travelers’ confidence. Full of hope, already sure of success, they accordingly fell into a peaceful sleep, as the projectile made its way through the heavens at a speed that was steadily decreasing.










CHAPTER 4








A Little Algebra






THE NIGHT WENT BY uneventfully. This word “night,” though, is misleading.


The projectile's position in relation to the sun hadn't changed. To an astronomer's eyes it was daytime in the lower half of the shell, nighttime in the upper. So when these two words are used in this narrative, they represent the period of time that elapses between sunrise and sunset on the earth.


The travelers slept all the more peacefully, because, though the projectile was going extremely fast, it seemed perfectly still. No movements revealed that it was proceeding through space. Not even the swiftest speed can be detected by an organism if it takes place in a vacuum, or when the air mass around the traveling object flows along with it. What earthling notices how fast his planet is carrying him, even though its speed is nearly 56,000 miles per hour? Under such conditions neither motion nor stillness can be “sensed.” Here, accordingly, all objects are neutral. If an object is standing still, it will remain in that state so long as no outside force moves it. If it's in motion, it won't stop till some obstacle gets in its way. This neutrality with respect to motion or stillness is called inertia.


Therefore, since Barbicane and his companions were closed up inside their projectile, it could easily have seemed to them they were standing perfectly still. Even so, the effect would have been the same if they were on the outside. If the moon hadn't been growing bigger overhead, they would have sworn they were absolutely stationary.


That morning, December 3, a cheerful but unexpected sound woke the travelers up. The crowing of a rooster rang through the coach's interior.


Michel Ardan was on his feet first, clambered to the top of the projectile, and closed a partly open crate:


“Pipe down, will you!” he said in a low voice. “This creature's going to spoil all my arrangements!”


But Nicholl and Barbicane were awake.


“A rooster?” Nicholl was saying.


“Heavens no, my friends!” Michel replied hastily. “I was the one who tried to wake you up with this barnyard vocalizing!”


And with that he let out a choice cock-a-doodle-doo, which would have done credit to a prize specimen of the genus Gallus.


The two Americans couldn't help laughing.


“That's quite a talent,” Nicholl said, giving his companion a sidelong glance.


“Yes,” Michel replied, “it's an old joke in my country. Typical French fun. That's how we play cock of the walk in high society!”


Then, quickly changing the subject:


“Barbicane,” he said, “do you know who I thought about all last night?”


“No,” replied the Gun Club's president.


“Our Cambridge friends. You've already commented that I'm a champion know-nothing in mathematical matters. So I can't even guess how the experts at the observatory calculated what the projectile's initial velocity had to be for it to reach the moon after leaving the columbiad.”


“You mean,” Barbicane countered, “for it to reach that neutral point where the moon's gravity equals the earth's, since from that point on —which is about nine-tenths of the way there—the projectile would fall to the moon simply because of its weight.”


“So be it,” Michel replied. “But once again, how did they manage to calculate the initial velocity?”


“Nothing could be easier,” Barbicane answered.


“And could you have worked that calculation?” Michel Ardan asked. “Absolutely. Nicholl and I would have done so if that memo from the observatory hadn't saved us the trouble.”


“Well, Barbicane old boy,” Michel replied, “they could slice me from top to bottom before I could solve a problem like that.”


“Because you don't know your algebra,” Barbicane remarked serenely.


“Oh, there you go again, you gluttons for x's! You think you've said it all when you've said algebra.”


“Michel,” Barbicane countered, “do you think you could be a blacksmith without a hammer or a farmer without a plow?”


“Hardly.”


“Well, algebra is a tool like your plow or hammer, and a good tool for people who know how to use it.”


“You're serious?”


“Perfectly serious.”


“And you can work with this tool in front of me?”


“If you're interested.”


“And show me how they calculated our coach's initial velocity?”


“Yes, my good friend. By taking into account all the elements of the problem—the distance from the center of the earth to the center of the moon, the earth's radius, the earth's mass, the moon's mass—I can establish just what the projectile's initial velocity has to be, thanks to a simple formula.”


“Let's see this formula.”


“You're about to. Only I won't give you the curve our shell actually makes to account for the earth and moon orbiting the sun. No, I'll regard these two heavenly bodies as stationary, which will be good enough for us.”


“And why is that?”


“Because otherwise we would be grappling with that problem called ‘the problem of the three bodies,’ which integral calculus still hasn't advanced far enough to solve.”


“My, my,” Michel Ardan put in with a bantering air. “Mathematics hasn't had its final say?”


“Of course not,” Barbicane replied.


“Great. Maybe the moonpeople have taken their integral calculus farther than you. And by the way, what is this integral calculus?”


“It's a computation that's the reverse of differential calculus,” Barbicane answered solemnly.


“Thanks a lot.”


“Put another way, it's a computation in which you look for finite quantities whose differential you know.”


“That's clearer at least,” Michel replied with a smug expression.


“Now it's time to put pencil to paper,” Barbicane went on. “And in less than half an hour, I'll have the formula we want.”


With that Barbicane got down to work, leaving Nicholl to peer out into space and his companion to take care of breakfast.


Half an hour hadn't gone by before Barbicane looked up and showed Michel Ardan a page covered with algebraic signs, in the midst of which this overall formula stood out:










“And this means … ?” Michel asked.


“This means,” Nicholl replied, “that half of v to the second power minus v zero squared equals gr, times r over x minus 1 plus m prime over m, times r over d minus x minus r over d minus r—”


“—plus x over y climbing on z and sitting astride p,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, bursting into laughter. “And you can understand all this, captain?”


“Nothing could be clearer.”


“Positively!” Michel said. “It's as plain as day and I couldn't ask for more.”


“You incurable comedian!” Barbicane countered. “You wanted algebra and now you're in it up to the neck.”


“I would rather be hanged by the neck.”


“As a matter of fact,” replied Nicholl, who was examining the formula with a connoisseur's eye, “this strikes me as nicely worked out, Barbicane. It's the integral of the momentum equation, and I'm sure it will give us the desired result.”


“But I want to understand it!” Michel exclaimed. “I'll put in ten years of a life like Nicholl's if it'll help!”


“Then listen,” Barbicane went on. “Half of v to the second power minus v zero squared—this is the formula that gives us fractional variations in momentum.”


“Fine, and Nicholl knows what it means?”


“Surely, Michel,” the captain replied. “All these signs may seem like cabalistic symbols to you, but they form the clearest, simplest, and most logical language to folks who know how to read it.”


“And you're claiming, Nicholl,” Michel asked, “that through these hieroglyphics, which are about as intelligible as the squawks of an Egyptian ibis, you can find what initial velocity the projectile has to be given?”


“Indisputably,” Nicholl replied. “And by using this same formula, I can always tell you its speed at any given point in its trip.”


“Word of honor?”


“Word of honor.”


“So you're as crafty as our president?”


“No, Michel. The hard part is what Barbicane did, which is to set up an equation that accounts for all the conditions of the problem. The rest is nothing more than a little arithmetic and calls only for knowledge of the four processes.”


“That sounds promising already!” replied Michel Ardan, who couldn't do simple addition to save his life and who defined the process as follows: “a riddle in Chinese that allows for an endless variety of answers.”


In the meantime Barbicane insisted that if Nicholl had put his mind to it, he would certainly have hit on this formula.


“I'm not so sure,” Nicholl said, “because the more I study it, the more I marvel at how you've set it up.”


“Now listen,” Barbicane told his know-nothing comrade, “and you'll see that each of these letters has a meaning.”


“I'm all ears,” Michel said, looking resigned.


“d,” Barbicane put in, “is the distance from the center of the earth to the center of the moon, because we must use their centers to calculate their gravitational pull.”


“That I can follow.”


“r is the radius of the earth.”


“r, radius. Granted.”


“m is the earth's mass, m prime the moon's. In essence we need to take the masses of these two magnetic objects into account, since their gravitational pull is in direct proportion to their masses.”


“Got it.”


“g represents gravity—the speed per second of an object falling to the earth's surface. Is that clear?”


“As mineral water,” Michel replied.


“Now, I use x to represent the variable distance separating the projectile from the center of the earth, and v stands for the projectile's velocity at that distance.”


“All right.”


“Finally the expression v zero figuring in this equation is the shell's velocity on leaving the atmosphere.”


“In essence,” Nicholl said, “it's from there that we need to calculate this velocity, since we already know that our velocity at departure is exactly 1½ times greater than our velocity on leaving the atmosphere.”


“I've quit understanding!” Michel put in.


“Yet it's quite simple,” Barbicane said.


“Not as simple as I am,” Michel remarked.


“It means that once our projectile has gone past the bounds of the earth's atmosphere, we've already lost a third of our initial velocity.”


“As much as that?”


“Yes, my friend, merely because of our friction against the atmospheric layers. Please understand that the faster we go, the more resistance we get from the air.”


“That I can accept and understand,” Michel replied, “though your v to the second power and your v zero squared are jangling around in my head like nails in a sack.”


“Algebra's initial effect,” Barbicane went on. “And now to finish you off, we're going to establish the numerical values of these different expressions, in other words, put them into figures.”


“Go on, finish me off!” Michel replied.


“Some of these expressions are already known,” Barbicane said, “the others need to be worked out.”


“I'll look after the latter,” Nicholl said.


“Let's take r,” Barbicane went on. “r is the earth's radius, which at our starting point, Florida's latitude, equals 20,899,000 feet. d, in other words, the distance from the center of the earth to the center of the moon, is equal to fifty-six times the earth's radius, hence …”


Nicholl quickly worked it out.


“Hence,” he said, “1,170,340,000 feet just as the moon has reached her perigee, in other words, her closest point to the earth.”


“Good,” Barbicane put in. “Now m prime over m—in other words, the ratio of the earth's mass to the moon's—equals 1/81.”


“How wonderful,” Michel said.


“g, the gravity, is 32.18 feet in Florida. From which it follows that gr is —”


“—equal to 671,948,000 square feet,” Nicholl responded.


“And now what?” Michel Ardan asked.


“Now that the expressions have been put into figures,” Barbicane replied, “I'm going to look for the velocity v zero, in other words, the velocity our projectile needs on exiting the atmosphere to reach the point where the gravitational pull is equivalent to an absence of velocity. Since velocity at that juncture is nonexistent, I'll make it equal to zero, then I'll let x—the distance at which this neutral point is found—be represented by 9/10 of d, in other words, the distance separating the two centers.”


“I have a vague notion that's got to be right,” Michel said.


“Which gives me, then: x equals 9/10 of d, and v equals zero, and my formula will become … ”


Barbicane wrote quickly on his piece of paper:










Nicholl scanned it eagerly.


“That's it, that's it!” he exclaimed.


“Is it clear?” Barbicane asked.


“It's inscribed in letters of fire!” Nicholl replied.


“What helpful fellows,” Michel mumbled.


“Do you finally understand it?” Barbicane asked.


“Understand it?” Michel Ardan snapped. “It's giving me a splitting headache!”


“Thus,” Barbicane went on, “v zero squared equals 2gr, times 1 minus 10r over 9d minus 1/81, times 10r over d minus r over d minus r.”


“And now,” Nicholl said, “to get the shell's velocity as it leaves the atmosphere, we only have to do a little calculating.”


The captain, a seasoned all-around problem solver, started writing with fearful speed. Divisions and multiplications stretched into the distance under his fingers. Figures fell like hail onto the blank spots on his sheet of paper. Barbicane kept an eye on him, while Michel Ardan pressed both hands against his temples, which were now starting to throb severely.


“Well?” Barbicane asked after a few minutes of silence.


“Well, according to the finished calculation,” Nicholl replied, “v zero, in other words, the velocity the projectile needs on leaving the atmosphere to reach the neutral point, should be … ”


“Yes … ?” Barbicane put in.


“… should be 12,085 yards per second.”


“What! ” Barbicane put in, jumping up. “You're telling me—”


“It should be 12,085 yards.”


“Curse the rascals!” exclaimed the Gun Club's president, making a gesture of despair.


“What's wrong?” Michel Ardan asked, quite startled.


“Wrong? If right now the friction has already reduced our speed by a third, then our initial velocity should have been …”


“It should have been 18,128 yards per second,” Nicholl replied.


“But the Cambridge Observatory stated that 12,000 yards was enough at departure, so our shell took off with only that much speed!”


“Well?” Nicholl asked.


“Well, it won't be enough.”


“Good heavens.”


“We aren't going to reach the neutral point.”


“Blast!”


“We won't even get halfway.”


“Son of a gun!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, leaping up as if the projectile were already colliding with their planet.


“And we'll fall back to the earth!”










CHAPTER 5








The Coldness of Space






THIS REVELATION was like a lightning bolt. Who could have anticipated such a calculating error? Barbicane refused to believe it. Nicholl reviewed his figures. They were correct. As for the formula that had generated them, its accuracy was above suspicion, and after verifying it, they'd confirmed that an initial velocity of 18,000 yards per second was needed to reach the neutral point.


The three friends looked at each other in silence. Breakfast wasn't in the picture anymore. Barbicane peered out a porthole, gritting his teeth, knitting his brow, convulsively clenching his fists. Nicholl examined his calculations, arms folded. Michel Ardan muttered:


“So much for your so-called experts! Those good-for-nothings! I would give twenty gold pieces for this shell to fall right on the Cambridge Observatory and pulverize every pencil pusher inside!”


All at once the captain had a thought, which he conveyed immediately to Barbicane.


“Hold on!” he said. “It's seven o'clock in the morning. So we've been gone thirty-two hours. Our flight is more than half over, yet as far as I can tell, we aren't falling.”


Barbicane didn't answer. But after a quick glance at the captain, he picked up a pair of compasses he used for measuring the angular distance of the earth. Then he got a highly accurate reading through the lower window, since the projectile seemed to be stock-still. Afterward he straightened, mopped the beads of sweat forming on his brow, and juggled some figures on his piece of paper. Nicholl saw that the Gun Club's president was trying to compute from the length of the earth's diameter just how far the shell had traveled. The captain watched him anxiously.


“No!” Barbicane exclaimed a few seconds later. “No, we're not falling! We're already over 125,000 miles from the earth! We've gone past the point where the projectile should have halted if its initial velocity had been just 12,000 yards per second. We're still ascending!”


“Obviously,” Nicholl replied. “So we're forced to conclude that the thrust from those 400,000 pounds of guncotton produced an initial velocity greater than the promised 12,000 yards. That explains why it took us just thirteen minutes to meet up with our second satellite, whose orbit is more than 5,000 miles above the earth.”


“And this explanation is all the more likely,” Barbicane added, “because by expelling the water stored between the collapsible partitions, the projectile suddenly lost considerable weight.”


“Right,” Nicholl put in.


“Ah, my gallant Nicholl,” Barbicane exclaimed, “we're saved!”


“Well then,” Michel Ardan replied serenely, “since we're saved, it's time for breakfast.”


In fact Nicholl wasn't mistaken. By a stroke of luck, their initial velocity had been greater than the speed specified by the Cambridge Observatory, but the Cambridge Observatory had made a mistake all the same.


Recovering from this false alarm, our travelers sat down to a hearty breakfast. If they ate a good deal, they talked even more. Their confidence was even greater now than before “the algebra incident.”


“Why shouldn't we succeed?” Michel Ardan kept saying. “Why shouldn't we arrive safely? We've taken off. There are no obstacles in front of us. There are no stumbling blocks in our way. We've got an easy road to travel, easier than a ship struggling against the sea, easier than a balloon fighting with the wind! Now then, if a ship can sail where it wants and a balloon can soar where it pleases, why can't our projectile hit the target it's aiming at?”


“It will hit the target,” Barbicane said.


“If only to do credit to the American people,” Michel Ardan added, “the only people who could see such an undertaking through to completion, the only ones who could bring forth a man like President Barbicane. And come to think of it, what's going to happen to us now that our worries are over? We'll end up being bored stiff.”


Barbicane and Nicholl waved this away.


“But I've foreseen this state of affairs, my friends,” Michel Ardan went on. “Just say the word. You've got chess, checkers, card games, and dominoes at your disposal. All we're lacking is a billiard table.”


“What!” Barbicane asked. “You brought such frivolous things along?”


“Certainly,” Michel replied, “and not just to entertain ourselves, but also with the praiseworthy intention of bequeathing them to the moonpeople's clubhouses.”


“My friend,” Barbicane said, “if there are people on the moon, they appeared thousands of years before people on the earth, because they live on a heavenly body that's unquestionably older than ours. So if these moonpeople have existed for hundreds of thousands of years, and if their brains are put together like human brains, they've already invented everything we've invented, and even what we'll invent in centuries to come. They have nothing to learn from us, and we have everything to learn from them.”


“What!” Michel responded. “You think they've got artists like Phidias, Michelangelo, or Raphael?”


“They do.”


“Writers like Homer, Virgil, Milton, Lamartine, and Victor Hugo?”


“I'm sure of it.”


“Philosophers like Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, and Kant?”


“I haven't any doubt of it.”


“Scientists like Archimedes, Euclid, Pascal, and Newton?”


“I would swear to it.”


“Comedians like Étienne Arnal and photographers like … like that


Nadar fellow?” 2


“I'm sure of it.”


“Then, Barbicane my friend, if these moonpeople are as good as we are, or even better, why haven't they tried to contact the earth? Why haven't they fired a lunar projectile at our planet?”


“Who says they haven't?” Barbicane replied in all seriousness.


“That's right,” Nicholl added. “It would be easier for them than for us, and for two reasons: first, because the gravity on the surface of the moon is a sixth of the earth's gravity, which would allow a projectile to take off more easily; second, because they would need to send this projectile a mere 20,000 miles instead of 200,000, which would require only a tenth as much thrust at departure.”


“Then I repeat,” Michel continued, “why haven't they done it?”


“And I repeat,” Barbicane countered, “who says they haven't?”


“When?”


“Thousands of years before man appeared on the earth.”


“What about the shell? Where's the shell? I insist on seeing the shell.”


“My friend,” Barbicane replied, “the sea covers five-sixths of our globe. That gives us five good reasons for assuming that if a lunar projectile was fired, it's now sitting on the floor of the Atlantic or the Pacific. Unless it got buried in some crevasse during that era when the earth's crust still hadn't hardened sufficiently.”


“Barbicane old boy,” Michel replied, “you have an answer for everything and I bow to your wisdom. All the same here's one theory that suits me better than the rest: since moonpeople are older and therefore wiser than we are, they simply decided not to invent gunpowder!”


Just then Diana butted into the conversation, barking noisily. She was clamoring for her breakfast.


“Ah!” Michel Ardan put in. “While we were arguing away, we forgot about Diana and Satellite.”


They immediately dished out a decent helping of dog chow, which Diana devoured ravenously.


“Look here, Barbicane,” Michel said, “we ought to have turned this projectile into a second Noah's ark and taken two of every domestic animal to the moon.”


“No doubt,” Barbicane answered, “but there wouldn't be enough room.”


“True,” Michel said, “it might be a bit of a squeeze.”


“The fact is,” Nicholl replied, “such ruminants as oxen, cows, bulls, and horses would be mighty useful on those lunar landmasses. It's a shame this coach couldn't be made into a stable or a cowshed.”


“But at least,” Michel Ardan said, “we might have brought a donkey along, just one little donkey, one of those courageous, patient creatures old Silenus liked to ride. I'm partial to those poor donkeys! They're absolutely the unluckiest animals in creation. They get beaten not only while they're alive, but even after they're dead.”


“How do you figure that?” Barbicane asked.


“It's the truth,” Michel put in. “Their hides are used for drums!”


Barbicane and Nicholl couldn't help laughing at this silly statement. But an exclamation from their lighthearted companion cut them off. The latter was stooping over the nook where Satellite lay; he straightened up, saying:


“Fine. Satellite isn't ailing anymore.”


“Good,” Nicholl put in.


“No, he's dead,” Michel went on. “That's going to be awkward,” he added in a doleful tone. “I'm afraid, my unlucky Diana, you aren't going to establish a bloodline in the lunar regions!”


In essence poor Satellite hadn't recovered from his injury. He was stone dead. Very flustered, Michel Ardan looked at his friends.


“This presents a problem,” Barbicane said. “We can't keep this dog's carcass with us for another two days.”


“No, surely not,” Nicholl replied, “but our portholes are on hinges. We can lower them. We'll open one of them and toss his body out into space.”


The Gun Club's president thought for a few seconds and said:


“Yes, that's how we'll proceed, but we'll need to take the most meticulous precautions.”


“Why?” Michel asked.


“For two reasons you'll soon understand,” Barbicane replied. “The first concerns the air inside the projectile—we need to lose as little of it as possible.”


“But we renew our air.”


“Only partially. We renew just the oxygen, my gallant Michel—and pertinent to this, let's take good care the device doesn't furnish an excessive amount of oxygen, because too much could cause us very serious physiological problems. But though we renew the oxygen, we don't renew the nitrogen, this carrier that the lungs don't consume and that needs to stay intact. Now then, this nitrogen will swiftly escape through the open porthole.”


“Oh I see—while we're tossing out poor Satellite,” Michel said.


“Right, so we'll need to act quickly.”


“And how about your second reason?” Michel asked.


“The second reason is that we mustn't let the intense cold outside get into the projectile, otherwise we'll freeze to death.”


“But what about the sun … ?”


“The sun warms our projectile, which absorbs its rays, but it doesn't warm the vacuum in which we're cruising right now. There's no air, so heat can't spread any more than light can, and wherever the sun's rays don't shine directly, it's not only dark, it's cold as well. This temperature, then, is simply what's produced by stellar radiation, in other words, it's what the planet earth would experience if the sun faded out one day.”


“Which isn't a cause for concern,” Nicholl replied.


“Who knows?” Michel Ardan said. “Even so, assuming that the sun doesn't fade out, couldn't the earth move farther away from it?”


“Oh good,” Barbicane put in. “Michel's daydreaming again!”


“Wait!” Michel went on. “Isn't it a fact that the earth passed through the tail of a comet in 1861? Now then, if we ever ran into a comet with a gravitational pull greater than the sun's, our orbit could shift toward this rambling space rock, the earth could become its satellite, and our planet could be dragged so far away that the sun's rays wouldn't have any further effect on its surface.”


“That actually could happen,” Barbicane replied, “but the consequences of such a change needn't be quite as alarming as you assume.”


“And why not?”


“Because heat and cold would remain in balance on our planet. Scientists calculate that if the earth had been carried off by that comet in 1861, we would have felt, even when we were farthest from the sun, a heat barely sixteen times greater than what we get from moonlight—which even the strongest magnifying lens can't increase to any appreciable extent.”


“So?” Michel put in.


“Wait a second,” Barbicane replied. “Scientists also calculate that at the earth's perihelion, when we're closest to the sun, we'll face a heat 28,000 times greater than what we feel during the summer. But this heat, which is enough to fuse solid matter and turn the seas into steam, will form heavy belts of clouds that reduce the intense temperature. Ergo the coldness of the aphelion compensates for the warmth of the perihelion, and we're likely to reach a happy medium.”


“But how cold,” Nicholl asked, “do scientists estimate that it gets in outer space?”


“In the past,” Barbicane replied, “they thought temperatures fell tremendously. In calculating low thermometer readings, they got to the point of juggling figures millions of degrees below zero. It was Joseph Fourier, one of Michel's countrymen and a famous expert at the French Academy of Sciences, who turned these numbers back into reasonable estimates. According to him, the temperature in space isn't any lower than -76° Fahrenheit.”


“Piddling,” Michel put in.


“It's pretty close to the temperature,” Barbicane replied, “that was recorded in the arctic regions at Melville Island and Fort Reliance, hence about -69° Fahrenheit.”


“It remains to be seen,” Nicholl said, “if Fourier's assessments were well founded. If I'm not mistaken, another French scientist, Claude Pouillet, puts the temperature in space at -256° Fahrenheit. However we'll be able to find out for ourselves.”


“Not right now,” Barbicane replied, “because the sun's rays are shining directly on our thermometer, so I'm afraid they would give an overly high temperature. But each side of the moon is dark for two weeks at a time, and once we've landed, we'll have the leisure to conduct this experiment, because the earth's satellite is moving in a vacuum.”


“But what do you mean by a vacuum?” Michel asked. “Is it an absolute void?”


“It's absolutely without air.”


“And the air isn't replaced by anything?”


“Yes. By ether,” Barbicane replied.


“Aha! And just what is this ether?”


“Ether, my friend, is a cluster of infinitesimal atoms, which, according to books on molecular physics, are as far from each other, relative to their dimensions, as celestial bodies are in space. But this distance is less than one 75,000,000th of an inch. It's the vibrating motion of these atoms that generates both light and heat, undulating 430 trillion times per second, though they're only two or three 125,000ths of an inch in size.”


“Billions of billions!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “So they've measured and counted all those fluctuations, have they? These, Barbicane my friend, are typical scientific figures—they grate on the ears and people can't relate to them.”


“But you have to work with figures—”


“No you don't. You're better off comparing them to something. A trillion doesn't mean a thing. Comparisons say it all. For instance: if you keep telling me that Uranus is 76 times bigger than the earth, Saturn 900 times bigger, Jupiter 1,300 times bigger, the sun 1,300,000 times bigger, I won't be much farther along. Accordingly I prefer—and by far—those old-fashioned comparisons in the almanacs that just talk down to you: the sun is a pumpkin two feet wide, Jupiter is an orange, Saturn is a lady apple, Neptune is a black cherry, Uranus is a Barbados cherry, the earth is a pea, Venus is a smaller pea, Mars is a bulbous pinhead, Mercury is a mustard seed, Juno, Ceres, Vesta, and Pallas are simply grains of sand. This way, at least, you know where you stand!”


After Michel Ardan's sally against scientists and the trillions they reel off without batting an eye, it was time to bury Satellite. This was a simple matter of tossing him out into space, just as sailors toss a corpse into the sea.


But as President Barbicane had advised, they needed to work fast so as to lose as little air as possible, since that elastic fluid would quickly pour out into the void. They carefully unscrewed the bolts in the right porthole, whose opening measured about a foot across; in the meantime Michel, full of remorse, got ready to launch the dog into space. Raised by a powerful lever that helped it overcome the interior air pressure on the projectile's walls, the window swung swiftly on its hinges and out went Satellite. Only a few molecules of air had escaped, and the operation was so successful, Barbicane had no qualms later on about likewise dumping any needless rubbish that cluttered the coach.










CHAPTER 6








Questions and Answers






ON DECEMBER 4, when the travelers woke up after fifty-four hours of traveling, the chronometers said five o'clock in the morning earth time. As for the scheduled length of their stay aboard the projectile, they'd gone five hours and forty minutes past its halfway point; but as for their flight plan, they'd already covered nearly seven-tenths of its distance. This oddity was due to their gradual decrease in speed.


When they studied the earth through the lower window, it looked like nothing more than a dark patch washed out by the sun's rays. No more crescent, no more reflected light. At midnight the next day, exactly when they would have a full moon, they also would have a new earth. Overhead, that silver orb drew nearer and nearer to the path being taken by the projectile, getting ready to meet up with it at the appointed hour. The dark dome all around them was spangled with shimmering sparks that seemed to be slowly moving. But they were at such considerable distances, their comparative sizes didn't seem to have changed. The sun and stars looked the same as they do from the earth. As for the moon, she was considerably bigger; but our travelers' spyglasses simply didn't have the power to examine her surface, so it was too soon to conduct a productive survey of her topography and geology.


Accordingly they passed the time in endless conversations. They especially chatted about the moon. Each man trotted out his own special brand of knowledge. Barbicane and Nicholl were always in earnest, Michel Ardan always fanciful. The projectile, its position, its heading, possible developments, and what precautions to take while falling to the moon all were unlimited subjects for speculation.


Sure enough, during breakfast one of Michel's questions about the projectile provoked a rather unusual answer from Barbicane, an answer worth quoting.


Michel wanted to know what the consequences would have been, supposing the shell had suddenly come to a halt while it was still going at its fearsome initial velocity.


“But,” Barbicane replied, “I don't see how the projectile could have come to a halt.”


“Suppose it had,” Michel responded.


“That isn't a feasible supposition,” remarked the practical Barbicane. “Unless there was a loss of thrust. But even then its speed would have decreased little by little and it wouldn't have come to a sudden stop.”


“Let's assume it had bumped into an object in space.”


“What object?” “That enormous meteor we met up with.” “Then,” Nicholl said, “the projectile would have been smashed into a thousand pieces and the three of us along with it.”


“Worse than that,” Barbicane replied. “We would have burned up.”


“Burned up!” Michel exclaimed. “By God, I'm sorry it didn't take place, so we could have ‘seen for ourselves.’ ”


“And it would have been something to see,” Barbicane replied. “Nowadays it's a known fact that heat is simply motion converted. When you warm water—in other words, when you add heat to it— that means you set its molecules in motion.”


“Say,” Michel put in, “that's a clever way of looking at it!”


“And it's accurate, my good friend, because it explains every phenomenon associated with high temperatures. Heat is only molecular motion, a simple fluctuation of the particles in an object. When you throw on a train's brakes, the train comes to a stop. But what happens to the motion impelling it? It's transformed into heat and the brakes get hot. Why do they grease the axles of the wheels? To keep them from getting hot, since the loss of motion will transform into heat. Do you understand?”


“I do understand,” Michel replied, “I understand perfectly. To give an example, when I've been running for so long that I'm dripping wet, that I'm sweating in big drops, why do I need to stop? Quite simply because my motion has transformed into heat!”


Barbicane couldn't help smiling at Michel's comeback. Then, continuing with his supposition:


“Hence,” he said, “in the event of a collision, our projectile would have been in the same shoes as a bullet that falls smoking to the ground after hitting a piece of armor plate. Its motion has turned into heat. Consequently I maintain that if our shell had bumped into that meteor, its sudden loss of speed would have created enough heat to turn it instantly into steam.”


“Then,” Nicholl asked, “what would happen if the earth were to suddenly stop orbiting?”


“Its temperature would shoot so high,” Barbicane replied, “it would immediately be reduced to vapor.”


“Fine,” Michel put in. “That's a way for the world to end that thoroughly simplifies things.”


“And what if the earth plummeted into the sun?” Nicholl said.


“It's calculated,” Barbicane replied, “that its fall would generate the same heat as 1,600 lumps of coal the same size as the planet earth.”


“A handy increase in temperature for the sun,” Michel Ardan remarked. “And the residents of Uranus or Neptune surely won't have any grounds for complaint, because they must be freezing to death on their planets.”


“Hence, my friends,” Barbicane went on, “any motion that's suddenly halted will generate heat. And this formulation leads us to believe that the sun's heat is fed by a hailstorm of meteors falling continually on its surface. They've even calculated … ”


“Look out,” Michel muttered, “here come the figures.”


“They've even calculated,” Barbicane went on unflappably, “that each meteor's collision with the sun should generate the same heat as 4,000 loads of coal the same size.”


“And how hot is the sun?” Michel asked.


“As hot as if you'd burned a seam of coal around it that's over sixteen miles deep.”


“And this heat—”


“—could bring 695 billion cubic miles of water to a boil in one hour.”


“And it doesn't roast you?” Michel exclaimed.


“No,” Barbicane replied, “because the earth's atmosphere absorbs four-tenths of the sun's heat. Besides, the amount of heat the earth intercepts is only two billionths of the sun's total output.”


“I can see that all's for the best,” Michel remarked, “and our atmosphere is a handy concoction, because it not only lets us breathe, it also keeps us from cooking.”


“Yes,” Nicholl said. “Unfortunately it won't be the same on the moon.”


“Phooey,” Michel put in, always optimistic. “If creatures live on her, they're breathing. If they've died off, they're bound to have left enough oxygen for three people, if only at the bottom of gullies where it'll accumulate because of its weight. So we won't do any mountain climbing, that's all!”


And getting up, Michel went to study the moon's disk, which was shining with unbearable brilliance.


“Good grief,” he said, “it must be warm up there!”


“Not to mention,” Nicholl replied, “that each day lasts 360 hours!”


“Plus, by way of compensation,” Barbicane said, “the nights are just as long, and since the moon's heat is restored only through solar radiation, her temperature has to be the same as it is in outer space.”


“Not exactly paradise,” Michel said. “Never mind! I wish I was there already! Hoho, my dear comrades, it'll be pretty strange to have the earth as our moon, to see it rise above the horizon, to make out the shapes of the continents, and to tell yourself, ‘There's America, there's Europe,’ then to watch it go and get lost in the sunlight! Speaking of that, Barbicane, do moonpeople ever have a chance to see eclipses?”


“Yes, eclipses of the sun,” Barbicane replied, “when the centers of the three heavenly bodies are in a line and the earth is in the middle. But they're only annular eclipses in which the earth hides just a portion of the sun's disk, leaving a large outer ring still visible.”


“And why aren't there any total eclipses?” Nicholl asked. “Doesn't that conical shadow cast by the earth stretch beyond the moon?”


“Yes, if we don't count the refraction caused by the earth's atmosphere. No, if we do count that refraction. Therefore, if we let delta prime be the horizontal parallax, and p prime the apparent semidiameter—”


“Whew!” Michel put in. “We're back to half of v zero squared! Speak English, you fiend for algebra!”


“All right,” Barbicane replied. “In layman's terms the average distance from the moon to the earth is sixty times the earth's radius, but after refraction the length of the conical shadow shrinks to less than forty-two times that radius. During an eclipse, then, the moon ends up protruding beyond the original conical shadow, and the rays she receives come not only from the edges of the sun but from its center.”


“Then,” Michel said in a mocking tone, “why are there eclipses at all, if there shouldn't be any?”


“Solely because the sun's rays are weakened by the refraction, so most of them fade out after they enter the atmosphere!”


“That's a convincing reason,” Michel replied. “Anyhow we'll find out when we get there. Meanwhile tell me this, Barbicane—do you think the moon was once a comet?”


“Now there's an idea!”


“Oh,” Michel remarked with smug cheeriness, “I get a few now and then.”


“But this particular idea doesn't originate with Michel,” Nicholl responded.


“Great. So I'm plagiarizing it?”


“Without any doubt,” Nicholl replied. “According to the ancients, the Greeks in Arcadia claimed their ancestors lived on the earth before the moon became its satellite. Based on this fact certain scientists have viewed the moon as a comet, a comet whose orbit brought her so near the earth one day, she was caught in its gravitational pull.”


“And is there any truth to this theory?” Michel asked.


“None whatever,” Barbicane replied, “and as proof, the moon doesn't reveal any trace of the gaseous covering that always surrounds a comet.”


“But,” Nicholl went on, “before the moon became the earth's satellite, couldn't she have passed so near the sun during her perihelion that all this gaseous matter evaporated?”


“It could have happened, Nicholl my friend, but it isn't likely.”


“Why not?”


“Because … ye gods, I don't know.”


“Ah, how many hundreds of volumes,” Michel exclaimed, “we could publish about everything we don't know!”


“Oh drat! What time is it?” Barbicane asked.


“Three o'clock,” Nicholl replied.


“How time flies,” Michel said, “when scholars like us put our heads together! No doubt about it, I feel loaded down with learning! I feel like I've become a well of knowledge!”


With that Michel hoisted himself up to the ceiling of the projectile, “to get a better look at the moon,” he claimed. Meanwhile his companions were peering into space through the lower window. Nothing new to report.


When Michel Ardan came back down, he went over to a side porthole and suddenly let out a cry of surprise.


“What's the matter?” asked Barbicane.


The Gun Club's president went over to the window and saw a sort of flattened-out bag floating in space a few yards away from the projectile. This object seemed as motionless as the shell, so it had to be heading upward in the same way.


“What is that thingamajig?” Michel Ardan kept saying. “Is it some sort of space particle our projectile has attracted to us, something that'll go with us to the moon?”


“What amazes me,” Nicholl replied, “is that the specific gravity of this object is clearly much less than the shell's, yet it's staying exactly level with us.”


“Nicholl,” Barbicane replied after a moment's thought, “I don't know what that object is, but I definitely know why it's staying level with the shell.”


“Why?”


“Because we're floating in a vacuum, my dear captain, and in a vacuum objects fall or move—which is the same thing—at the identical speed regardless of their gravity or shape. It's the air resistance that generates differences in weight. When you create a vacuum in a tube pneumatically, the objects you throw into it, whether they're specks of dust or lead pellets, all fall at the same speed. Out here in space you've got the same cause and the same effect.”


“Quite right,” Nicholl said, “and everything we toss out of the projectile will go with us all the way to the moon.”


“Oh, what blockheads we've been!” Michel exclaimed.


“Why do you call us that?” Barbicane asked.


“Because we could have filled up the projectile with useful objects— books, instruments, tools, etc. We could have dumped them all out, and they all would have lined up behind us. But here's a thought. Why can't we ourselves roam around outside like that meteor? Why can't we shoot into space through one of these portholes? What fun it would be to hang out in the ether like that—and we're luckier than birds are, since they always have to flap their wings to stay up!”


“Agreed,” Barbicane said, “but how would we breathe?”


“If there's no air out there, a thousand curses on the stuff!”


“But your density is less than the projectile's, Michel, so if there were air out there, you would soon be left far behind.”


“Then it's a vicious circle.”


“As vicious as can be.”


“And we must stay locked up in our coach?”


“We must.”


“Ah! Of course!” Michel blurted out in a fearsome voice.


“What's wrong?” Nicholl asked.


“Now I see, now I can guess what that so-called space particle is! It isn't an asteroid that's going along with us. It isn't a piece of some planet.”


“Then what is it?” Barbicane asked. “It's our unfortunate dog! It's Diana's mate!”


Shapeless, unrecognizable, reduced to nothingness, the object was indeed Satellite's carcass, flattened out like a deflated set of bagpipes, yet rising higher and higher!










CHAPTER 7








An Intoxicating Moment






HENCE THESE STRANGE conditions gave rise to a phenomenon that was unusual but logical, peculiar but understandable. Any objects tossed out of the projectile had to follow its flight path and could come to a halt only when it did. Here was a topic of conversation good for a whole evening. Besides, the three travelers were growing more excited the nearer they got to their journey's end. They were on the alert for anything new and unexpected, and nothing would have surprised them in their current frame of mind. Their feverish fancies were going faster than the projectile itself, which had slowed down significantly without their noticing. But the moon was getting bigger in front of their eyes, and they already imagined that if they simply stretched out their hands, they could practically grab it.


The next day, December 5, all three were on their feet by five o'clock in the morning. If their calculations were correct, this was to be the last day of their journey. In eighteen hours, at midnight that very evening and right when the moon was full, they would arrive on its shining disk. This coming midnight would see them complete their journey, the most amazing of all time. Bright and early that morning, therefore, they looked out the portholes, which were tinted silver by the moon's rays, and they greeted her with a hearty and hopeful cheer.


The earth's satellite was proceeding majestically across the starry firmament. A few more degrees and she would reach the exact point in space where she was due to meet up with the projectile. By Barbicane's own reckoning they would make contact in her northern hemisphere, where mountains are scarce and wide plains stretch into the distance. A promising state of affairs, if, as they believed, the moon stored her atmosphere exclusively in the lowlands.


“Besides,” Michel Ardan pointed out, “it's better to land on a plain than a mountain. If a moonperson got dropped off on the summit of Mt. Blanc in Europe or on top of the Himalayas in Asia, he wouldn't really have arrived yet!”


“What's more,” Captain Nicholl added, “on level terrain the projectile would stay stationary once it descended. By contrast, if we alighted on a slope, our shell would roll down it like an avalanche, and since we aren't squirrels in a cage, we wouldn't arrive safe and sound. So all's for the best.”


In fact the success of their daring endeavor no longer seemed doubtful. But Barbicane was bothered by one thought; however, not wanting to worry his two companions, he kept silent on the matter.


In essence their moving toward the moon's northern hemisphere proved that the projectile's flight path had changed slightly. As worked out by the mathematicians, the blast at takeoff was supposed to carry the shell to the very center of the lunar disk. If it didn't arrive there, that meant it had gone off course. What was the cause? Due to the shortage of landmarks, Barbicane couldn't gauge or even guess the magnitude of this change in course. Nevertheless he hoped it would result only in taking them toward the topside of the moon, a region more suitable for landing.


Therefore, without sharing his worries with his friends, Barbicane was content to keep a close watch on the moon, trying to see if the projectile had truly changed direction. Because if the shell missed its target, overshot the moon, and flew off into interplanetary space, they would be in a dreadful position.


Just then, instead of looking flat like a disk, that silver orb was already hinting at her convexity. If the sun's rays had struck her at an angle, the shadows cast would have highlighted her lofty mountains and made them stand out sharply. A person's eyes could have dipped into the yawning depths of her craters or followed those erratic crevices that streak across her wide plains. But the intense brightness still flattened everything. You could barely see those wide blotches that make our satellite look like a human face.


“A face it may be,” Michel Ardan said, “but with apologies to the


charming goddess of the moon, 3 a pockmarked face!”


But the travelers were so close to their destination, they couldn't take their eyes off this new world. They strolled in their imaginations through its unknown lands. They scaled its lofty peaks. They descended into its wide basins. Here and there they thought they saw huge seas barely coalescing in its thin atmosphere, and watercourses pouring out their contributions from the mountains. Peering into the depths, they hoped to detect some sounds from this heavenly body, eternally silent in the solitude of space.


That last day left them with thrilling memories. They took note of the tiniest details. A vague uneasiness came over them as the time drew nearer. This uneasiness would have been even greater if they'd sensed how their speed was slackening. They wouldn't have thought it at all sufficient to take them to their destination. This was because the projectile no longer “carried any weight” by that point. It kept getting lighter, and at that boundary line where the moon's gravity and the earth's neutralize each other, the shell would become completely weightless, creating some highly startling effects.


But despite his various involvements, Michel Ardan didn't forget to fix their morning meal with his usual punctuality. They ate heartily. Nothing could have been more excellent than that beef broth brewed over the gas jet, nothing finer than those canned meats. A couple glasses of good French wine topped off this meal. And pertinent to this, Michel Ardan pointed out that under such blazing sunlight, even more robust wines were sure to be fermenting in the moon's vineyards, assuming they existed in the first place. In any event the farsighted Frenchman had taken pains to pack some precious cuttings from Médoc and Cote d'Or for which he had especially high hopes.


The Reiset and Regnault device continued to operate with tremendous efficiency. The air was always perfectly fresh. Not a molecule of carbon dioxide eluded the potassium hydroxide, and as for the oxygen, Captain Nicholl called it “definitely high quality.” The traces of water vapor inside the projectile mixed with the air, tempering its dryness, and it's a fact that few apartments and auditoriums in London, Paris, or New York could have offered such sanitary conditions.


But for it to operate reliably, the device had to be kept in perfect working order. Accordingly Michel inspected the escape valves every morning, tested the spigots, and adjusted the gas temperature on the pyrometer. Everything had gone well till then, and like dear old J. T. Maston, the travelers were starting to put on weight—and if they stayed locked in a few months longer, they would end up unrecognizable. In short, they acted like chickens in a coop: they got fatter.


Glancing out the portholes, Barbicane saw the ghostly carcass of the dog and various other objects that had been tossed out of the projectile, all stubbornly tagging along. Diana gave a mournful howl at seeing Satellite's remains. This flotsam and jetsam looked as motionless as if it were lying on solid ground.


“Do you realize, my friends,” Michel Ardan said, “that if one of us had died from the recoil at our departure, we would have had a hard time burying him, or rather ‘etherizing’ him, since out here we've got ether instead of dirt. As you can see, the incriminating corpse would have followed us into space like a guilty conscience.”


“That would have been distressing,” Nicholl said.


“But,” Michel went on, “the thing I miss is being able to go for a stroll outdoors. What rapture to float through this radiant ether, to bathe in it, to roll around in the sun's pure rays! If only Barbicane had thought to provide us with diving gear and an air pump, I could venture outside, pretend to be a gargoyle, and pose on top of the projectile like a chimera or a hippogriff.”


“Well, Michel old fellow,” Barbicane replied, “you wouldn't play hippogriff for long, because, despite your diving suit, the air would expand inside you, then you would inflate and explode like a shell from a mortar, or rather like a hot air balloon that has gone too high in the skies. Therefore you aren't missing anything, and remember this: so long as we're cruising in space, we need to prohibit any starry-eyed strolling outside the projectile.”


Michel Ardan let himself be partially persuaded. He conceded the thing was difficult though not “impossible,” a word that wasn't in his vocabulary.


The conversation shifted from this topic to another, not faltering for a second. Right then the three friends felt that ideas were sprouting in their brains the way leaves sprout during the first warm spell in spring. They were starting to get all tangled up.


In the midst of the questions and answers crisscrossing each other that morning, Nicholl pointed out a problem that didn't have an immediate solution.


“Of course,” he said, “it's all fine and dandy to go to the moon, but how do we get back?”


His two conversation partners looked at each other in surprise. You would have thought this possibility had never occurred to them before.


“What do you mean, Nicholl?” Barbicane asked in all seriousness.


“It strikes me as premature,” Michel added, “to think about leaving a place before we even get there.”


“I'm not saying we shouldn't keep on,” Nicholl remarked, “but I'll repeat my question and ask: how do we get back?”


“I haven't a clue,” Barbicane replied.


“As for me,” Michel said, “if I'd known how to come back, I never would have gone.”


“That's not much help,” Nicholl snapped.


“I'm on Michel's side,” Barbicane said, “and I'll add that the problem has no current relevance. Later on, when we judge it's time to go back, we'll put our heads together. Though we don't have the columbiad, we'll still have the projectile.”


“There's a step in the right direction. A bullet without a gun!”


“The gun we can build,” Barbicane replied. “The gunpowder we can make. There should be no shortage of metal, saltpeter, or coal in the bowels of the moon. Besides, in order to go back all we have to do is overcome the moon's force of attraction, and we only need to go 20,000 miles before we'll fall to the earth simply because of the laws of gravity.”


“That's enough,” Michel said heatedly. “Let's table this question of getting back! We've spent too much time on it already. As for contacting our old colleagues on the ground, that won't be hard.”


“And how would you do it?”


“With meteors launched out of lunar volcanoes.”


“Good thinking, Michel,” Barbicane replied in a decisive tone. “Pierre Laplace calculated that a force five times greater than that of today's cannons would be enough to shoot a meteor from the moon to the earth. Now then, every volcano has more propulsive force than that.”


“Hooray!” Michel shouted. “What handy mailmen these meteors will make, plus they won't cost a cent! And what fun we'll have with the postal authorities! But come to think of it … ”


“Think of what?”


“I've just had a marvelous idea! Why didn't we hook a wire to our shell? We could have traded telegrams with the earth!”


“Damnation!” Nicholl shot back. “A wire 215,000 miles long—do you think it would weigh nothing at all?”


“Nothing at all! We could have tripled the columbiad's powder charge! Even quadrupled or quintupled it!” Michel exclaimed, each of his verbs getting higher in pitch.


“There's just one small objection to make to your plan,” Barbicane replied. “As our globe rotates, the wire will wind itself around it like a chain on a winch—and that'll bring us back down to earth for sure.”


“God bless the Union and its thirty-nine stars!” Michel said. “I'm having nothing but unrealistic ideas today—ideas worthy of J. T. Maston! But I guess if we don't make it back to the earth, J. T. Maston could come and fetch us.”


“Yes, he'll come!” Barbicane remarked. “He's a dear and courageous comrade! Besides, what could be simpler? Isn't the columbiad still buried in Florida soil? Is there any shortage of cotton and nitric acid for manufacturing pyroxile? Won't the moon reappear at the zenith above Florida? Eighteen years from now won't she be in exactly the same place she's in today?”


“Yes,” Michel echoed. “Yes, Maston will come—along with our friends Elphiston, Blomsberry, and all the members of the Gun Club, and they'll get a hearty welcome! Then later on we'll run trains of projectiles between the earth and the moon! Hooray for J. T. Maston!”


It's likely that if the honorable J. T. Maston didn't hear the cheers uttered on his behalf, at least his ears were burning. What was he doing at that juncture? No doubt he was stationed in the Rocky Mountains at the outpost on Long's Peak, still trying to find that invisible shell drifting in space. If he was thinking of his dear companions, it must be conceded that they weren't far behind—all three were in the grip of a strange exhilaration and were sending him their best wishes.


But what was the reason for this lively behavior, now visibly increasing in the projectile's guests? Their sobriety couldn't be doubted. Should this odd intellectual sensitivity be blamed on their unusual circumstances, on the nearness of that moon just a few hours away, on some mysterious lunar influence now affecting their nervous systems? Their faces were as red as if they'd been exposed to heat from an oven; their breathing had quickened, and their lungs were pumping like a blacksmith's bellows; an abnormal light gleamed in their eyes; their voices were exploding with fearsome emphasis; their words were popping out like champagne corks expelled by carbon dioxide; their sweeping gestures were becoming dangerous. And strangely enough, none of them noticed this mental hypertension.


“Now,” Nicholl said in a curt tone, “now that I'm not so sure we'll get back from the moon, I want to know what we'll do there.”


“What we'll do there?” Barbicane replied, stamping his foot like a swordsman at a fencing club. “I have no idea!”


“You have no idea?” Michel exclaimed, bellowing the words so that they reverberated noisily around the projectile.


“No, I haven't the foggiest notion!” Barbicane shot back, matching the volume level of his conversation partner.


“Well, I know what we'll do,” Michel replied.


“So tell us,” Nicholl snapped, no longer able to keep a snarl out of his voice.


“I'll tell you if I feel like it,” Michel exclaimed, grabbing his companion fiercely by the arm.


“You'd better feel like it,” Barbicane said, eyes fiery, fists raised. “You're the one who dragged us on this fearsome journey, and we want to know why!”


“That's right!” the captain put in. “Since I'm not sure where I'm going, I want to know why I'm going!”


“Why?” Michel exclaimed, jumping a yard off the floor. “Why? To lay claim to the moon in the name of the United States! To add a fortieth state to the Union! To colonize these lunar regions, farm them, populate them, send them all our prodigious achievements in art, science, and technology! To bring civilization to the moonpeople, unless they're more civilized than we are, and to set them up in a republic, if they haven't got one already!”


“And what if there aren't any moonpeople?” Nicholl shot back, turning very argumentative under the sway of this bewildering intoxication.


“Who says there aren't any moonpeople?” Michel snapped in a threatening tone.


“I do!” Nicholl roared.


“Captain,” Michel said, “if you continue this insolent behavior, I'll ram it down your throat along with your teeth!”


The two opponents were about to rush at each other, and this disjointed debate was all set to deteriorate into a fistfight, when Barbicane made a fearsome leap in between them.


“Stop, you miserable fools!” he said, causing his two companions to turn their backs on each other. “If there aren't any moonpeople, we'll manage without them.”


“Right,” snapped Michel, who had no strong feelings either way. “We'll manage without them. Who needs moonpeople anyway? Down with all moonpeople!”


“The lunar empire is ours,” Nicholl said.


“The three of us will set up a republic!”


“I'll be the congress,” Michel exclaimed.


“I'm the senate,” Nicholl shot back.


“And Barbicane's president,” Michel roared.


“Not a president elected by the nation!” Barbicane replied.


“All right, a president elected by congress,” Michel snapped. “And since I'm the congress, you're elected unanimously!”


“Three cheers for President Barbicane!” Nicholl shouted.


“Hip hip hooray!” Michel Ardan howled.


Afterward president and senate, both in dreadful voice, sang a rabble-rousing “Yankee Doodle,” while the virile strains of the “Marseillaise” rang out from congress.


Then they started a chaotic round dance, making demented gestures, stomping insanely, turning somersaults like rubber-boned clowns. Howling in her turn, Diana joined the dance and leaped to the ceiling of the projectile. Then came a bewildering ruckus of flapping wings and a peculiar clamor like a rooster crowing. Five or six hens were fluttering around, knocking against the walls like crazed bats …


Their lungs out of order from some perplexing cause, more than just intoxicated, scorched by the air that was burning their respiratory organs, the three traveling companions fell motionless to the projectile's floor.










CHAPTER 8








195,285 Miles Away






WHAT WAS GOING ON? What had caused this strange intoxication that could have had such disastrous consequences? A simple blunder on Michel's part, which Nicholl was luckily able to remedy in time.


After a genuine swoon that lasted a few minutes, the captain came back to life first and gathered his wits about him.


Though he'd had breakfast two hours earlier, he felt his stomach growling dreadfully, as if he hadn't eaten for several days. From belly to brain his whole system was in an extreme state of hyperactivity.


So he stood up and ordered Michel to fix a light snack. Michel, wiped out, didn't reply. Nicholl then tried to brew a couple cups of tea, intending it to ease his consumption of a dozen or so sandwiches. First he set about lighting the gas and briskly struck a match.


He was startled to see its sulfur shine with such amazing brilliance, he could barely stand to look at it. When he lit the gas jet, a flame shot out of it like a beam of electric light.


An explanation dawned in Nicholl's mind. That bright light, the physiological problems he was experiencing, the hyperactivity of all his mental and emotional processes—now he understood.


“The oxygen!” he exclaimed.


And bending over the air device, he saw that this colorless, tasteless, odorless gas was pouring full blast from the spigot—a substance essential to life but in an unadulterated state causing the severest organic disorders. Michel had inadvertently left the spigot on the device wide open!


Nicholl hurriedly turned off the oxygen, which was saturating the atmosphere and would have led to the deaths of the travelers, not from asphyxiation but from combustion.


An hour later the air was thinner and their lungs back to normal. Little by little the three friends got over their intoxication; but they had to sleep off their oxygen like a drunk with his wine.


When Michel learned about the role he'd played in this incident, he didn't seem put out in the least. This unscheduled spree broke the monotony of their journey. Under its influence many foolish words had been spoken, but they were no sooner said than forgotten.


“Then again,” added the lighthearted Frenchman, “I'm not sorry I sampled a little of that heady gas. You know, my friends, it would be interesting to set up an emporium with oxygen rooms, where folks with weak constitutions could lead a more active life for a few hours! Imagine a gathering where the air was steeped in this noble elastic fluid, or a theater where the management would always add a stiff dose—what passions would fill the souls of the actors and the audience, what fire and enthusiasm! And if instead of a mere crowd we could saturate a whole community, how vigorously it would behave, what extra vitality it would gain! Maybe we could turn a worn-out nation into a big strong one, and I know more than one old European country that needs to go on an oxygen regimen for health reasons!”


Michel babbled so energetically, you would have sworn the spigot was still wide open. But a single sentence from Barbicane threw the brakes on his enthusiasm.


“That's all well and good, Michel my friend,” he told Ardan, “but how do you explain the presence of these hens that joined in our music making? ”


“Hens?”


“Yes.”


It was true, half a dozen hens and a handsome rooster were strutting around, clucking and flapping their wings.


“Oh, the spoilsports!” Michel exclaimed. “That oxygen incited them to rebellion!”


“But what did you bring these hens for?” Barbicane asked.


“To acclimate them to the moon, of course!”


“Then why hide them?”


“It was a prank, my dear president, simply a prank that backfired pitifully. I meant to turn them loose on the moon without saying anything. Goodness, how amazed you would have been to see these earth birds pecking away at your moon meadows!”


“You scamp, you eternal scamp!” Barbicane replied. “You don't need any oxygen going to your head! The way we acted under the influence of that gas is the way you always act! You're always out of your mind!”


“Ah, but what if that's a way to wisdom?” Michel Ardan remarked.


After this philosophical thought the three friends put the projectile back in order. Hens and rooster were reinstated in their chicken coop. But while proceeding with this operation, Barbicane and his two companions became distinctly aware of a new phenomenon.


Since the moment they'd left the earth, their own weight, the shell's, and that of the objects inside all had been progressively decreasing. Though they couldn't verify this weight loss in the projectile's case, the time would come when they would feel its effect on their own persons and on the tools and instruments they'd been using.


Needless to say, a scale couldn't have registered this loss, because the weights used to measure the object's heaviness would have lost the same amount as the object itself. But a spring balance, for instance, keeps its tension regardless of the gravitational pull and could have assessed this loss accurately.


We know that an object's force of attraction, also called its specific gravity, is in direct proportion to the object's mass and in inverse ratio to the square of its distance. From this it follows: if all other celestial bodies had been suddenly wiped out and our planet were alone in space, the projectile, in accordance with Newton's law, would weigh less and less the farther it got from our globe—yet it would never be completely weightless, because the earth's gravitational pull would always be felt no matter how far away.


But in the present instance, there had to come a time when the projectile was no longer subject to the laws of gravity, disregarding other celestial bodies, which could be viewed as having zero influence.


In essence the projectile was following a path between the earth and the moon. As it traveled away from our planet, the earth's gravitational pull decreased in inverse ratio to the square of its distance, but the moon's influence increased by the same proportion. So there had to come a point where these two forces of attraction would neutralize each other and the shell would no longer have any weight. If the moon and the earth had been equal in mass, this point would be found halfway between the two heavenly bodies. But after accounting for their difference in mass, it's easy to calculate that this point would be located at 47/52 of the way there—hence, to run the numbers, 195,285 miles away from the earth.


At this point an object without any built-in source of speed or motion would stay stationary forever, pulled equally by both heavenly bodies and drawn neither to one nor the other.


Now then, if the projectile's thrust had been accurately calculated, it was due to reach this point when its speed was gone and it had lost every ounce of its weight, like all the objects it carried inside.


Then what would happen? There were three theoretical possibilities.


Either the projectile would still keep some of its speed, go past the point of equal attraction, and fall to the moon—because the earth's gravitational pull would be less than its satellite's.


Or, running out of speed and failing to reach the point of equal attraction, the shell would fall back to the earth—because the moon's gravitational pull would be less than its planet's.


Or finally, impelled by enough speed to reach the neutral point but not enough to go past it, the projectile would stay eternally suspended in midair between zenith and nadir, like the fabled coffin of Mohammed.


That was the situation, and Barbicane clearly explained the consequences to his traveling companions. They were extremely concerned. Now then, when would they know that the projectile had reached this neutral point, which was located 195,285 miles away from the earth?


Exactly when they and the objects inside the projectile were no longer governed by the laws of gravity.


Till then, though the travelers all could tell this force was having less and less effect, they were still aware of its presence. But that day, near eleven o'clock in the morning, Nicholl let a glass slip out of his hand, and instead of falling, the glass stayed suspended in the air.


“Aha!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Now there's an entertaining lesson in physics.”


And right away, when they let go of various objects, weapons, and bottles, the articles stayed miraculously aloft. Released in space by Michel, even Diana herself duplicated—but without any sleight of hand—that marvelous suspension trick worked by such magicians as Alfred de Caston and Jean Robert-Houdin. What's more, the dog didn't seem to even realize she was floating in the air.


Despite their scientific sophistication, our three venturesome companions were startled and astonished themselves, feeling swept off into a realm of wonders, their bodies weightless. If they held out an arm, it hadn't any inclination to drop. Their heads bobbed around on their shoulders. Their feet no longer stayed on the projectile's floor. They were like drunkards who had lost their sense of balance. Fantastic tales have featured people who had no reflections, others who had no shadows. But here, by neutralizing the force of gravity, real life had created human beings for whom nothing had any weight, who weighed nothing themselves!


Suddenly Michel gathered himself, leaped off the floor, and stayed suspended in the air like the floating monk in Murillo's painting Angels’ Kitchen.


His two friends joined him instantly, and right in the middle of the projectile, all three enacted a miraculous ascension into Heaven.


“Is this credible? Is this feasible? Is this possible?” Michel exclaimed. “No, and yet it's happening! Oh, if only Raphael had seen us like this, what an ‘assumption’ he could have put on canvas!”


“This assumption isn't likely to hold up,” Barbicane replied. “If the projectile goes past the neutral point, the moon's gravity will pull us toward her.”


“Then our feet will stand on the ceiling of the projectile,” Michel answered.


“No,” Barbicane said, “because the projectile's center of gravity is quite low, so it will swing around little by little.”


“Then it'll turn all our arrangements upside down, literally!”


“Relax, Michel,” Nicholl replied. “Nothing's going to overturn, don't worry. Not a single object will move, because the projectile will change position without our even noticing.”


“That's right,” Barbicane went on. “And once it has cleared the point of equal attraction, its base, being comparatively heavier, will draw it vertically down to the moon. But for this phenomenon to occur, we need to have gone past the neutral line.”


“Past the neutral line!” Michel exclaimed. “Then let's do what seamen do when they cross the equator. Let's drink to the occasion!”


An easy sideways movement took Michel to the padded wall. There he found a bottle and glasses, set them “out in the open” for his companions, and they gleefully greeted the boundary line with a round of toasts followed by three cheers.


These gravitational effects lasted barely an hour. The travelers felt themselves gradually settling back onto the floor, and Barbicane thought he saw the projectile's conical end veer a little from its usual position of pointing toward the moon. With a countermovement the base was coming around. So the moon's gravity was winning out over the earth's. They were starting their fall toward the lunar disk, though it was still barely noticeable; they must have been going only fifteen feet per hour. But little by little this gravitational influence would grow stronger, their descent would become more pronounced, the projectile's base would be pulled downward and its cone would point toward the earth, then the shell would fall with increasing speed to the surface of the lunar landscape. Therefore they would reach their destination. Now nothing could impede the undertaking's success, and both Nicholl and Michel Ardan shared Barbicane's delight.


Then they chatted about all those phenomena they'd marveled at one after another. In particular they couldn't say enough about that neutral point where the laws of gravity weren't enforced. Michel Ardan, always the enthusiast, tried to draw some conclusions that were simply sheer imagination.


“Ah, my good friends,” he exclaimed, “what progress we could make back home if we could get rid of gravity, that chain shackling us to the earth! We would be like prisoners set free! Our arms and legs would never get tired again. No doubt it's true we would need to be 150 times stronger to fly over the earth's surface, to stay in the air just by using our muscles—but if there weren't any gravity, we could go off into space on a mere whim, simply by an act of will.”


“That's right,” Nicholl said, grinning. “If we managed to eliminate gravity the way we eliminate pain with an anesthetic, modern society would certainly be in for a change!”


“Yes,” Michel exclaimed, all caught up in his argument. “Let's abolish gravity, then we'll have no more burdens to carry! Which means no more cranes, jacks, winches, hand cranks, or other outmoded gadgets!”


“Well put,” Barbicane remarked. “But if nothing had any weight, nothing would hold still anymore—not even the hat on your head, my good Michel, nor your house, whose bricks stay in place simply because of their weight! Nor even a boat, which keeps steady on the water merely as a result of gravity. Nor the ocean itself, whose waves would no longer be regulated by the earth's gravitational pull. Nor finally even the atmosphere, whose molecules would no longer cling together and would scatter into space!”


“How inconvenient,” Michel remarked. “There's nothing like these practical folks for bringing you back to reality with a thud.”


“But take heart, Michel,” Barbicane went on. “Though there's no heavenly body where the laws of gravity have been repealed, at least you're going to visit one with much less gravity than the earth.”


“The moon?”


“Right. On the surface of the moon, objects weigh a sixth of what they do on the earth, a phenomenon you'll quite easily verify.”


“Then we'll notice it ourselves?” Michel asked.


“Obviously, since 450 pounds will weigh only 75 on the surface of the moon.”


“And our muscles won't have less strength?”


“Not at all. Instead of jumping three feet off the ground, you'll jump eighteen.”


“Why, I'll be a regular Hercules on the moon!” Michel exclaimed.


“To say the least,” Nicholl replied. “Because if a moonperson's size is in proportion to his sphere's mass, he'll be barely a foot tall.”


“Like the people of Lilliput!” Michel remarked. “So I'll get to play the role of Gulliver! We'll bring those fairy tales about giants to life! That's the advantage of leaving our planet and roaming the solar system!”


“Hold on, Michel,” Barbicane responded. “If you want to play Gulliver, visit just the smaller planets such as Mercury, Venus, or Mars, whose masses are a bit less than the earth's. But don't venture onto the big planets of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune, because there you'll swap roles and you'll be the one from Lilliput.”


“What about the sun?”


“Though the sun has a quarter of the earth's density, it has 1,324,000 times the volume, and its gravity is twenty-seven times stronger than on the surface of our globe. Keeping everything in proportion, the natives there should boast an average height of two hundred feet.”


“Damnation!” Michel exclaimed. “I would be nothing more than a pygmy, a house pet!”


“Gulliver in Brobdingnag,” Nicholl said.


“Exactly,” Barbicane replied.


“So it would be helpful to take along a couple cannons for protection.”


“Oh good,” Barbicane remarked. “Your shells would be completely ineffectual on the sun—they would travel only a few yards before they fell to the ground.”


“That's a strong statement.”


“That's a true statement,” Barbicane replied. “The gravity on that huge heavenly body is so considerable, an object weighing 150 pounds on the earth would weigh over 4,200 pounds on the surface of the sun. Your hat would weigh over 20 pounds, your cigar half a pound. In short, if you slipped and fell on that solar soil, you would be so heavy—over 5,500 pounds—that you couldn't pick yourself up again.”


“Holy smoke!” Michel put in. “So I would need to pack a small portable crane! All right, my friends, let's be happy with the moon for right now. At least, we'll cut an impressive figure there. Later on we'll see if there's any point in going to the sun, where nobody can have a drink without a winch to hoist his glass to his lips!”










CHAPTER 9








The Consequences of Going off Course






BARBICANE HAD REGAINED his confidence, if not in the journey's outcome, at least in the projectile's thrust. Its speed had the potential to take it past the neutral line. Therefore it wouldn't fall back to the earth. Therefore it wouldn't stay stationary at the point of equal attraction. This left only one theoretical possibility with a chance of becoming reality: the shell would arrive at its destination through the workings of the moon's gravity.


Actually this meant a fall of 20,740 miles—onto a heavenly body, it's true, whose gravity must be reckoned at just a sixth of the earth's. A fearsome fall nevertheless, and one for which they needed to take every conceivable precaution.


These precautions were of two kinds: some were to deaden the impact right when the projectile landed on the lunarsoil, others were to slow their fall and thus reduce its force.


With regard to deadening the impact, it was a shame Barbicane couldn't use the same methods that had so effectively lessened the jolt at departure, in other words, collapsible partitions and the use of water as springs. The partitions were still available but not the springs, because the travelers couldn't use their water supply for this purpose—a supply that would prove invaluable, if, during their first days on the moon, they found this liquid element lacking in her soil.


What's more, this supply would have been quite inadequate as a set of springs. The cushion of water stored in the projectile at departure —underneath the watertight disk—was a good three feet deep, with a surface area of fifty-four square feet. Its volume was nearly eight cubic yards, its weight 6.3 tons. Now then, their containers of drinking water didn't hold a fifth of this amount. So they had to do without this potent method of deadening the jolt on arrival.


Luckily, since Barbicane hadn't been content with using just water, the movable disk featured highly resilient buffers, designed to lessen the jolt at the shell's base when the horizontal partitions slammed into it. These buffers were still available; the travelers simply needed to readjust them and put the movable disk back in position. All these parts were easy to handle, weighed nothing to speak of, and could be quickly reassembled.


This took place. Readjusting the various pieces wasn't a problem. It was literally a nuts-and-bolts affair. And tools weren't in short supply. Soon the reconditioned disk lay on its steel buffers like a table on its legs. One problem resulted from the presence of this disk. It blocked the lower window. So even when they were rushing straight at the moon, it would be impossible for the travelers to keep an eye on her through this opening. Consequently they had to make do without it. However they could still see the vast lunar landscape out the side openings, just as you can look at the earth from an airship's gondola.


Positioning this disk was a good hour's work. It was afternoon by the time everything was ready. Barbicane took new readings on the projectile's tilt; but much to his annoyance, it hadn't swung around enough to start falling; it seemed to be traveling along a curve that ran parallel to the moon's disk. That silver orb was gleaming radiantly in space, while the golden orb opposite was a blazing fire.


The situation didn't inspire confidence.


“Will we get there?” Nicholl said.


“We'll proceed on that assumption,” Barbicane replied.


“You scaremongers,” Michel Ardan remarked. “We'll get there, and faster than we may like.”


This response sent Barbicane back to his preparatory work, and he got busy readying the devices designed to slow their fall.


You may recall the drama at that rally held in Tampa, Florida, during which Captain Nicholl played the role of Barbicane's foe and Michel Ardan's opponent. When Captain Nicholl argued that the projectile would shatter like glass, Michel had replied he would slow its fall by using shrewdly positioned rockets.


In essence, with the projectile's base as their launchpad, powerful explosives could blow up outside, create a recoil, and check the shell's speed to some extent. True, these rockets would have to burn in a vacuum, but they wouldn't be short of oxygen since they supplied it themselves, like those lunar volcanoes that can burn despite the moon's lack of atmosphere.


So Barbicane had come equipped with these explosives, which were packed in small tubes of threaded steel that could be screwed into the projectile's base. On the inside of the shell, these tubes were flush with the floor. Outside, they jutted six inches. There were twenty of them. An opening contrived in the disk allowed you to light the fuse on each. The result took place entirely outdoors. They'd tamped the detonation charges into the tubes beforehand. So all they had to do was pull out the metal plugs lodging in the base and replace them with these tubes, which fitted snugly into their holes.


Near three o'clock they'd finished this new chore, and after taking all these precautions, they had nothing left to do except wait.


Meanwhile the projectile was visibly closing in on the moon. To some extent it was obviously subject to her gravity, but its own impetus was also tugging it at an angle. The line of travel resulting from these two influences could take the shell off on a tangent. But the projectile definitely wasn't going to fall to the surface of the moon in the normal way, because its lower end, being heavier, already should have swung around toward her.


Barbicane's confidence shrank as he watched his shell withstand the moon's gravitational pull. The unknown was opening up in front of him, the unknown of interstellar space. He, the expert, thought he'd foreseen the three theoretical possibilities—falling back to the earth, falling to the moon, or staying stationary at the neutral line! And now a fourth possibility, fraught with all the terrors of the infinite, had unexpectedly surged into view. To face up to it without flinching, you needed to be a determined professional like Barbicane, a confirmed stoic like Nicholl, or a daring adventurer like Michel Ardan.


This now became the topic of conversation. Other men would have explored the question from a practical viewpoint. They would have wondered where their projectile coach was carrying them. Not these three. They looked for the cause that had produced this effect.


“So we've jumped the tracks,” Michel said. “But why?”


“Despite all the precautions that were taken,” Nicholl replied, “I very much fear the columbiad wasn't correctly angled. No matter how small the error was, it must have been enough to make us overshoot the moon's gravitational field.”


“Then their aim was off?” Michel asked.


“I don't think so,” Barbicane replied. “The cannon was absolutely vertical, it was unquestionably directed at the zenith overhead. Now then, once the moon reaches that zenith, we should hit her dead center. There's an additional argument, but it eludes me.”


“Aren't we arriving too late?” Nicholl asked.


“Too late?” Barbicane put in.


“Yes,” Nicholl went on. “The memo from the Cambridge Observatory maintains that we're to accomplish this flight in 97 hours, 13 minutes, and 20 seconds. Which means that if we arrive any sooner, the moon won't have made it to the point in question, and any later, she'll already be gone.”


“Agreed,” Barbicane replied. “But we left on December 1 at 10:46:40 in the evening, and we're supposed to arrive at midnight on the 5th, right when the moon is full. Now then, today is December 5. It's 3:30 in the afternoon, and another 8½ hours should be enough to take us to our destination. Why isn't it happening?”


“Could we be going too fast?” Nicholl responded. “Because we now know that our initial velocity was greater than it should have been.”


“No, a hundred times no!” Barbicane responded. “Even if the projectile's going too fast, this wouldn't keep us from reaching the moon if our direction's right. No, our course has changed! Something has driven us off course.”


“How? Why?” Nicholl asked.


“I can't say,” Barbicane replied.


“Well then, Barbicane,” Michel said, “would you like to know my views on this question of what drove us off course?”


“Go on.”


“I wouldn't give fifty cents for the answer. We're off course and that's that. It makes no difference where we're heading! We'll soon find out. Hell's bells, we're being dragged through space, so we'll definitely end up falling into some gravitational field or other.”


Michel Ardan's lack of concern didn't appease Barbicane. It wasn't that he was worried about the future, but about why his projectile had gone off course—he wanted to figure this out at any cost.


Meanwhile the shell continued to move sideways toward the moon, escorted by the retinue of objects tossed out of it. From prominent landmarks on the moon, now less than 5,000 miles away, Barbicane could even verify that they'd started moving at a uniform speed. Fresh proof they weren't falling. The projectile's thrust was still winning out over the moon's gravitational pull, but its flight path was definitely bringing it closer to the lunar disk, and there was a chance that when it got closer still, the force of gravity would take over and ultimately cause it to fall.


Having nothing better to do, our three friends stayed on watch. But they still couldn't make out the details of the moon's topography. All her surface features were flattened by the direct sunlight.


Consequently they peered out the side windows till eight o'clock in the evening. By then that silver orb had grown so big as they looked, it concealed a good half of the firmament. From opposite sides both sun and moon flooded the projectile with light.


By this point Barbicane thought he could put the distance separating them from their destination at just 1,750 miles. He judged that the projectile's speed was over 200 yards per second, hence about 410 miles per hour. Under the influence of centripetal force, the shell's base was showing a tendency to swing toward the moon; but centrifugal force was still winning out, so their linear flight path seemed likely to change into some sort of curve, its nature still undetermined. …


Barbicane kept looking for a solution to his insoluble problem.


The hours went by to no effect. The projectile was obviously closing in on the moon, but it was equally obvious that they wouldn't reach her. As for how near they would come, this depended on the two forces, one attracting and one repelling, that were courting this moving object.


“All I want,” Michel kept saying, “is to get close enough to probe the moon's secrets!”


“A thousand curses on whatever caused our projectile to go off course!” Nicholl exclaimed.


“In that case,” Barbicane replied, as if an idea had suddenly occurred to him, “curse that meteor we passed on the way!”


“Huh?” Michel Ardan put in.


“What do you mean?” Nicholl snapped.


“I mean,” Barbicane said in a decisive tone, “that our going off course is entirely due to our meeting up with that rambling space rock.”


“But it didn't even graze us,” Michel replied.


“That makes no difference. Compared to our projectile, its mass was enormous, so its gravitational pull was enough to affect our course.”


“Only minimally!” Nicholl exclaimed.


“Yes, Nicholl, but as minimal as it was,” Barbicane replied, “over a distance of 210,000 miles, that's all it took to make us miss the moon!”










CHAPTER 10








The Moonwatchers






CLEARLY BARBICANE HAD hit on the only plausible reason for their going off course. As small as it was, it had been enough to change the projectile's flight path. This was sheer bad luck. Due to a completely accidental occurrence, their daring endeavor had gone haywire, and unless there were some exceptional developments, they would no longer be able to reach the moon's disk.


Would they pass near enough to resolve certain matters of physics or geology that hadn't been settled as yet? This was the only question currently worrying these bold travelers. As for whatever fate the future had in store for them, they didn't give it a thought. But what would happen to them in the midst of this infinite emptiness, these men whose air would soon run out? A few more days and they would die of asphyxiation in this shell, which was now wandering at random. But for these stalwarts a few days were as good as centuries, and they devoted every second of their time to examining that moon they no longer had any hope of reaching.


By that point you could put the distance separating the projectile from the earth's satellite at about 500 miles. When it came to viewing the moon's surface features, our travelers were farther away under these circumstances than earthlings equipped with high-powered telescopes.


In fact, as you know, the Earl of Rosse assembled an instrument in Parsonstown, Ireland that magnifies 6,500 times, bringing the moon within forty miles; better still, the high-powered mechanism set up on Long's Peak can magnify that silver orb 48,000 times, making for a viewing distance of less than five miles, and objects over thirty feet across are distinct enough to be studied.


Hence, at their current distance the details of the moon's topography couldn't be closely scrutinized without a spyglass. A person's eyes grasped the general outlines of those huge hollows incorrectly called “seas” but couldn't identify their actual nature. The mountains lost their upthrust in that magnificent glare caused by the sun's reflected rays. An onlooker instinctively turned away, as dazzled as if peering into a pool of molten silver.


Even so, the oval shape of that heavenly body was already apparent. She looked like a gigantic egg, her small end facing the earth. In reality, when the moon was first being formed, she had the appearance of a perfect sphere and was either liquid or ductile; but she soon got caught in the earth's gravitational pull and was stretched out of shape by its force of attraction. Turning into a satellite, she lost the symmetrical contours of her birth; her center of gravity was distinctly off center, and due to this state of things, some experts drew the conclusion that the moon's air and water had managed to take refuge on her opposite side, which can't be seen from the earth.


This modification of our satellite's original contours was noticeable for only a few seconds. The moon very quickly drew closer thanks to the projectile's speed, which was considerably slower than its initial velocity though eight or nine times faster than any express train. The shell's going off at an angle—due to the very nature of the angle itself—left Michel Ardan hopeful of bumping into the lunar disk at some point or other. He refused to believe they weren't going to reach her. Yes, he refused to believe it and said so time and again! But Barbicane, a better judge of the facts, never failed to answer him with pitiless logic:


“No, no, Michel! We can reach the moon only by falling to her surface and we aren't doing so. Centripetal force keeps us within range of the moon's gravity, while centrifugal force pulls us irresistibly away.”


This was said in a tone that removed Michel Ardan's last hopes.


The projectile was closing in on our satellite's northern hemisphere, which moon maps place at the bottom, because these maps are generally drafted to match the images supplied by spyglasses, and as you know, spyglasses show things upside down. This was the case with Beer and Mädler's Mappa Selenographica, which Barbicane consulted. On this map the northerly hemisphere displayed wide plains broken up by isolated mountains.


At midnight the moon was full. Right then the travelers should have been setting foot on her, if that illomened meteor hadn't driven them off course. So the earth's satellite was arriving under the conditions meticulously calculated by the Cambridge Observatory. With mathematical precision she'd reached her perigee at the zenith of the 28th parallel. An eyewitness standing at the bottom of that enormous columbiad—whose aim was at an exact right angle to the horizon—would have seen the moon framed in the cannon's mouth. A straight line from the axis point of the piece would have gone right through the center of that silver orb.


No need to mention that during the night of December 5–6, our travelers didn't rest for a second. How could they shut their eyes while so near to this new world? No way. They put every ounce of their energy into a single objective: keep looking! These three represented the entire earth, they stood for all mankind past and present, through their eyes the whole human race was gaping at those lunar regions and probing our satellite's secrets! Their hearts throbbed with excitement and they went silently from one window to the other.


Their findings, which Barbicane recorded, were meticulously accurate. They had spyglasses for making them, maps for double-checking them.


The first moonwatcher was Galileo. His inadequate spyglass magnified only thirty times. Nevertheless, seeing those patches scattered over the lunar disk “like the eyes on a peacock's tail,” he was the first to identify them as mountains and he estimated the elevations of a few peaks, giving them an exaggerated height equal to 1/20 of the disk's visible width, hence about 27,000 feet. Galileo didn't draw up any map of his findings.


A few years later Johannes Hevelius, an astronomer from Danzig, used procedures that were correct only twice a month during the moon's first and last quarters, reducing Galileo's peaks to just 1/26 of that disk width. An exaggeration in the other direction. Even so, he's the scholar we have to thank for our first moon map. On it the clear round patches represent circular mountains, and the dark patches indicate wide seas, which in reality are only plains. He named these mountains and expanses of water after surface features on the earth. On his map you'll see a Mt. Sinai in the middle of a second Arabia, a Mt. Etna in the center of another Sicily, new versions of the Alps, Apennines, and Carpathians, then the Mediterranean, Sea of Azov, Black Sea, and Caspian Sea. But these monikers are misnomers, because neither the mountains nor the seas have shapes resembling their namesakes on the earth. Take that wide white spot on his map, which joins still-bigger landmasses to its south and ends in a cape—it's hard to recognize this as an upside-down image of India's peninsula, the Bay of Bengal, and Cochin China. Accordingly these names were dropped. Another mapmaker, somebody with a better knowledge of what makes people tick, proposed a new naming system that had instant appeal to human vanity.


This skywatcher was Father Riccioli, one of Hevelius's contemporaries. The map he drew up was crude and crammed with errors. But he named the lunar mountains after great men of antiquity and the scientists of his own era, a custom mostly followed to this day.


A third moon map appeared in the 17th century, the work of Domenico Cassini; though better drawn than Riccioli's, its proportions aren't accurate. Several miniature versions of it were published, and the royal press at the Louvre kept its brass printing plates for many years, then finally sold them by the pound for scrap metal.


Philippe de La Hire, a famous draftsman and mathematician, drew up a moon map thirteen feet high, but it was never engraved.


Following him, about midway through the 18th century, a German astronomer named Tobias Mayer undertook to publish a magnificent map of the moon's physical features, using measurements he'd meticulously verified; but his death in 1762 kept him from finishing this worthy task.


Next came Johann Schröter from Lilienthal, who sketched many moon maps, then one Lorhmann from Dresden, whom we have to thank for a layout divided into twenty-five sections, four of which have been engraved.


It was in 1830 that Messrs. Beer and Mädler rendered their famous


Mappa Selenographica 4 by tracing over an orthographic projection.


This map faithfully reproduces the lunar disk as it appears to our eyes, but the shapes of its mountains and plains are accurate only in the central part; elsewhere in the northern, southern, eastern, or western parts, these shapes are foreshortened and aren't comparable to those in the center. Thirty-seven inches high and divided into four parts, this topographic map is a masterpiece of lunar cartography.


Among later experts, we'll mention the relief maps of the moon's surface features by the German astronomer Julius Schmidt, the topographic work of Father Secchi, those magnificent photographic prints by the English enthusiast Warren De la Rue, and finally a map based on an orthographic projection by Messrs. Lecouturier and Chapuis—issued in 1860, it was an unusually fine example of clear draftsmanship and cogent design.


So much for this laundry list of different maps depicting the lunar world. Barbicane had two in his possession, Beer's and Mädler's plus the one by Messrs. Chapuis and Lecouturier. They were to make his moonwatching work a good deal easier.


As for the optical instruments at their disposal, there were some excellent nautical spyglasses manufactured specifically for this journey. They magnified objects a hundred times. Consequently they could bring the moon within a viewing distance of less than 2,500 miles from the earth. But just then, around three o'clock in the morning, their distance didn't exceed 75 miles, and in a setting that never suffered from bad weather, their instruments were to bring the ground on the moon within 5,000 feet.










CHAPTER 11








Fact and Fancy






“HAVE YOU EVER seen the moon?” a teacher sarcastically asked one of his pupils.


“No, sir,” the pupil remarked even more sarcastically. “But I have to admit I've heard about the place.”


In a sense the pupil's humorous answer could be given by the vast majority of mortal beings. How many people have heard about the moon but have never seen her … at least not through the eyepiece of a spyglass or telescope! How many have never even examined a map of the earth's satellite!


When we look at a map of the moon's physical features, one oddity strikes us right off.


In contrast to the arrangement adopted on the earth and Mars, the moon's continents lie primarily in the southern hemisphere of her globe. These continents don't boast the clean, clear outlines of South America, Africa, and India's peninsula. Their angular, erratic, deeply chiseled coasts are full of bays and capes. They're instantly reminiscent of the mass confusion in the Sunda Islands of Malaysia, where the land is extremely broken up. If any ships ever navigated over the surface of the moon, it must have been an exceptionally difficult and dangerous activity, and those lunar seamen and hydrographers were to be pitied—the latter as they surveyed the tortuous shorelines, the former as they made for those hazardous landing places.


You'll also note that on the lunar globe, her south pole is a much fuller landmass than her north pole. This last is nothing but a skimpy


patch of ground separated from the other continents by wide seas.5 To the south landmasses cover nearly the whole hemisphere. So it's possible moonpeople have already planted a flag on one of their poles, while the likes of such terrestrial explorers as Franklin, Ross, Kane, Dumont d'Urville, and Lambert still haven't managed to reach that unknown spot on the planet earth.


As for islands, they're plentiful on the surface of the moon. Nearly all of them are oval or as circular as if drawn with a pair of compasses, and they seem to form a huge group similar to those delightful isles scattered between Greece and Asia Minor, a region mythology once livened up with its most appealing legends. The names of such islands as Naxos, Tenedos, Milo, and Karpathos automatically spring to mind, and you instantly look around for the vessel captained by Ulysses or the “clipper” of the Argonauts. At least that's the effect this region had on Michel Ardan—they were the Greek Isles that he saw on the map. To the eyes of his less fanciful companions, the appearance of these coastlines was more reminiscent of the sliced-up lands of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, and where our Frenchman found the traces of fabled heroes, these Americans were pointing out the most favorable sites for opening trading posts in the interests of lunar commerce and industry.


To finish this description of the landlocked part of the moon, here are a few words on the layout of her mountains. Her chains of pinnacles, solitary peaks, basins, and crevices are easy to spot. The moon's most rugged terrain is confined to this section. Here it's amazingly craggy. You've got an immense Switzerland, an ongoing Norway where volcanic action has affected everything. This deeply carved surface came from consecutive contractions of the moon's crust back when this heavenly body was in the process of being formed. Therefore this lunar disk is a promising locale for studying your major geological phenomena. As certain astronomers have noted, her surface, though older than the earth's, has actually aged less. There are no seas to spoil her primitive features and increasingly smooth everything over, nor any air with a corroding effect that could change the outlines of her mountains. Here the fruits of volcanic activity can be seen in all their original glory, unchanged by water erosion. The earth was like this before swamps and streams coated it with layers of sediment.


After roaming these wide landmasses, a person's eyes are caught by even wider seas. Their organization, location, and appearance are all reminiscent of the earth's oceans; like the earth's, moreover, these seas take up the greater part of the globe. And yet they aren't bodies of water but plains, whose nature the travelers soon hoped to determine.


Astronomers, it must be conceded, have adorned these so-called seas with names that are peculiar to say the least, though science honors them to this day. Michel Ardan was right to compare a moon map to that board game “The Map of the Heart,” which was played by romantic folks like Madeleine de Scudéry or Cyrano de Bergerac.


“Only,” he added, “it's no longer the maudlin map of the 17th century, it's the map of life, quite neatly divided into two parts, one feminine and the other masculine. The right half of the moon's sphere is for women, the left for men!”


Whenever he went on like this, Michel left his matter-of-fact companions shrugging their shoulders. Barbicane and Nicholl looked at a moon map from a viewpoint quite unlike their fanciful friend's. However their fanciful friend may have been right about a few things. You be the judge.


In the left half of the lunar globe sat the “Sea of Clouds,” where human reason so often founders. Not far away appeared the “Sea of Rain,” fed by all the cares of life. Nearby lay the “Ocean of Storms,” where folks wage continual war with their passions, too often losing the battle. Then, exhausted by deceit, treachery, infidelity, and the whole retinue of worldly woes, what do people find at the end of their careers? That vast “Sea of Moods,” barely sweetened by a few drops from the “Bay of Dew.” Clouds, rain, storms, moods—does a human life include anything else, and don't these four words say it all?


The right half, “for ladies only,” contains smaller seas, whose meaningful names take in all the incidents of a feminine existence. There's the “Sea of Serenity,” a mirror into which young women peer, and the “Lake of Dreams,” which reflects a smiling future! There's the “Sea of Nectar” with its waves of affection and breezes of love! There's the “Sea of Fertility,” the “Sea of Crises,” then the “Sea of Low Spirits,” whose dimensions are maybe too modest, and finally that vast “Sea of Tranquillity,” which swallows up every false passion, futile dream, and unquenched desire, and whose waves empty peacefully into the “Lake of Death!”


What an odd sequence of names! What a quaint way of characterizing the moon's two halves, pairing them like husband and wife, fashioning this realm of existence out in space! As for our fanciful Michel, wasn't he right to interpret the old astronomers’ whimsies in this manner?


But while his imagination was “roving the seas,” his earnest companions were looking at things more geographically. They were learning this new world by heart. They were measuring her angles and diameters.


For Barbicane and Nicholl, the Sea of Clouds was an immense hollow in the ground that was dotted with a few circular mountains while largely covering the west side of the southern hemisphere; it took up about 1,150,000 square miles and its center was located in latitude 15° south and longitude 20° east. The Ocean of Storms, Oceanus Procellarum, the widest plain on the moon's disk, embraced a surface area of some 2,050,000 square miles, its center being in latitude 10° north and longitude 45° east. From the heart of it rose those wonderfully luminous mountains named after Kepler and Aristarchus.


More to the north and separated from the Sea of Clouds by lofty mountain chains, the Sea of Rain, Mare Imbrium, had its center point in latitude 35° north and longitude 20° east; it was almost circular in shape and covered an area of over 1,200,000 square miles. Not far off was the Sea of Moods, Mare Humorum, a little bowl only measuring about 275,000 square miles and located in latitude 25° south and longitude 40° east. Finally three bays stood out as well on the shores of this half of the moon's sphere: the Bay of Heat, the Bay of Dew, and the Bay of Rainbows, little plains fenced in by lofty mountain chains.


The “feminine” half—with a mind of its own, naturally—featured seas that were smaller and more plentiful. These were: to the north the Sea of Cold, Mare Frigoris, in latitude 55° north and longitude 0°, boasting a surface area of about 475,000 square miles, and bordering on the Lake of Death and the Lake of Dreams; the Sea of Serenity, Mare Serenitatis, found in latitude 25° north and longitude 20° west and encompassing a surface area of some 537,000 square miles; the Sea of Crises, Mare Crisium, in latitude 17° north and longitude 55° west, well defined, quite round, and embracing a surface area of nearly 250,000 square miles—an honest-to-goodness Caspian Sea hidden inside a belt of mountains. Then at the equator the Sea of Tranquillity, Mare Tranquillitatis, could be seen in latitude 5° north and longitude 25° west, taking up some 759,000 square miles; to the south this sea connected with the Sea of Nectar, Mare Nectaris, an expanse of about 180,000 square miles in latitude 15° south and longitude 35° west, and to the east it connected with the Sea of Fertility, Mare Fecunditatis, the widest in this half of the moon's sphere, taking up around 1,370,000 square miles in latitude 3° south and longitude 50° west. Finally, to the far north and far south, two other seas were visible—the Sea of Humboldt, Mare Humboldtianum, whose surface area was over 40,000 square miles, and the Southern Sea, Mare Australe, with a surface area of more than 160,000 square miles.


In the middle of the lunar disk, straddling the equator and the zero meridian, lay the Bay of the Center, Sinus Medii, a kind of hyphen linking the two halves.


That's how Nicholl's and Barbicane's eyes sorted out the whole visible surface of the earth's satellite. When they added up the different measurements, they found that the area of this half was some 29,610,000 square miles, of which about 20,720,000 square miles were volcanoes, mountain chains, basins, and islands—in short, everything that seemed to make up the solid part of the moon —while about 8,810,000 square miles were seas, lakes, and swamps—everything that seemed to make up the liquid part. None of this, however, was of the slightest interest to our good Michel.


This half sphere, as you can see, is less than a thirteenth the size of the earth's. Even so, lunar scholars have already counted over 50,000 craters! Consequently this surface is blistered, cracked, and as full of holes as a skimming spoon; in other words, it's worthy of that far from poetic designation the English have given it—“green cheese.”


Michel Ardan leaped up when Barbicane spoke this discourteous name.


“So this is the respect,” he exclaimed, “that 19th century Anglo-Saxons show to lovely Diana, fair Phoebe, sweet Iris, charming Astarte, the Queen of the Night, Jupiter's daughter by Latona, and the little sister of glorious Apollo!”










CHAPTER 12








Mountain Matters






THE PROJECTILE'S HEADING, as we've already indicated, was taking it toward the moon's northern hemisphere. Our travelers were far from that center point they were scheduled to hit before their flight plan suffered an irreparable change in course.


It was 12:30 in the morning. At this juncture Barbicane put their distance at 870 miles, a little longer than the moon's radius and sure to decrease as they drew nearer to her north pole. By then the projectile wasn't level with the equator but abreast of the 10th parallel—and from this latitude up to the pole, as they carefully reckoned on their map, Barbicane and his two companions could study the moon under optimum conditions.


With the help of their spyglasses, in fact, this distance of 870 miles shrank to 8.7 miles, hence 3½ geographic leagues. That telescope in the Rocky Mountains could bring the moon closer still, but the earth's atmosphere significantly weakened its optical power. Stationed in his projectile and looking through his pocket binoculars, Barbicane could accordingly view certain surface features that weren't visible to moonwatchers on the earth.


“My friends,” said the Gun Club's president in a solemn voice, “I don't know where we're heading, I don't know if we'll ever see the planet earth again. Nevertheless let's proceed as if our research will someday benefit our fellow mortals. Let's forget all our worries and free up our minds. We're astronomers. This shell is a workroom at the Cambridge Observatory transferred into outer space. Let's start our investigations.”


After that they conducted their research with tremendous diligence, faithfully recording changes in the moon's appearance at the different distances where the projectile hovered in relation to her. Right when the shell was level with the 10th parallel north, it seemed to be heading faithfully up longitude 20° east.


Here we'll make an important comment about the chart they were using in their investigations. In moon maps based on images supplied by spyglasses, the south is above and the north below, because these instruments show things upside down; given this inversion, it would seem natural for the east to be on the left and the west on the right. But this isn't the case. If the map were turned downside up and it displayed the moon as we see her, the east would still be on the left and the west still on the right, the opposite of earth maps. Here's the reason for this anomaly. Skywatchers located in the northern hemisphere—in Europe, say—see the moon to the south in relation to themselves. When they study her, their backs are to the north, the reverse of where they'll be when these folks look at an earth map. Since their backs are to the north, the east is on their left and the west on their right. To skywatchers located in the southern hemisphere—in Patagonia, for instance—the moon's west would be properly on their left and her east on their right, since the south is behind them.


That's the reason for this seeming reversal of the two compass points, and it's essential to take this into account while keeping an eye on President Barbicane's investigations.


With the help of Beer and Mädler's Mappa Selenographica, the travelers could instantly identify any portion of the lunar disk framed in the fields of their spyglasses.


“What are we seeing right now?” Michel asked.


“The northerly part of the Sea of Clouds,” Barbicane replied. “We're too far away to determine its character. Are those plains composed of dry sand, as the earliest astronomers claimed? Are they only immense forests, in line with Mr. Warren De la Rue's thinking, which gives the moon a very dense but low-lying atmosphere? That's something we'll find out later. We won't draw any conclusions till we're qualified to.”


This Sea of Clouds is rather sketchily defined on the maps. Supposedly this wide plain is littered with chunks of lava spewed out of those volcanoes close to its right-hand side, Ptolemy, Purbach, and Arzachel. But the projectile was moving ahead, drawing noticeably nearer, and soon some peaks appeared, closing off the northerly end of this sea. To the front stood a luminous mountain in all its beauty, its summit hidden from sight behind an outburst of solar rays.


“That's … ?” Michel asked.


“Copernicus,” Barbicane replied.


“Let's give Copernicus a look.”


Located in latitude 9° north and longitude 20° east, this pinnacle rises to a height of 11,280 feet above the level of our satellite's surface. It's quite visible from the earth, and astronomers can study it thoroughly, especially during the phase that occurs between the last quarter and the new moon, because at that point shadows fall lengthwise from east to west, letting you calculate its elevation.


After Tycho, which is located in the southern hemisphere, Copernicus boasts the most prominent network of bright rays on the moon. Like a gigantic lighthouse, it towers in isolation over the part of the Sea of Clouds that's next to the Ocean of Storms, and it sheds its magnificent radiance on both oceans at the same time. Those long luminous trails were a matchless sight, so dazzling during the full moon, crossing over the boundary of mountain chains to the north and going as far as the Sea of Rain before fading out. It was one o'clock in the morning earth time, and like a hot air balloon carried off into space, the projectile looked down on this splendid mountain.


Barbicane could accurately identify its chief characteristics. Copernicus belongs to the category of circular mountains, the first order in the division of large basins. Like Kepler and Aristarchus, which overlook the Ocean of Storms, it has sometimes gleamed through the gray light like a blazing spark, causing it to be mistaken for a volcanic eruption. But it's only an extinct volcano like all the others on that side of the moon. It measured about fifty-five miles across, rampart to rampart. Their spyglasses revealed traces of stratification produced by consecutive outpourings, and the whole neighborhood seemed to be littered with volcanic waste, a fair amount still visible inside the crater itself.


“There are several kinds of basins on the surface of the moon,” Barbicane said, “and it's easy to see that Copernicus belongs to the variety notable for its bright rays. If we were closer, we could spot those cones that garnish its insides and that used to be volcanic vents. An unusual characteristic, which is consistent on the moon, is that the inner surfaces of these basins go significantly below ground level, unlike the structure seen in craters on the earth. As a result, the overall curve at the bottom of each basin is a miniature version of the moon's spherical shape.”


“And what's the reason for this distinctive characteristic?” Nicholl asked.


“Nobody knows,” Barbicane replied.


“What marvelously bright rays!” Michel kept saying. “A lovelier sight would be hard to imagine!”


“Then what would you say,” Barbicane responded, “if traveler's luck takes us to the southern hemisphere?”


“Hopefully I'll say it's lovelier still!” Michel Ardan remarked.


Just then the projectile looked straight down on this basin. The ramparts of Copernicus formed a nearly perfect circle and its ultra steep walls stood out clearly. You could even detect a second ring of rock inside. All around it stretched a grayish, wild-looking plain whose surface features were highlighted in yellow. On the basin's floor, like jewels in a case, two or three volcanic cones sparkled for a second as if they were enormous dazzling gemstones. To the north the walls receded, forming a valley that very likely gave access to the crater's interior.


While passing over the surrounding plains, Barbicane could take note of a good many less-important mountains, among others a small circular one named Gay-Lussac that measured some fourteen miles across. To the south the plain looked extremely flat, not a single bulge, not a single projection above ground. To the north as far as the Ocean of Storms, however, it resembled a liquid surface agitated by a hurricane, and its peaks and swellings looked like a sequence of waves suddenly taking form. Across this whole expanse, luminous trails ran in from every direction, converging on the summit of Copernicus. Some were over eighteen miles wide, their lengths incalculable.


Our travelers discussed the origin of these strange rays, no more able to determine their nature than moonwatchers on the earth.


“But why,” Nicholl said, “couldn't these rays simply be spurs of mountains that reflect sunlight more intensely?”


“Not possible,” Barbicane replied. “If that were the case, these ridges would cast shadows under certain lunar conditions. Now then, they don't do any such thing.”


In essence these rays are visible only when the sun is directly opposite the moon, and they vanish as soon as the sunlight shines at an angle.


“But what have they come up with to explain those light trails?” Michel asked. “Because I refuse to believe scientists are ever at a loss for an explanation!”


“It's true,” Barbicane replied, “that Herschel made his views known, but he didn't dare offer them as conclusive.”


“Never mind. What were his views?”


“He thought those rays must have been streams of hardened lava that glittered under normal sunlight. Maybe so, but it's far from a certainty. If we pass nearer to Tycho, however, we'll be in a better position to identify what's causing those bright rays.”


“My friends,” Michel said, “do you know what that plain looks like from this far up?”


“No,” Nicholl replied.


“Well, since all those bits of lava are as skinny as spindles, it looks like an immense game of pick up sticks tossed around helter-skelter. All that's missing is a hook for pulling them out one by one.”


“Can't you ever be serious!” Barbicane said.


“Seriously then,” Michel remarked in a serene voice, “let's say bones instead of sticks. This way the plain could simply be a vast cemetery covered with the mortal remains of a thousand deceased generations. Do you like this highfalutin comparison better?”


“One's as bad as the other,” Barbicane remarked.


“Holy smoke, you're hard to please!” Michel replied.


“My good friend,” continued the practical Barbicane, “it makes no difference what it looks like, when we don't know what it is.”


“Excellent answer!” Michel exclaimed. “That'll teach me to argue with an expert.”


Meanwhile the projectile was moving ahead, going around the lunar disk at a speed that was nearly uniform. As you can readily imagine, our travelers didn't dream of resting, not for a second. Every minute brought a change in the scenery speeding by under their eyes. Near 1:30 in the morning, they glimpsed the upper reaches of another mountain. Checking his map, Barbicane identified it as Eratosthenes.


It was a circular mountain over 14,700 feet high, one of those basins so plentiful on the earth's satellite. Pertinent to this, Barbicane told his friends about Kepler's odd views on the formation of these basins. According to that famous mathematician, these crater-shaped cavities had been dug by human hands.


“For what purpose?” Nicholl asked.


“For a perfectly understandable purpose,” Barbicane replied. “The moonpeople would have undertaken these immense labors and dug these enormous holes in order to take refuge in them—to stay protected from the sun's rays, which beat down on them for two weeks at a time.”


“Those moonpeople were no fools!” Michel said.


“An odd notion,” Nicholl replied. “But it's likely that Kepler didn't know the real dimensions of these basins, because digging them would have been a job for giants, hardly feasible for moonpeople!”


“Why not?” Michel said. “On the surface of the moon, isn't gravity only a sixth of what it is on the earth?”


“But what if moonpeople are only a sixth as big?” Nicholl remarked.


“And what if there aren't any moonpeople?” Barbicane added. Which shut down the discussion.


Soon Eratosthenes vanished below the horizon without the projectile's getting close enough for them to carefully scrutinize it. This peak separated the Apennines from the Carpathians.






Among the moon's pinnacles you can make out several mountain chains distributed chiefly over her northern hemisphere. However some also reside in certain parts of her southern hemisphere.


Here's a table of these different chains listed from south to north, along with their latitudes and the elevations of their loftiest peaks:


Mountains: Latitudes: Elevations:


Dörfel 84° south 24,944 ft.


Leibnitz 65° " 24,934 "


Rook 20° to 30° " 5,249 "


Altai 17° to 28° " 13,278 "


Cordillera 10° to 20° " 12,789 "


Pyrenees 8° to 18° " 11,913 "


Ural 5° to 13° " 2,749 "


D'Alembert 4° to 10° " 19,183 "


Haemus 8° to 21° north 6,631 "


Carpathian 15° to 19° " 6,362 "


Apennine 14° to 27° " 18,048 "


Taurus 21° to 28° " 9,009 "


Ripheus 25° to 33° " 13,684 "


Hercynian 17° to 33° " 3,839 "


Caucasus 32° to 41° " 18,264 "


Alps 42° to 49° " 11,867 "


The most prominent of these different chains are the Apennines, 375 miles in length—which is less, however, than the major mountain systems on the earth. The Apennines skirt the east coast of the Sea of Rain and continue to the north as the Carpathians, whose geological profile measures about 250 miles.


The travelers could glimpse only the upper part of these Apennines, which are laid out between longitude 10° west and longitude 16° east; but the Carpathian chain stretched under their eyes from longitude 18° to 30° east, and they could appreciate its characteristics.


One theory struck them as thoroughly justified. Noticing that here and there this Carpathian chain took on a circular shape and was overlooked by peaks, they concluded this range used to feature prominent basins. These circular mountains must have partially broken up during the huge eruption that created the Sea of Rain. In appearance these Carpathians were what the Purbach, Arzachel, and Ptolemy basins might have been, assuming some cataclysm had knocked down their left-hand ramparts and transformed them into a continuous chain. They boasted an average elevation of 10,500 feet, an elevation comparable to certain parts of the Pyrenees on the earth, such as the valley of Pineda. Their southerly slopes dropped abruptly down to the immense Sea of Rain.


Near two o'clock in the morning, Barbicane found they were level with the 20th lunar parallel and not far from a small mountain 5,115 feet high, which goes by the name Pythias. The projectile's distance from the moon didn't exceed 750 miles, which their spyglasses reduced to 7½.


The Mare Imbrium, or Sea of Rain, spread out under our travelers’ eyes like an immense valley whose features were still barely visible. Near it on the left stood Mt. Lambert, whose elevation has been put at 5,948 feet, and farther on by the edge of the Ocean of Storms, luminous Mt. Euler shines in latitude 23° north and longitude 29° east. This mountain rose just 5,955 feet above the lunar surface and was the subject of some interesting research by the astronomer Johann Schröter. Trying to identify how these lunar mountains had originated, this scientist wondered if each crater always ended up having the right amount of space to hold the ramparts forming it. Now then, this perfect fit turned out to be generally the case, so Schröter concluded that a single outpouring of volcanic waste was all it took to form these ramparts, because additional outpourings would have upset the balance. Only Mt. Euler belied this general rule—it must have required several consecutive outpourings when it was formed, since its cavity had twice the space needed to hold its surrounding wall.


These various theories were all very well for some earthbound skywatcher whose instrument functioned only in a limited way. But Barbicane wasn't willing to settle for them, and seeing that his projectile was drawing steadily nearer to the moon's disk, he hoped that if he couldn't reach her, at least he could discover the secrets of her formation.










CHAPTER 13








Lunar Scenery






BY 2:30 IN THE MORNING, the shell hovered abreast of the 13th lunar parallel, at an actual distance of some 620 miles but a viewing distance their optical instruments had reduced to about 6¼. There still seemed to be no possibility they could reach any part of the lunar disk. They were orbiting at a comparatively moderate speed, which President Barbicane found bewildering. At this distance from the moon, it would take considerable velocity to withstand her gravitational pull. So the reason for this phenomenon remained elusive. Anyhow there wasn't time to look for the cause. The moon's surface features were parading under our travelers’ eyes, and they didn't want to miss a single detail.


As seen through their spyglasses, then, the lunar disk was 6¼ miles away. If a balloonist were carried that far above the earth, how much could he make out on its surface? We can't say, since the highest flights haven't gone more than 5 miles up.


Meanwhile here's an accurate description of what Barbicane and his companions saw from that altitude.


Broad swatches of pigment appeared over the moon's disk, covering a fair range of colors. Lunar scholars aren't in agreement on the nature of these pigments. There are a variety of them and they're pretty sharply contrasted. Julius Schmidt claims that if the earth's oceans dried up and a lunar skywatcher compared those oceans to our globe's inland plains, they wouldn't offer as great a range of distinct shades as the moon shows to skywatchers on the earth. According to him, the color common to those wide plains called “seas” is a dark gray mixed with green and brown. A few big craters also feature this pigmentation.


Barbicane was acquainted with the views of this lunar specialist from Germany, views shared by Messrs. Beer and Mädler. His own eyes verified that they were right and not certain astronomers who acknowledged only gray pigments on the surface of the moon. In some areas the color green was exceptionally distinct, being conspicuous, according to Julius Schmidt, in the Sea of Serenity and Sea of Moods. Barbicane likewise noticed some wide craters that hadn't any cones inside and were giving off a bluish color, like the gleam from a shiny new piece of boiler plate steel. These pigments were truly intrinsic to the moon's disk and weren't caused, as some astronomers say, by a spyglass's flawed objective lens or by the intervention of the earth's atmosphere. Barbicane had no doubts on this score. He was viewing them out in space and couldn't have made any optical errors. He accepted these different pigments as a proven scientific fact. Did that mean these shades of green came from tropical vegetation thriving in a dense, low-lying atmosphere? He still couldn't make up his mind.


Farther off he noted a reddish hue that was distinct enough. A comparable shade had already been spotted on the floor of a remote basin named Lichtenberg Crater, which is located near the Hercynian Mountains on the edge of the moon; even so, he couldn't discover its nature.


He wasn't any luckier with another lunar oddity whose cause he couldn't accurately define. Here's that oddity.


Michel Ardan was on watch next to the Gun Club's president, when he noticed some long white lines shining intensely in the direct sunlight. It was a sequence of luminous furrows very different from the bright rays Copernicus had recently displayed. They lay parallel to each other.


With his usual breeziness Michel didn't fail to exclaim:


“Say! Tilled fields!”


“Tilled fields?” Nicholl responded, shrugging his shoulders.


“Plowed at least,” Michel Ardan contended. “But what farmhands these moonpeople have got to be, and what gigantic oxen they must hitch to their plows to cut such furrows!”


“They aren't furrows,” Barbicane said, “they're rills.”


“Go on with your rills,” Michel replied genially. “Just what do you mean by rills, in a scientific sense?”


Barbicane promptly told his companion what he knew about lunar rills. He knew that such furrows had been spotted on every lowland part of the moon's disk; that isolated examples of these furrows very often measured from 10 to 125 miles in length; that they ran from 3,000 to 5,000 feet wide, and that their edges were absolutely parallel; but he didn't know anything more about their formation or their nature.


Using his spyglass, Barbicane examined these rills with the greatest care. He noticed that their edges consisted of ultra steep slopes. They were long parallel ramparts, and with a little imagination you could accept them as lengthy lines of fortifications erected by lunar engineers.


Some of these different rills were as flawlessly straight as if they'd been drawn with a tape measure. Others had gentle curves, though their edges always stayed parallel. The latter intersected each other; the former cut across craters. Here, they plowed through routine cavities such as the Posidonius or Petavius basins; there, they streaked over whole seas such as the Sea of Serenity.


These local irregularities inevitably fired the imaginations of astronomers on the earth. Their initial moonwatching hadn't turned up these rills. Neither Hevelius, Cassini, La Hire, nor Herschel seems to have been aware of them. It was Schröter who first brought them to scientific notice in 1789. After him others such as Pastorff, Gruithuisen, Beer, and Mädler studied these furrows. As many as seventy have been counted to date. But though we know their number, we still haven't determined their nature. They definitely aren't fortifications, any more than they're old dried up riverbeds, because for one thing, water is so scarce on our satellite's surface that it couldn't have carved itself any spillways, and for another, these furrows often go across craters located at high elevations.


It must be acknowledged, however, that Michel Ardan came up with an explanation—and without realizing it, this time he fell in with Julius Schmidt's thinking.


“Why couldn't those bewildering sights,” he said, “simply be a phenomenon caused by vegetation?”


“What do you mean?” Barbicane asked instantly.


“Easy, my dear president,” Michel replied. “Couldn't those dark lines making up that barricade be trees planted in neat rows?”


“So you're in favor,” Barbicane said, “of calling them vegetation?”


“I'm in favor,” Michel Ardan remarked, “of explaining what all you experts can't! At least my theory would have the advantage of suggesting why these rills vanish, or seem to vanish, at regular intervals.”


“And what's your reason for this?”


“The reason is that the trees become invisible when they lose their leaves, and visible when they get them back.”


“Your explanation is clever, my dear companion,” Barbicane replied, “but it's unacceptable.”


“Why?”


“Because there literally are no seasons on the surface of the moon, so that vegetation of yours couldn't cause any phenomenon whatever.”


In fact the minimal angle of the moon's axis keeps the sun virtually at a constant elevation in every latitude. Over the equatorial regions that shining orb is almost always found at the zenith, and in the polar regions it barely goes past the horizon line. So depending on the particular region, winter, spring, summer, or autumn will reign all year long, as they do on the planet Jupiter, which likewise orbits on an axis that's minimally tilted.


How did these rills originate? Hard question to answer. They definitely arrived after the craters and basins were formed, because several have invaded these cavities by busting through their circular ramparts. So this occurrence could have been contemporary with recent geological history and may have been due simply to the encroachment of natural forces.


Meanwhile the projectile had pulled level with the 40th lunar parallel, hovering at a distance that couldn't have been more than 500 miles. Framed in their spyglasses, objects seemed to be located only 5 miles away. At this juncture Helicon rose to a height of 1,657 feet right underneath where they stood, and on its left curved those medium-sized hills that surround a small portion of the Sea of Rain known as the Bay of Rainbows.


If astronomers are to thoroughly examine the surface of the moon, the earth's atmosphere would need to be 170 times more transparent than it actually is. But in this vacuum where the projectile was cruising, no moisture intervened between the eye of the beholder and the object beheld. What's more, Barbicane enjoyed a viewing distance that the highest-powered telescopes had never afforded, neither the one built by the Earl of Rosse nor the one in the Rocky Mountains. So he had absolutely optimum conditions for settling that crucial question of whether or not life could exist on the moon. But the answer still eluded him. He could make out only an empty expanse of immense plains plus some barren mountains to the north. No artifacts revealed the hand of man. No ruins gave evidence of human beings passing that way. No herds of animals indicated that at least the lower life forms had developed. Nowhere any movement, nowhere a trace of vegetation. Out of the three kingdoms sharing the planet earth, only one was represented in this lunar world: the mineral kingdom.


“Oh drat!” Michel Ardan said, looking a little flustered. “Isn't anybody home?”


“Not so far,” Nicholl replied. “No human beings, no animals, no trees. After all, we still haven't any way of knowing if there's air hidden deep in those cavities, inside those basins, or even on the other side of the moon.”


“Besides,” Barbicane added, “even for the keenest eyes, a human being isn't visible more than 4½ miles off. So if any moonpeople exist, they can see our projectile, but we can't see them.”


Near four o'clock in the morning, level with the 50th parallel, their distance had shrunk to some 370 miles. On the left, prominent in the broad daylight, a row of erratically shaped mountains unfolded. To the right, by contrast, a dark hole punctured the ground like a huge murky pit, impossible to plumb, drilled far into the lunar soil.


That hole was Plato, the Black Lake, a deep basin earthlings can properly study between the last quarter and the new moon, when shadows fall from west to east.


This black pigment is seldom found on our satellite's surface. It has been identified elsewhere only in the depths of Endymion Crater, east of the Sea of Cold in the northern hemisphere, and on the floor of Grimaldi Basin, at the equator near the eastern edge of the moon.


Plato is a circular mountain located in latitude 51° north and longitude 9° east. Its basin is fifty-seven miles long and thirty-eight wide. Barbicane was sorry they weren't passing directly over this huge opening. There were depths to plumb, maybe some mysterious phenomenon to discover. But the projectile's course couldn't be changed. They had to resign themselves completely to this fact. Even hot air balloons can't be steered, much less a shell when you're closed up inside its walls.


By around five o'clock in the morning, they'd finally gone past the northerly limits of the Sea of Rain. La Condamine Crater and Fontenelle Crater were still to come, one on the left, the other on the right. Starting with the 60th parallel, that part of the moon's disk was turning completely mountainous. Their spyglasses brought it within 2½ miles, less than what separates the summit of Mt. Blanc from sea level. This whole region was garnished with peaks and basins. Near latitude 70° Philolaus Crater towered to a height of 12,140 feet, revealing an oval basin forty miles long and ten wide.


Viewed from that distance, though, the moon's disk had an extremely peculiar appearance. Her scenery was visible under far different, far poorer conditions than on the earth.


Since the moon hasn't any atmosphere, this absence of a gaseous covering has consequences that already have been shown. There isn't any twilight on her surface, so night follows day and day follows night with the abruptness of a lamp turned off or on in the midst of utter darkness. There's no transition from hot to cold, so the temperature drops in a second from the boiling point to the coldness of outer space.


This absence of air has another consequence: wherever the sun's rays don't reach, it's as dark as the pit. What we refer to on the earth as diffuse light, the luminous matter hanging in the air that creates dusk and dawn, that produces shadows, half-lights, and all the magic of chiaroscuro—this doesn't exist on the moon. Ergo these stark contrasts of hers that feature just two colors, black and white. If moonpeople were to shade their eyes from the sun's rays, the sky would seem completely black to them, and the stars would look as bright as they do on the darkest nights.


You can gather what an impact this strange vista had on Barbicane and his two friends. Their eyes were befuddled. They couldn't tell foregrounds from backgrounds. No landscape painter on earth could render a piece of lunar scenery that lacks the softening effects of chiaroscuro. The result would be nothing more than ink blotches on a blank sheet of paper.


This vista didn't change, not even when the projectile drew level with the 80th parallel and was separated from the moon by little more than sixty miles. Nor even at six o'clock in the morning when it came within thirty miles of Gioja Crater, a distance their spyglasses reduced to some 1,600 feet. They practically could reach out and touch the moon! It seemed impossible that the shell wouldn't bump into her before long, if only at her north pole whose brilliant crest stood out sharply against the black background of the sky. Michel Ardan wanted to open a porthole and dive down to our satellite's surface. A 30-mile fall? No problem. But it wouldn't have been worth the effort, because Michel would have been dragged along in their wake; if the projectile couldn't reach any part of the moon, he couldn't either.


Just then, at six o'clock, the lunar pole appeared. Sharply lit up, only half of the moon's disk was offered to the travelers’ eyes, while the other half was lost in shadow. All at once the projectile crossed the line of demarcation between bright light and utter darkness, then abruptly plunged into the blackest of nights.










CHAPTER 14










The Night Lasting 354½ Hours






AT THE MOMENT this phenomenon suddenly occurred, the projectile had been skimming the lunar north pole, barely thirty miles up. So it took only a few seconds for them to plunge into the utter blackness of space. This transition happened so swiftly, without any stages in between, any fading of brightness, any softening of light waves, it was as if that silver orb had been blown out by a stupendous puff of air.


“The moon vanished!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, absolutely astounded. “It dissolved into nothingness!”


True enough, there wasn't a glimmer or a shadow. Not another thing was visible of that disk whose light had recently been so dazzling. It was as dark as the pit, and stellar radiation made the darkness even deeper. This was “that pitch-blackness” in which the lunar night is steeped, a period lasting 354½ hours on every part of her hidden disk, a night whose length comes from the equal speeds of her spinning and orbiting motions, one on her axis, the other around the earth. Since the projectile hovered deep inside the moon's conical shadow, the sun's rays didn't have any more effect on it than they had on that whole invisible side of the earth's satellite.


Inside the shell it was, then, as dark as the pit. They couldn't see each other anymore. Ergo they needed to dispel this darkness. As badly as Barbicane wanted to conserve his limited supply of gas, he had to call on it for some artificial light, a costly replacement for that sunshine currently denied them.


“The sun can go to blazes!” Michel Ardan snapped. “Making us spend our gas allowance instead of giving us daylight for free!”


“Don't blame the sun,” Nicholl continued. “It isn't Old Sol's fault, it's the moon's—she came between us and the sun like a shield.”


“It's the sun!” Michel insisted.


“It's the moon!” Nicholl shot back.


This was a pointless dispute, which Barbicane squelched by saying:


“My friends, it isn't the sun's fault or the moon's. It's our projectile's fault—instead of faithfully staying on its flight path, it clumsily veered away. Or to be fair about it, it's the fault of that illomened meteor, which drove us so dismally off our original course.”


“Fine!” Michel Ardan replied. “Since that settles the matter, let's eat breakfast. After being on the lookout all night, it's time we had a little sustenance.”


This proposition met with no resistance. In a few minutes Michel had fixed their meal. But they ate for the sake of eating, they drank without proposing any toasts or rounds of cheers. Carried off into these gloomy regions, lacking their usual escort of light rays, our bold travelers felt a vague uneasiness coming over them. Those “savage shadows” so dear to Victor Hugo's pen were clawing at them from all sides.


Meanwhile they chatted about this endless night of 354½ hours— hence nearly two weeks—that the laws of physics had inflicted on moon dwellers. Barbicane gave his friends some information on the causes and consequences of this unusual phenomenon.


“Unusual is the word for it,” he said. “During her long nights, each half of the moon goes without sunlight for two weeks, and the side we're over right now can't enjoy even the sight of the earth brilliantly lit up. In short, only one side of the lunar disk has a big heavenly body in the sky—I'm referring to our planet. Now then, suppose this were the case on the earth; suppose, for example, the moon never beamed on Europe and she was visible only in the Antipodes, can you imagine how amazed Europeans would be when they arrived in Australia?”


“Folks would make the trip just to see the moon!” Michel replied.


“Well,” Barbicane continued, “this same amazement lies in store for moonpeople who live on the lunar face that looks away from the earth, a face that's never visible to our countrymen down on the ground.”


“But which we ourselves would have seen,” Nicholl added, “if we'd arrived here during a new moon, in other words, two weeks later.”


“To even things up,” Barbicane went on, “I'll add that residents of the visible face are exceptionally blessed by nature at the expense of their brethren on this invisible face. As you can see, the latter have absolute darkness for 354 hours without a single glimmer cutting through the nighttime. By contrast, after the sun has shone for two weeks and sunk below the horizon, the former see a brilliant orb rise on the opposite horizon. It's the earth, thirteen times bigger than that small-scale moon we're familiar with; the earth, looking as wide as two lunar degrees, bathing the moon in a light thirteen times brighter than any light filtered through its own layers of atmosphere; the earth, which only vanishes just as the sun reappears in its turn!”


“Very eloquent,” Michel Ardan said, “though maybe a bit technical.”


“It follows from this,” Barbicane continued without missing a beat, “that the visible face of the lunar disk must be quite pleasant to live on, since this side is always lit up, either by the sun when the moon is full, or by the earth when the moon is new.”


“But,” Nicholl said, “this advantage must be totally offset by the unbearable heat the light brings with it.”


“That particular drawback is the same for both faces, because light reflected by the earth obviously has no heat. Even so, this invisible face will still experience more heat than the visible face. I say this for your benefit, Nicholl, because Michel isn't likely to understand.”


“Thanks,” Michel put in.


“In essence,” Barbicane went on, “when this invisible face gets light and heat from the sun simultaneously, it's because the moon is new, in other words, she's in conjunction, she's located between the sun and the earth. So in relation to where she's located when she's in opposition—when she's full—she's situated closer to the sun by twice her distance from the earth. Now then, we can put this distance at 1/200 of the distance separating the sun from the earth, or in round numbers, 500,000 miles. Therefore this invisible face is 500,000 miles closer to the sun when she gets its rays.”


“Quite right,” Nicholl replied.


“On the other hand …,” Barbicane continued.


“Just a second,” Michel said, interrupting his earnest companion.


“What is it?”


“I insist on continuing the explanation.”


“Why is that?”


“To prove that I do understand.”


“Go ahead,” Barbicane put in, smiling.


“On the other hand,” Michel said, mimicking President Barbicane's tone and gestures, “on the other hand, when the sun shines on the moon's visible face, it's because the moon is full, in other words, she's located opposite to the sun in relation to the earth. So the round number for the distance separating her from that shining orb is 500,000 miles greater, and the heat she gets has to be a little less.”


“Well put!” Barbicane exclaimed. “You know, Michel, for a showman you've got some sense!”


“Yes,” Michel replied nonchalantly, “we all do around the Boulevard


des Italiens.”6


Barbicane solemnly shook hands with his easygoing companion, then continued to spell out some of the benefits in store for residents of the moon's visible face.


Among others he mentioned the sight of solar eclipses, which take place only on that side of the moon's disk, since she needs to be in opposition for them to occur. Caused by the earth's intervening between the moon and the sun, these eclipses can last two hours; during this time, thanks to the rays refracted by the earth's atmosphere, our planet looks like nothing more than a black dot on the sun.


“Thus,” Nicholl said, “there's half of the moon, this invisible half, that nature has really shortchanged, really neglected!”


“Yes,” Barbicane replied, “but not completely. In fact, by a kind of swaying motion, by a kind of swinging on her midpoint, the moon shows somewhat more than half of her disk to our planet. She's like a pendulum whose center of gravity tends toward the earth and fluctuates rhythmically. What's the source of this fluctuation? The fact that her spinning motion on her axis stays at a uniform speed, whereas her orbiting motion—along an oval path around the earth— isn't uniform. At her perigee, the moon's closest point to the earth, her orbiting speed wins out and she shows a portion of her western edge. At her apogee, by contrast, her spinning speed wins out and a piece of her eastern edge appears. These slivers, which cover about eight lunar degrees, sometimes appear to the west, sometimes to the east. Consequently 56.9% of the moon is on view.”


“It makes no difference,” Michel replied. “If we ever change into moonpeople, we'll live on the visible face. Me, I like the limelight.”


“Unless,” Nicholl countered, “the atmosphere happens to have condensed on the other side, as some astronomers claim.”


“We'll take that into consideration,” Michel merely replied.


Meanwhile, breakfast over, the moon-watchers went back to their posts. They tried to see through the murky portholes by quenching all light in the projectile. But in the darkness outside, nothing so much as glimmered.


One bewildering fact bothered Barbicane. Since they'd passed so close to the moon—within about thirty miles of her—why hadn't the projectile fallen to her surface? If their speed had been tremendous, it was understandable that such a fall wouldn't occur. But since their speed was comparatively moderate, this resistance to the moon's gravity remained baffling. Was the projectile subject to some foreign influence? Was some sort of alien entity keeping it out in the ether? Obviously it wasn't destined to reach any part of the moon. Where was it heading? Was it getting closer to the lunar disk or farther away? Would it be carried off into that black night and across infinity? How could they learn the truth, how could they figure it out in the midst of this darkness? All these questions worried Barbicane, but he couldn't answer them.


Though invisible, the earth's satellite was definitely there, maybe no farther away than a few geographic leagues, a few miles; but neither he nor his companions could see her anymore. If her surface gave off any noises,


they weren't audible. There was no air, no sound-conducting medium, to transmit any rumblings from the moon, which Arabic legends characterize as “a living, breathing human being who's already half granite.”


It was enough, you must admit, to aggravate the most patient skywatchers. Nothing less than this whole unknown side of the moon was hidden from their eyes! The face that the sun's rays brilliantly light up— as they had two weeks earlier and would two weeks later —was currently lost in utter darkness. Where would the projectile be in another two weeks? Where would these different forces of gravity chance to take it? Who could say?


Thanks to the findings of lunar scholars, it's generally conceded that our satellite's invisible half has absolutely the same makeup as her visible half. In fact about a seventh of this side is revealed by that swaying motion Barbicane spoke of. Now then, on those slivers that have been glimpsed, there were simply plains, mountains, basins, and craters—similar to the ones already recorded on the maps. So we can expect the same sort of world, the same dry, dead habitat. And yet what if the moon's atmosphere had taken refuge on this face? What if a combination of air and water had brought life to this reborn landscape? What if vegetation continued to thrive here? What if animals populated these lands and seas? What if such good living conditions meant that man still existed hereabouts? So many intriguing questions were left to be clarified! So many answers could be derived from studying this half of the moon! How enthralling to take a look at this world no human eyes have ever glimpsed!


The reader can imagine, then, how annoyed the travelers felt in the midst of this pitch-black night. All scrutiny of the lunar disk was prohibited. Only the constellations made a bid for their attention, and it must be acknowledged that not even such astronomers as Faye, Chacornac, or Father Secchi ever found such promising conditions for studying them.


In fact nothing could match the magnificence of that starlit world bathing in the translucent ether. Set in the dome of the skies, those diamonds sparkled with superb fire. A person's eyes took in the firmament from the Southern Cross to the North Star, those two constellations that in another 12,000 years, thanks to the precession of the equinoxes, will relinquish their roles as pole stars, one to Canopus in the southern hemisphere, the other to Vega in the northern hemisphere. A person's imagination could get lost in this sublime infinity where the projectile was revolving, a new heavenly body created by the hand of man. Due to natural causes, the constellations gleamed with a gentle glow; since there wasn't any atmosphere, they didn't twinkle, which is caused by intervening layers of air that differ in density and humidity. Those stars were gentle eyes, gazing into that deep night through the absolute stillness of space.


Our travelers were speechless for a good while, in this state examining that star-spangled firmament where the huge shield of the moon made an enormous dark hole. But a painful sensation finally tore them away from their contemplating. It was bitterly cold, and thick coats of ice were soon covering the insides of the glass portholes. In essence there was no longer any direct sunlight to warm the projectile, which, little by little, was losing the heat stored between its walls. This heat was radiating into the void and swiftly evaporating, and the result was a significantly lower temperature. Coming in contact with the glass windows, the moisture in the shell had consequently changed into ice, which made it impossible to see outside.


Nicholl checked the thermometer and saw it had dropped to 1.4° above zero. Therefore, despite all the reasons for practicing thrift, Barbicane had to call on their gas not only for light but for heat. The shell's low temperature was no longer bearable. Its guests would have frozen to death.


“We can't complain that this trip has been monotonous,” Michel Ardan pointed out. “We've had plenty of variety, at least in temperature! Sometimes we're blinded by the light and suffocated by the heat, like Indians on the Pampas! Sometimes we're surrounded by absolute darkness in the middle of an arctic chill, like Eskimos at the pole! No, we really haven't any right to complain, and nature has put on quite a show in our honor.”










“But,” Nicholl asked, “what's the temperature outside?”


“Exactly that of interplanetary space,” Barbicane replied.


“Then,” Michel Ardan went on, “wouldn't this be the time to conduct that experiment we couldn't attempt when the sun's rays were flooding over us?”


“It's now or never,” Barbicane replied, “because we're in a viable position to verify the temperature in space—and to see whether it's Fourier's or Pouillet's calculations that are correct.”


“It's cold in any event,” Michel replied. “Look how the moisture inside is condensing on the glass portholes. If the temperature drops even a little more, the steam of our breath will turn into snowflakes and fall all around us!”


“Let's get a thermometer ready,” Barbicane said.


As you can easily imagine, a standard thermometer wouldn't have been any help under the conditions the instrument would soon be exposed to. The mercury would have frozen in its bulb, since it can't stay liquid below -38° Fahrenheit. But Barbicane had come equipped with a discharge thermometer based on Walferdin's design, which gives the minimum readings of extremely low temperatures.


Before starting the experiment, they compared this instrument to a standard thermometer, then Barbicane got set to use it.


“How will we manage this?” Nicholl asked.


“Nothing could be simpler,” Michel Ardan replied, never at a loss. “We quickly open the porthole; we toss out the instrument; it follows the projectile with exemplary obedience; fifteen minutes later we yank it back in—”


“With your hand?” Barbicane asked.


“With my hand,” Michel answered.


“Well, my friend, that's a risk you'd better not run,” Barbicane replied. “Because the hand you'll yank in will be nothing more than a stump, frozen and deformed by this frightful cold.”


“Really!”


“You'll feel a dreadful burning sensation, as if from a white-hot iron; because whether heat abruptly leaves or enters our flesh, the effect is absolutely the same. Besides, I'm not certain the objects we tossed outside the projectile are still escorting us.”


“Why not?” Nicholl said.


“Because if we're passing through any sort of atmosphere, even if it has very little density, those objects will lag behind. Now then, this darkness keeps us from verifying whether they're still floating around us. So to avoid any risk of losing our thermometer, we'll attach it, then we can pull it back inside more easily.”


They took Barbicane's advice. Through a quickly opened porthole, Nicholl tossed out the instrument, which was on the end of a short string so it could be quickly yanked back in. The porthole was open only a second, but that second was enough to let the intense cold get into the projectile.


“Damnation!” Michel Ardan yelled. “It's cold enough to freeze a polar bear!”


Barbicane waited till half an hour had gone by, ample time for the instrument to drop to the temperature level out in space. At this point, then, they quickly yanked the thermometer back inside.


Barbicane calculated the amount of alcohol discharged into the tiny vial that was soldered to the instrument's lower end, then he said:


“It reads -220° Fahrenheit!”


Claude Pouillet was right and not Joseph Fourier. This was the alarming temperature of interstellar space! And maybe this was the figure for those lunar landmasses, when, after basking in two weeks of sunlight, that silver orb lost all her heat by its radiating into the void.










CHAPTER 15








Hyperbola or Parabola






MAYBE IT SURPRISES YOU that while Barbicane and his companions were shooting through the infinite ether, they were so unconcerned about the future in store for them inside their metal prison. Instead of wondering where they were heading, they spent their time conducting experiments, as if they were serenely ensconced in their workrooms.


We could reply that these stouthearted men were above such concerns, that they didn't bother with trivia, that they had other things to do besides worrying about their future lot in life.


The truth is, they weren't in control of their projectile, they couldn't check its speed or change its direction. A seaman can adjust his vessel's heading at will; a balloonist can make his airship go up and down. Our travelers, by contrast, were powerless over their vehicle. Every possible maneuver was prohibited. Ergo this inclination to let things be, or as sailors say, “ride it out.”


Where were they hovering just then, at eight o'clock in the morning on that earth day reckoned as December 6? Very definitely in the vicinity of the moon, and so close even that she looked like a huge black shield covering the firmament. As for the distance separating them, it was impossible to estimate. Kept aloft by some bewildering force, the projectile had skimmed our satellite's north pole, barely thirty miles up. But during their two hours inside this conical shadow, had their distance increased or decreased? There weren't any landmarks to help them gauge the projectile's direction and speed. Maybe it was hurrying away from the lunar disk and would soon leave this unbroken shadow. On the other hand, maybe it was drawing appreciably closer to the moon and was about to bump into some lofty peak on her invisible side—which would bring this journey to a close, no doubt at our travelers’ expense.


This topic came up for discussion; Michel Ardan, always chock full of explanations, offered his view that since the shell was caught in the moon's gravity, it would end up falling to her surface as a meteor falls to the earth.


“First of all, my dear comrade,” Barbicane answered him, “not all meteors fall to the earth, just a small number. So even if we're transformed into a meteor, it doesn't follow that we're sure to reach the surface of the moon.”


“But,” Michel responded, “what if we get close enough…”


“A fallacy,” Barbicane replied. “Haven't you seen thousands of shooting stars streak through the sky at various times?”


“Right.”


“Well, those stars—or rather those particles—only shine after they've heated up from flying through layers of air. Now then, if they enter the earth's atmosphere, they come within forty miles of the ground yet rarely fall on it. The same goes for our projectile. It could get very close to the moon yet not fall on her.”


“In that case,” Michel insisted, “I would be pretty curious to know how our vagabond vehicle will behave out in space.”


“I see only two theoretical possibilities,” Barbicane replied after thinking for a few seconds.


“Which are?”


“The projectile has a choice of two mathematical curves, and it will go along one or the other depending on the speed impelling it, which I can't estimate just now.”


“Yes,” Nicholl said, “it will go along a parabola or a hyperbola.”


“Right,” Barbicane replied. “At a certain speed it will take the parabola, and at a more considerable speed the hyperbola.”


“I love these big words,” Michel Ardan snapped. “Right off they're so self-explanatory. And what, if you please, is this parabola of yours?”


“My friend,” the captain replied, “a parabola is a curve of the second order that results from slicing a cone with a plane parallel to one of its sides.”


“Aha!” Michel put in smugly.


“It's almost the same,” Nicholl went on, “as the flight path taken by a bombshell fired from a mortar.”


“Wonderful. And how about your hyperbola?” Michel asked.


“A hyperbola, Michel, is a curve of the second order produced by the intersection of a conical surface and of a plane parallel to its axis, which forms two separate and distinct branches that extend indefinitely in opposite directions.”


“It can't be!” Michel Ardan cooed in the most solemn tone, as if he'd learned of some aweinspiring development. “But bear this in mind, Captain Nicholl. What I love about your definition of hyperbola—I almost said hyperbaloney—is that it's even less clear than the word you're claiming to define!”


Nicholl and Barbicane ignored Michel Ardan's jokes. They'd launched into a scientific discussion. Which curve would the projectile take: that's what had them fired up. One favored a hyperbola, the other a parabola. The reasons they gave each other were garnished with x's. They couched their arguments in language that made Michel jumpy. It was a heated discussion, and neither opponent would back down from his curve of choice.


This scientific conflict wore on, and Michel finally got impatient, saying:


“Oh drat! Will you fiends for trigonometry stop throwing parabolas and hyperbolas at each other? There's just a single interesting thing in this whole business, and I want to hear about it. We'll go along one or the other of your curves. Fine. But where will they lead us?”


“Nowhere,” Nicholl replied.


“Excuse me? Nowhere?”


“Obviously,” Barbicane said. “They're open curves that continue indefinitely.”


“Oh, you scientists, you're so dear to my heart!” Michel exclaimed. “Come on! Out in space what difference does it make if it's a parabola or hyperbola, since they'll both carry us off into infinity!” Barbicane and Nicholl couldn't help smiling. They'd just been indulging in “art for art's sake.” Never had a more needless question been raised at a less timely moment. Here was the grim truth: whether their projectile was carried off hyperbolically or parabolically, they were never again to meet up with the earth or its moon.


Now then, what would happen to these bold travelers in the not-too-distant future? If they didn't die from hunger or thirst, it's because by the time their gas ran out in a few days, they would be dead from lack of air, if the cold didn't kill them first.


Yet as crucial as it was to conserve this gas, the extremely low temperature of their surroundings required them to consume a certain amount. In a pinch they could do without its light, but not its heat. Luckily the warmth generated by the Reiset and Regnault device raised the projectile's interior temperature a little, and they managed to keep it at a bearable level without burning too much gas.


But it had gotten very difficult to look out the portholes. The moisture inside the shell was condensing on the windows and immediately freezing. They had to scrape ice off the panes time and again. However this allowed them to verify some phenomena of the greatest interest.


Actually, if the moon's invisible half were supplied with an atmosphere, shouldn't you see the light trails of meteors streaking over it? If the projectile itself had gone through those shifting layers of air, wouldn't you detect some noises transmitted by echoes from the moon—the rumbling of a storm, for instance, or the hubbub of an avalanche, or the explosions of an erupting volcano? And if some fire-breathing mountain threw in a few lightning bolts, wouldn't you notice their intense flashing? Carefully validated, such data could significantly clarify that murky issue of the moon's composition. Accordingly Barbicane and Nicholl were stationed at their porthole like trueblue astronomers, studying her with scrupulous patience.


But so far her disk remained dark and silent. She wasn't answering the assorted questions posed by these eager brains.


Which provoked this remark by Michel, an apt one on the face of it: “If we ever make this trip again, we'll be better off picking a time when the moon's new.”


“Actually,” Nicholl replied, “that would be a more promising circumstance. Since the sun's rays will wash out the moon, I admit she won't be visible during the flight, but as compensation we'll see the earth when it's full. What's more, if we're forced to circle the moon—which is happening right now—at least we'll have the benefit of seeing her invisible half magnificently lit up!”


“Well put, Nicholl,” Michel Ardan remarked. “Barbicane, what think you?”


“I think this,” replied the Gun Club's solemn president. “If we ever make this trip again, we'll start out at the same time and under the same conditions. Suppose we'd reached our destination, wouldn't it have been better to find these landmasses in broad daylight rather than plunged in the blackest of nights? Wouldn't we have taken up residence under better circumstances to begin with? Yes, obviously. As for this invisible side, we could have inspected it during our scouting expeditions over the lunar globe. So that period of the full moon was the right choice. But it called for reaching our destination, and to do so, not going off course.”


“I can't argue with that,” Michel Ardan said. “Nevertheless we've missed a fine opportunity for studying the other side of the moon. Who knows if the residents of other planets aren't farther along than our earth scientists when it comes to their satellites.”


To Michel Ardan's comment we could easily reply as follows: yes, other satellites are easier to study simply because they're closer to their planets. The residents of Saturn, Jupiter, and Uranus— assuming there are any—would have less trouble setting up contact with their moons. Jupiter's four satellites revolve at distances of 270,650 miles, 430,500 miles, 686,750 miles, and 1,200,325 miles. But these distances are computed from the planet's center, and after subtracting the length of the radius (which is between 42,500 and 45,000 miles), you'll find that the first satellite isn't as far from Jupiter's surface as the moon is from the earth's. Out of Saturn's eight moons, four are likewise closer: Dione is 211,500 miles away, Tethys 157,415, Enceladus 120,478, and finally Mimas with an average distance of just 86,250. Out of Uranus's eight satellites, Ariel, the first, is only 128,800 miles away from its planet.


On the surface of these three heavenly bodies, therefore, an experiment similar to President Barbicane's presented fewer difficulties. So if their residents have made such an attempt, maybe they've identified the composition of that half of their satellite's disk


that's perpetually hidden from their eyes. 7 But if they've never left their planet, they're no farther along than astronomers on the earth.


In the darkness, meanwhile, the shell was going along that incalculable flight path no landmark helped them work out. Had its heading shifted, whether from the tug of the moon's gravity or the influence of some alien entity? Barbicane couldn't tell. But a change had taken place in the vehicle's relative position, and Barbicane verified the fact around four o'clock in the morning.


The change amounted to this: the projectile's base had swung toward the surface of the moon, its axis point staying at a right angle to her. Her force of attraction—in other words, her specific gravity— had brought about this shift. The heaviest part of the shell was facing her invisible disk, exactly as if it was falling toward her.


Was it falling, then? Were the travelers finally going to reach their deeply desired destination? Not so. And the sight of a landmark (which in itself was rather bewildering) soon showed Barbicane that his projectile wasn't closing in on the moon, that it had headed off along a nearly concentric curve.


This landmark was a bright gleam Nicholl suddenly spotted on the edge of that horizon formed by the black disk. This speck of light couldn't be confused with a star. It was a reddish glow that increased little by little, irrefutable proof the projectile was moving toward it and not falling to the surface of the moon in the normal way.


“A volcano! It's an active volcano!” Nicholl exclaimed. “An outpouring of our satellite's inner fires! So this world still isn't completely dead.”


“Yes, it's an eruption!” Barbicane replied, carefully studying the phenomenon through his night glasses. “Honestly, what else could it be except a volcano?”


“But in that case,” Michel Ardan said, “there has to be air for it to keep burning. So an atmosphere is covering that part of the moon.”


“Maybe,” Barbicane replied, “but not necessarily. By decomposing certain ingredients, a volcano can supply its own air and thus shoot up flames in a vacuum. That blaze strikes me as definitely having the intensity and brilliance caused by objects burning in unadulterated oxygen. So we mustn't be too hasty about proclaiming the existence of a lunar atmosphere.”


This fire-breathing mountain had to have been located around latitude 45° south on the invisible part of the lunar disk. But much to Barbicane's displeasure, the curve taken by the projectile led it far away from the scene of the eruption. Therefore he couldn't determine its nature more specifically. Half an hour after they'd spotted it, this brilliant speck of light vanished below the dark horizon. But their sighting of this phenomenon was a notable event in lunar research. It proved that heat still hadn't completely vanished from the bowels of this sphere, and where there's heat, who can say that the vegetable kingdom—even the animal kingdom—isn't still withstanding the forces of destruction? Conclusively identified by experts on the earth, the presence of this erupting volcano would surely lead to many affirmative theories on that important issue of whether life could exist on the moon.


Barbicane let his thoughts run away with him. He was lost in silent reverie, all aquiver with the fateful mysteries of the lunar world. He was trying to piece together the evidence gathered to this point, when a new incident brought him sharply back to reality.


This incident was more than a cosmic phenomenon, it was an impending danger whose consequences could be disastrous.


Out in the ether, in that deep darkness, an enormous mass had suddenly appeared. It looked like a moon, but a white-hot moon whose brilliance was even more unbearable by contrast with the stark blackness of space. Circular in shape, this mass gave off so much light that it filled up the projectile. Bathed in harsh white rays, the faces of Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan took on a pale, ghastly, bluish gray appearance, which physicists can create with that artificial light produced by mixing salt in alcohol.


“Damnation, we look hideous!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “What is that illomened moon?”


“A meteor,” Barbicane replied.


“A meteor burning in a vacuum?”


“Yes.”


That ball of fire was indeed a meteor. Barbicane wasn't mistaken. Seen from the earth, shooting stars out in the cosmos generally give off a bit less light than the moon, but here in this dark ether, they dazzle the eyes. These rambling space rocks carry their own source of incandescence. They don't need oxygen around them in order to burn. And while it's true that some meteors cross through the atmospheric layers five to eight miles above the earth, others, by contrast, go along flight paths at a distance where the atmosphere can't reach. Examples of the latter include the meteor on October 27, 1844, which appeared at an altitude of 320 miles up, and another on August 18, 1841, which vanished at a distance of 455 miles up. Some of these shooting stars are around 1¾ to 2½ miles wide and reach speeds greater than 45 miles per second, moving in a


direction opposite to the earth's.,8 More than 250 miles away from them, this spinning ball was suddenly visible in the darkness, so Barbicane estimated that it had to measure over 6,500 feet across. It came on at a speed of about 1¼ miles per second, hence 75 miles per minute. It was cutting across the projectile's path and was bound to reach them in a few minutes. As it closed in, it grew at a tremendous rate.


Imagine, if you can, the predicament our travelers were in! It's impossible to describe. Despite their courage, their composure, their jauntiness in the face of danger, they stood silent and motionless, muscles clenched, in the grip of wild terror. Their projectile—whose course they couldn't change—was racing straight at that flaming mass, which was brighter than the gaping maw of a reverberatory furnace. They seemed to be rushing into a fiery chasm.


Barbicane clutched the hands of his two companions, and all three looked through half-closed eyelids at that white-hot asteroid. If their thought processes hadn't been eradicated, if their brains still functioned in this frightful situation, they must have figured they were done for!


Two minutes after the meteor's abrupt appearance—two centuries of agony—the projectile seemed on the verge of colliding with it, when that ball of fire burst like a bombshell, but without making the slightest noise out in that vacuum where sounds can't occur, since they're simply layers of vibrating air.


Nicholl gave a shout. He and his companions rushed to the glass portholes. What a sight! What pen could ever describe it, what palette had colors rich enough to duplicate such magnificence?


It was like a crater gaping wide, like a huge fire scattering sparks. Thousands of glowing fragments lit up the void, streaking it with their embers. Every size, every color, was in the mix. There were rays tinted yellow, ivory, red, green, gray, a royal crown of multicolored fireworks. As for that enormous, alarming ball of fire, nothing was left of it except pieces flying in all directions, now changed to asteroids in their turn, some like flaming swords, others surrounded by whitish clouds, a number leaving brilliant trails of cosmic dust in their wake.


These luminous lumps were crisscrossing, colliding, scattering into smaller fragments, a few even striking the projectile. One piece hit the left window so forcefully, it actually cracked the glass. They seemed to be cruising through a hailstorm of shrapnel, and the tiniest shard could wipe them out in a second. The ether was steeped in light that was expanding with incomparable intensity, these asteroids spreading it in all directions. At one point it was so bright, Michel dragged Barbicane and Nicholl over to his window, exclaiming: “The invisible moon—it's finally visible!”


During an outpouring of light that lasted a couple seconds, all three glimpsed the moon's secret side, which human eyes were seeing for the first time.


What could they make out from that incalculable distance? A few slender bands over her disk, actual clouds forming in an environment with very little air, an environment where whole mountains emerged as well as less important surface features, where basins and yawning craters were laid out in erratic patterns, just like on the moon's visible side. Then there were immense open spaces, no longer barren plains but actual seas, oceans distributed far and wide, reflecting in their liquid mirrors all the dazzling magic of the bonfires in space. Finally, on the surface of those landmasses, there were huge dark forms, like immense forests swiftly seen beneath flashes of lightning …


Was it a mirage, a hallucination, an optical illusion? Could they give scientific credence to a discovery so hastily made? Did they dare decide that question of life on the moon after such a faint view of her invisible disk?


Meanwhile those flashes out in space gradually grew weaker; their periodic brilliance died away; the asteroids fled down different flight paths and faded into the distance. The ether finally resumed its usual murkiness; momentarily outshone, the stars twinkled in the firmament, and the moon's disk, barely glimpsed, vanished once more into the impregnable night.










CHAPTER 16








The Southern Hemisphere






THE SHELL HAD JUST escaped a dreadful danger, a danger totally unforeseen. Who would have imagined these brushes with meteors? Such wandering space rocks could pose major hazards for the projectile. They were scattered over this ocean of ether like so many reefs, and our travelers—less fortunate than navigators at sea—had no way of avoiding them. But did these space explorers complain? Not since nature had given them that superb sight of a meteor explosion on a fearsome scale, not since they'd seen those cosmic fireworks even the Ruggieri Brothers couldn't have duplicated, not since those incomparable skyrockets had shed a couple seconds of light on the moon's invisible glory. That swift flash had shown them landmasses, seas, and forests. Did this mean an atmosphere had brought its bracing particles to the moon's unseen face? These were issues that still couldn't be settled, riddles eternally nagging at mankind's curiosity!










By then it was 3:30 in the afternoon. The shell headed along the curving line of its course around the moon. Due to that meteor, were they again on a new flight path? They feared so. However the projectile had to be sweeping in a steady curve determined by the laws of rational mechanics. Barbicane was inclined to think that this curve would be a parabola rather than a hyperbola. Assuming it was a parabola, however, pretty soon the shell would have to emerge from the conical shadow, which, here in space, fell away from the sun. In actuality this cone is quite narrow, since the moon's angular diameter is so small compared to the diameter of that golden orb. Now then, the projectile was still hovering in absolute darkness. Whatever their speed had been—and it couldn't have been negligible—the shell wasn't coming out into the sunlight. This was obvious enough, yet shouldn't things maybe have been otherwise, given that their flight path was supposed to be a strict parabola? It was a new problem pestering Barbicane's brain, caught up in a cycle of mysteries he honestly couldn't unravel.


Our travelers didn't dream of resting, not for a second. Each was on the alert for some unforeseen event that could shed new light on the layout of the heavens. Near five o'clock Michel Ardan distributed, under the guise of dinner, some cold cuts and slices of bread, which were swiftly consumed without any of them leaving their portholes, whose windowpanes continually iced over from vapor condensing.


Around 5:45 in the evening, Nicholl aimed his spyglass at the southerly edge of the moon—the direction in which the projectile was heading—and he sighted a few brilliant specks of light puncturing the dark shield of the sky. You would have sworn it was some jagged mountain range with a profile like a squiggle. It was shining pretty brightly. Which is how the moon's horizon line looks during one of her octants.


The cause was unmistakable. This time they weren't dealing with a simple meteor, because that glittering ridge didn't boast any color or motion. Nor was it an erupting volcano. Accordingly Barbicane gave his verdict without hesitation.


“It's the sun!” he exclaimed.


“What! The sun?” Nicholl and Michel Ardan responded.


“Yes, my friends, it's that shining orb in person, lighting up the tips of those mountains located on the moon's southerly edge. Obviously we're closing in on her south pole.”


“After having gone over her north pole,” Michel replied. “So we've done a full circle around our satellite!”


“Yes, my gallant Michel.”


“Then we haven't any more hyperbolas, parabolas, or open curves to worry about!”


“No, just a closed curve.”


“Meaning what?”


“An ellipse. Instead of getting lost in interplanetary space, most likely the projectile will sweep in an elliptical orbit around the moon.”


“Oh really?”


“And it'll become her satellite.”


“The moon's moon!” Michel Ardan exclaimed.


“Only I'll remind you, my good friend,” Barbicane remarked, “that despite this turn of events, we're still done for.”


“True, but at least we'll go out in warmth and comfort,” replied the carefree Frenchman with his cheeriest smile.


President Barbicane was right. In sweeping along its elliptical orbit, the projectile would undoubtedly revolve around the moon for all eternity like a junior satellite. A new heavenly body had been added to the solar system, a miniature cosmos housing three occupants— who would soon die from lack of air. So Barbicane couldn't have been overjoyed at this permanent state of affairs, which had been inflicted on the shell by the twofold influence of centripetal force and centrifugal force. He and his companions were going to see daylight again on the face of that lunar disk. Maybe they could even stay alive till they took one last look at the entire earth, splendidly lit by the sun's rays. Maybe they could bid a final farewell to that globe they were never to see again! Then their projectile would be nothing more than a snuffedout mass, as inert as some lifeless asteroid circulating in the ether. Their only consolation was that they were finally leaving this bottomless darkness, going back into daylight, reentering zones bathed by the sun's rays.


Meanwhile those mountains Barbicane had identified were standing out more and more from the mass of blackness. They were Mt. Dörfel and Mt. Leibnitz, which garnish the moon's circumpolar regions to the south.


All the mountains on the visible half have been measured with flawless accuracy. Maybe you'll find this perfection surprising, yet a hypsometer is an infallible instrument for determining heights. You could even say that the elevations of the moon's mountains have been worked out just as accurately as those of the earth's.


The method usually favored is to measure shadows that the mountains cast, while accounting for the sun's altitude at the time of your readings. Assuming the correct diameter of the lunar disk has been accurately established, such measurements are easily gotten by using a spyglass that has a reticular eyepiece with two parallel crosshairs. This method likewise allows for calculating the depth of craters and cavities on the moon. Galileo put it to good use, and since then Messrs. Beer and Mädler have utilized it with the greatest success.


Another approach, known as the “tangent rays method,” can also be employed in measuring the moon's surface features. You employ it just as the mountains turn into specks of light that stand out from the boundary line of night and day, shining above the dark part of the lunar disk. These specks of light are caused by solar rays higher than those marking the edge of the phase. So if we measure the interval of darkness left between the speck of light and the lighted portion of the phase that's nearest, we'll get the locale's exact elevation. Understand, however, that this procedure can be employed only with mountains near the boundary line of night and day.


A third method consists of using a micrometer to measure the profiles of lunar mountains outlined against the background; but it doesn't work with elevations near the moon's rim.


In any event you'll note that this measuring of shadows, intervals, or profiles can be executed only when the sun's rays, in relation to the onlooker, strike our satellite at an angle. When they strike her directly —in a word, when she's full—every shadow is summarily dismissed from her disk and no more readings are possible.


After Galileo had identified the existence of mountains on the moon, he was the first to calculate their elevations by measuring the shadows they cast. He attributed to them, as we've already said, an average height of 27,000 feet. Hevelius reduced these figures significantly, but on the other hand Father Riccioli doubled them. Their measurements were exaggerations in both directions. Equipped with new and improved instruments, Herschel came much closer to the hypsometric truth of the matter. But we ultimately need to look for it in the reports by modern skywatchers.


Messrs. Beer and Mädler, the foremost lunar scholars on the entire planet, have measured 1,095 of the moon's mountains. From their calculations it emerges that six of these mountains are higher than 19,000 feet, and twenty-two higher than 15,700 feet. The moon's loftiest summit measures 24,944 feet; consequently it's smaller than those on the earth, some of which exceed it by 3,000 to 3,500 feet. But one comment is called for. If you put these pinnacles alongside the respective masses of the two heavenly bodies, the moon's mountains are comparatively higher than the earth's. The former make up 1/470 of the moon's diameter, the latter only 1/1,440 of the earth's. To match the comparative proportions of a lunar mountain, an earthly mountain would have to measure 85,800 feet straight up. Now then, the highest we've got is less than 30,000 feet.


Hence, to continue with the comparisons, the Himalayan chain includes three peaks higher than any lunar peak: Mt. Everest at 28,993 feet high, Kanchenjunga at 28,176 feet, and Dhaulagiri at 26,860 feet. Mt. Dörfel and Mt. Leibnitz on the moon have an elevation comparable to Mt. Jewahir's in this same chain, hence around 24,940 feet. The chief lunar peaks in her Caucasus and Apennine ranges—Newton, Casatus, Curtius, Short, Tycho, Clavius, Blancanus, Endymion—are higher than Mt. Blanc, which measures 15,781 feet. Equal to Mt. Blanc are: Moretus, Theophilus, Catharnia; equal to Monte Rosa, hence 15,210 feet: Piccolomini, Werner, Harpalus; equal to the Matterhorn at 14,836 feet: Macrobius, Eratosthenes, Albategnius, Delambre; equal to the peak in Tenerife, which stands 12,172 feet high: Baco, Cysatus, Philolaus, and the summits of the lunar Alps; equal to Mt. Perdido in the Pyrenees, hence 10,994 feet: Römer and Boguslawsky; equal to Mt. Etna at 10,620 feet: Hercules, Atlas, Furnerius.


These comparative examples can help us appreciate the elevations of mountains on the moon. Now then, the projectile's flight path was taking it straight toward the upland regions of her southern hemisphere, where the finest samples of these lunar pinnacles rise into the air.










CHAPTER 17








Tycho






AT SIX O'CLOCK in the evening, the projectile passed over the moon's south pole, less than thirty miles up. They'd come within the same distance of her north pole. So that elliptical curve was flawlessly designed.


Just then our travelers reemerged into a wholesome outpouring of sunshine. Once again they saw those stars that slowly move from east to west. They greeted Old Sol with three cheers. Both light and heat came their way, soon seeping through the metal walls. The windows recovered their usual transparency. Those coatings of ice magically melted away. Resuming their thrifty habits, the travelers immediately turned off the gas. Only the air device needed to keep up its standard rate of consumption.


“Ahhh!” Nicholl put in. “These heat rays feel so good! After such a long night, how impatient moonpeople must get, waiting for that golden orb to reappear!”


“Yes!” Michel Ardan replied, figuratively inhaling this radiant ether. “Light and heat, they're life itself!”


Just then the projectile's base was showing a slight tendency to veer away from the surface of the moon, so as to stay on its longish elliptical orbit. If the earth had been full at this juncture, Barbicane and his companions could have seen it again. But the sun's rays washed it out and their planet remained completely invisible. Another sight inevitably caught their eyes—the picture offered by this southern section of the moon, which their spyglasses brought within a third of a mile. They didn't budge from their portholes and noted all the details of this peculiar landmass.


Mt. Dörful and Mt. Leibnitz make up two separate systems that unfold almost to the lunar south pole. The first system reaches from the pole to the 84th parallel on the moon's east side; the second, laid out along the eastern border, goes from latitude 65° to the pole.


Dazzling white sheets covered the irregular contours of these ridges, as Father Secchi has reported. Barbicane was on a firmer footing than that famous Italian astronomer and could identify what they were.


“They're blankets of snow!” he exclaimed.


“Snow?” Nicholl echoed.


“Yes, Nicholl, snow whose surface has frozen solid. Look at the light rays reflecting on it. Hardened lava would never give off such bright reflections. So there has to be water on the moon, there has to be air. Not much if you like, but the facts are now indisputable.”


No, they couldn't be disputed! And if Barbicane ever laid eyes on the earth again, his notes would testify to this significant event in lunar studies.


Mt. Dörful and Mt. Leibnitz stood in the middle of moderately wide plains bordered by a muddled sequence of basins and circular ramparts. These two mountain chains are the only ones coming together in this land of basins. Offering comparatively little variety, a few sharp peaks jut here and there, the loftiest among them measuring 24,944 feet high.


But the projectile looked right down on this whole panorama, whose surface features vanished in the brilliant glare from the moon's disk. Under our travelers’ eyes the lunar scenery reappeared in its primitive state, raw toned, with no intermediate colors, no gradual shading, stark blacks and whites, all due to the shortage of diffuse light. However the vista of this desolate world couldn't help captivating them by its very strangeness. They were cruising over this chaotic region as if carried along by hurricane winds, watching summits go past beneath their feet, their eyes digging into cavities, darting into clefts, scaling ramparts, plumbing those mysterious holes, surveying all those crevices. But not a trace of vegetation, not a sign of any cities; only sheets of rock, lava flows, outpourings as shiny as immense mirrors and reflecting the sun's rays with unbearable brilliance. Not a thing belonging to a living world, everything part of a dead world where avalanches, rolling silently down from the mountaintops, were disgorged deep into the gorges. The movements remained, the sounds were still missing.


After repeated scrutiny Barbicane verified that along the edges of the lunar disk, the surface features had been subject to different forces from those governing such features in the central region, yet they all displayed the identical structure. Same circular clusters, same projections above ground. Even so, you might suspect that these arrangements weren't necessarily comparable. In fact, back when the moon's crust was malleable, her center was subject to the twofold gravitational pull of the moon and the earth, which tugged in opposite directions along a straight line running from one to the other. At the edges of her disk, by contrast, the moon's gravity operates virtually at a right angle to the earth's. Supposedly, surface features created under these separate circumstances should have taken on different forms. Now then, this isn't what happened. So the moon herself was the sole source of her formation and composition. She owed nothing to any outside influences, living up to that noteworthy proposition by the French scientist Arago: “No external force has contributed to the creation of the moon's features.”


Be that as it may, in her current state she was the picture of a dead world, and it wasn't possible to tell if organic life had ever livened up the place.


Nevertheless Michel Ardan thought he identified a cluster of ruins, which he called to Barbicane's attention. It was near the 80th parallel in longitude 30°. Laid out in a fairly regular arrangement, this pile of stones looked like a huge fortress towering over one of those long clefts that used to serve as riverbeds in prehistoric times. Not far off, circular Short Crater rose to an elevation of 18,524 feet, as high as the Caucasus range in Asia. With his usual gusto Michel Ardan trotted out “the evidence” for his fortress. Behind it, he detected the demolished ramparts of a town; here, the curving shape of a still-intact portico; there, two or three columns lying below their support structure; farther on, a sequence of arches that must have held up the conduits of an aqueduct; elsewhere, the fallen pillars of a gigantic bridge running the width of the cleft. He made all this out, but with such imaginative eyes and through such a fanciful spyglass that we're forced to take his findings with a grain of salt. And yet who could claim, who would dare insist, that the dear boy hadn't actually spotted a few things his two companions weren't willing to see?


Their time was too valuable to waste in needless debate. Fanciful or not, the lunar city had already vanished into the distance. The projectile was showing a tendency to pull away from the moon's disk, and the details of her terrain were starting to fade into a confused jumble. Only the contours of her major features, craters, and plains continued to stand out clearly.


Off to the left just then, one of the finest basins in the lunar uplands came into view, one of this continent's points of interest. It was Newton Crater, which, after revisiting the Mappa Selenographica, Barbicane had no trouble identifying.


Newton is located right in latitude 77° south and longitude 16° east. It forms a circular crater whose ramparts rose to a height of 23,832 feet and seemed to be insurmountable.


Barbicane pointed out to his companions that this mountain's height above the surrounding plain was far less than its crater's depth. This enormous hole was impossible to plumb and formed a black chasm whose bottom the sun's rays could never reach. As Humboldt has noted, utter darkness reigns there, and neither sunlight nor earthlight can break in. A mythmaker would have made it—and with good reason—the entrance to his underworld.


“Newton Crater,” Barbicane said, “is the foremost example of these circular mountains, no specimens of which are found on the earth. They prove that in the process of cooling, the moon's formation took place under violent circumstances, because while her internal fires were making these surface features jut to considerable heights, their bottoms were receding and sinking far below ground level.”


“I don't say nay,” Michel Ardan replied.


A few minutes after passing over Newton, the projectile looked straight down on circular Moretus Crater. They skirted the summits of Blancanus from a fair distance away, then reached the basin of Clavius near 7:30 in the evening.


One of the most notable on the lunar disk, this basin is located in latitude 58° south and longitude 15° east. Its estimated elevation is 23,264 feet. From a distance of nearly 250 miles, which their spyglasses reduced to 2½, the travelers could marvel at this huge crater in its entirety.


“Volcanoes on the earth,” Barbicane said, “are just molehills compared to the ones on the moon. If you measure those old craters formed by the first eruptions of Vesuvius and Etna, you'll find they're barely four miles wide. In France the Cantal crater is around six miles wide; in Ceylon the island's basin is about forty-four miles wide and it's considered the largest on the globe. These diameters are nothing next to Clavius's, which we're looking down on right now!”


“So how wide is it?” Nicholl asked.


“One hundred forty-one miles,” Barbicane said. “This basin, in fact, is the most substantial on the moon, though quite a few others measure 120, 90, and 60 miles wide.”


“Ah, my friends,” Michel exclaimed, “imagine what this peaceful satellite must have been like when thunder filled these craters, when they simultaneously spewed out torrents of lava, hailstorms of stones, clouds of smoke, and sheets of flame! What a prodigious sight it was back then, and now what a comedown! This moon is nothing more than the pitiful tube of a firecracker, one of those squibs, skyrockets, snakes, or pinwheels that explode splendidly, then leave only pathetic shreds of cardboard behind. Who knows the cause, the reason, the justification for cataclysms like that?”


Barbicane wasn't listening to Michel Ardan. He was contemplating Clavius's ramparts, which consisted of squat mountains several geographic leagues wide. A hundred little extinct craters punctured the floor of this immense cavity and the ground had as many holes as a skimming spoon, while over it all towered a 16,000-foot peak.


All around, the plains had a desolate look. Nothing could be more barren than these surface features, more dreary than these remnants of mountains and—if we can put it this way—these tidbits of pinnacles littering the ground! At this locality the moon seemed to have exploded.


The projectile kept moving forward and this chaos didn't change. There were continual sequences of basins, craters, and crumbling mountains. No more plains, no more seas. An endless Norway and Switzerland. Finally, smack in the middle of this ruptured region, there was its high point—dazzling Tycho, the most magnificent mountain on the moon's disk, in which posterity will forever enshrine the name of that famous Danish astronomer.


While watching the full moon in a cloudless sky, nobody can help noticing this brilliant speck in her southern hemisphere. To characterize it, Michel Ardan used every metaphor his imagination could conjure up. For him Tycho was a blazing core of light, the center of a halo, a crater spewing sunbeams. It was the hub of a glittering wheel, a starfish squeezing the lunar disk with silver tentacles, an immense flame-filled eye, a circle of radiance to fit around the head of Pluto! It was a fireball hurled by the hand of our Creator, only to squash against the face of the moon!


Tycho's glow is so focused, earthlings can see it without a spyglass even though it's 250,000 miles away. Imagine, then, how bright it must look to the eyes of moon-watchers stationed only 375 miles away! Across this unadulterated ether its brilliance was unbearable, and before they could stand its brightness, Barbicane and his friends needed to darken the eyepieces of their spyglasses with smoke from the gas jet. Then they fell silent, rarely letting out even exclamations of wonderment, and they looked, they contemplated. All their feelings, all their reactions, were centered in their eyes—just as our whole beings, when deeply moved, are centered in our hearts.


Tycho belongs in the category of mountains with networks of bright rays, like Aristarchus and Copernicus. But it's the most comprehensive and characteristic of all, furnishing unimpeachable evidence of the appalling volcanic activity that led to the moon's formation.


Tycho is located in latitude 43° south and longitude 12° east. In its center is a crater fifty-four miles wide. Slightly oval-shaped, its surrounding wall is a ring of ramparts that towers 16,000 feet above the outer plains to the east and west. It's a collection of Mt. Blancs, circling the same midpoint and topped by a radiant headdress.


The character of this incomparable mountain, the panorama of surface features converging on it, the bulges inside its crater, are things even a photograph could never capture. In essence it's during a full moon that Tycho is revealed in all its splendor. Now then, at that juncture there aren't any shadows or foreshortenings of perspective, and prints from negatives look overexposed. An inconvenient state of things, because it would be interesting to have accurate photographs of this alien realm. It's nothing but a cluster of holes, craters, and basins, a dizzying web of ridges; then, vanishing into the distance, a whole string of volcanoes flung across the blistered landscape. As you can see, then, those bubbles that burst during the central outpouring have kept their original shape. After cooling and hardening, they've typified how the moon used to look while under the influence of eruptive forces.


The travelers weren't so far away from Tycho's circular summit that they couldn't pick out its chief details. On the very embankment forming Tycho's ramparts, the slopes of both the inner and outer mountain-sides were arranged in tiers like gigantic terraces. They seemed 300 or 400 feet higher to the west than to the east. No military campsite on earth could compare to this natural fortification. A town built on the floor of this circular cavity would have been completely out of reach.


Out of reach and marvelously situated on this broken terrain with its picturesque projections! In essence nature hadn't left the floor of this crater flat and empty. It enjoyed its own personal mountain range, highland regions that virtually turned it into a separate world. Our travelers could clearly make out some cones, hills in the center, notable fluctuations of the terrain, natural settings ready for any architectural masterpieces the moonpeople could design. There, a spot marked out for a temple; here, the site of a forum; in this locality, the support structure of a palace; in that one, the plateau of a citadel. Towering above everything, a 1,500-foot mountain rose in the middle. In this huge circular area, there was enough space for all of ancient Rome ten times over!


“Ah,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, carried away at the sight. “What an impressive town you could construct inside that ring of mountains! A serene metropolis, a quiet refuge, located far from all human misery! In such a city everybody who's full of distrust, everybody who hates humanity, everybody with a loathing for social intercourse, could live in peace and solitude!”


“Everybody?” Barbicane merely replied. “There wouldn't be enough room!”










CHAPTER 18








Important Issues






MEANWHILE THE PROJECTILE had gone past Tycho's surrounding wall. With the most scrupulous care, Barbicane and his two friends examined those glowing streaks the famous mountain scatters so intriguingly to every horizon.


What was this radiant halo? What geological phenomenon had designed this blazing headdress? These issues had Barbicane legitimately concerned.


Under his eyes, in fact, shiny furrows ran off in all directions, each sporting raised edges and sunken middles, some of them twelve miles wide, others thirty. In certain localities these glittering trails stretched as far as 750 miles from Tycho and seemed to take in— especially toward the east, northeast, and north—a good half of the southern hemisphere. One of them spurted as far as Neander Crater, located on the 40th meridian. Another made a turn and went off to plow the Sea of Nectar, crashing against the Pyrenees range after a thousand-mile run. To the west still others covered the Sea of Clouds and Sea of Moods with a network of light.


Over the plains as well as over surface features of every height, these glittering rays stood out—how had they originated? All of them shared the same center, Tycho's crater. This was their starting point. Herschel attributed their shining appearance to old lava flows frozen by the cold, a view that's far from official. Other astronomers have regarded these bewildering streaks as similar to glacial deposits, rows of erratic rubble that would have been dumped at the time of Tycho's formation.


“And why not?” Nicholl asked Barbicane, who was reporting these different views, then rejecting them.


“Because the symmetry of these shiny lines is so bewildering, given the force that's needed to shoot volcanic material to such a distance.”


“Of course I myself,” Michel Ardan replied, “can easily explain how these rays originated.”


“You don't say,” Barbicane put in.


“I do say,” Michel went on. “All we have to do is view them as a huge star-shaped fracture, like you get when a ball or a stone hits a pane of glass.”


“Fine,” Barbicane remarked with a smile. “And whose hand would be strong enough to throw a stone that could cause such a fracture?”


“The hand isn't essential,” Michel replied, unflustered. “And as for the stone, let's assume it's a comet.”


“Oh, those poor overworked comets!” Barbicane exclaimed. “My gallant Michel, your explanation isn't bad, but your comet's superfluous. The impact that caused this rupture could have come from inside the heavenly body. While the moon's crust was cooling and shrinking, some powerful contraction would have been sufficient to etch this gigantic star shape.”


“A contraction I can go along with,” Michel Ardan replied. “Something like a lunar bellyache.”


“Besides,” Barbicane added, “this is the view of an English expert, James Nasmyth, and it seems to me that it adequately explains the bright rays of these mountains.”


“That Nasmyth was no dummy,” Michel replied.


For a good while the travelers marveled at Tycho's splendors, never tiring of the sight. Steeped in outpourings of light, in rays from both the sun and moon, their projectile must have looked like a ball of fire. So they'd suddenly gone from considerable cold to intense heat. Nature was preparing them in this way to become moonpeople.


To become moonpeople! The thought took them back to the issue of whether life could exist on the moon. After what they'd seen, could our travelers settle this? Could they decide the matter one way or the other? Michel Ardan urged his two friends to clarify their views, asking them straight out if they thought animals and human beings were present in the lunar world.


“I think we can answer you,” Barbicane said. “But to my mind that isn't how the question should be couched. I would like to rephrase it.”


“Phrase it any way you want,” Michel replied.


“Here goes,” Barbicane went on. “The problem is twofold and calls for a twofold solution. Can life exist on the moon? Has life ever actually done so?”


“Good,” Nicholl replied. “First off, let's look into whether life can exist on the moon.”


“To tell the truth, I haven't a clue,” Michel remarked.


“And I myself say no,” Barbicane went on. “In the moon's current condition, her atmospheric cover is definitely quite reduced, her seas mostly dried up, her water supply inadequate, her vegetation minimal, her temperature abruptly shifting from cold to hot, her nights and days lasting 354 hours. So she doesn't strike me as a place where life can thrive; she doesn't seem to offer any promise for propagating the animal kingdom or for adequately supplying the necessities of existence as we understand them.”


“Agreed,” Nicholl replied. “But couldn't creatures live on the moon whose organisms are different from ours?”


“That's a harder question to answer,” Barbicane contended. “I'll give it a try, however, but I would ask Captain Nicholl if motion strikes him as an essential byproduct of life, no matter what organisms are involved?”


“Without the slightest doubt,” Nicholl replied.


“Well then, my fine companion, I'll answer you that we've studied the lunar landmasses from as close as 1,600 feet, and nothing seemed to be moving on the surface of the moon. The presence of any humanity whatever would have been revealed by some earmarks, by various artifacts, by actual ruins. Now then, what did we see? In every locality always the geological achievements of nature, never any human achievements. So if representatives of the animal kingdom live on the moon, they must be hiding out of sight in those bottomless cavities. Which I can't accept, because over these plains they would have left traces of their movements that a layer of atmosphere is bound to protect, no matter how thin it may be. Now then, no such traces are anywhere to be seen. So only one theoretical possibility remains—a species of living beings to whom motion, the essence of life, is alien!”


“That's as good as saying,” Michel remarked, “living creatures who are lifeless.”


“Exactly,” Barbicane replied. “Which from our standpoint is nonsense.”


“Then may we clarify our views?” Michel said.


“We may,” Nicholl replied.


“All right then,” Michel Ardan went on. “Regarding the issue of whether life can currently exist on the moon, this scientific commission has convened in the Gun Club's projectile, conducted an analysis based on freshly discovered facts, and reached a unanimous decision: no, it can't.”


This decision was entered in President Barbicane's notebook, where the proceedings of this meeting on December 6 are still to be found.


“Now,” Nicholl said, “let's attack the second question, the inevitable counterpart of the first. Therefore I ask the honorable commission: if life can't exist on the moon today, has it ever done so in the past?”


“Citizen Barbicane has the floor,” Michel Ardan said.


“My friends,” Barbicane replied, “I didn't plan this journey to form my views on whether life could have previously existed on the earth's satellite. I'll add that our personal investigations could only confirm the views I'd already held. I believe—nay, I insist—that the moon was inhabited by human civilizations like our own, that she brought forth animals anatomically similar to animals on the earth, but I would add that both her human and her animal species have had their day and are extinct for good.”


“Then,” Michel asked, “does this mean the moon's older than the earth?”


“No,” Barbicane answered with conviction, “but a world that has aged faster, that has developed and deteriorated with greater speed. The matter-shaping forces inside the moon have been far more violent, comparatively speaking, than those inside the planet earth. The cracked, craggy, bloated condition of our satellite today is overwhelming proof of this. Originally the earth and moon were only gaseous masses. Due to various influences, these gases changed into a liquid state, then into a solid mass later on. But gases or liquids very definitely remained on the moon after she cooled down, solidified, and became able to support life.”


“That's how I see it,” Nicholl said.


“Then,” Barbicane went on, “an atmosphere surrounded her. Confined inside this gaseous covering, the seas couldn't evaporate. Thanks to the influence of her air, water, light, solar heat, and central heat, vegetation took root on any landmass ready to welcome it, and life definitely appeared around this time, because nature is never wasteful, and a world so wonderfully suited to supporting life needs some life to support.”


“However,” Nicholl replied, “many phenomena hailing from our satellite's movement patterns must have hampered the development of the plant and animal kingdoms. For example, how about these days and nights lasting 354 hours?”


“In the polar regions on the earth,” Michel said, “they go for six months!”


“An argument that carries little weight, since the poles aren't inhabited.”


“Let's take note of one thing, my friends,” Barbicane continued. “In the moon's current condition, these long nights and days create temperature differences no organism can handle, but this wasn't the case at an earlier time in her history. An atmosphere covered the lunar disk with a shifting mantle. Steam condensed into banks of clouds. This natural shield tempered the sunlight's heat and restrained its rays at nighttime. Plus the light in the air could grow just as diffuse as the heat. Ergo, now that this atmosphere has almost totally vanished, the balance between these influences no longer exists. What's more, I'm going to add something amazing …”


“Amaze us,” Michel Ardan said.


“Well, I'm inclined to think that back when there was life on the moon, her nights and days didn't last 354 hours!”


“And why is that?” Nicholl asked instantly.


“Because in those days the moon's spinning motion on her axis very likely wasn't equal to her revolving motion—that state of equality where each part of her disk feels the sunlight's effects for a couple weeks at a time.”


“Right,” Nicholl replied, “but why wouldn't these two motions have been equal the way they are today?”


“Because this state of equality has been determined solely by the earth's gravitational pull. Now then, who knows if this gravity was strong enough to change the moon's movements back when the earth still hadn't solidified?”


“True,” Nicholl remarked, “and who knows if the moon has always been the earth's satellite?”


“And who knows,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, “if the moon wasn't around long before the earth was?”


Their imaginations were carrying them off into an infinite realm of possibilities. Barbicane tried to rein them in.


“We're getting into extravagant speculating,” he said, “and problems that are genuinely insoluble. Let's not go there. Let's simply acknowledge that the earth's original gravity was inadequate, therefore the moon's spinning and revolving motions weren't equal, and her nights and days back then could follow each other just as they do on the earth. What's more, life was possible even without those conditions.”


“Hence,” Michel Ardan asked, “human beings have vanished from the moon?”


“Right,” Barbicane replied, “after enduring, no doubt, for thousands of centuries. Then as the air got thinner, the lunar disk gradually became unlivable, as the planet earth will someday become when it cools off.”


“When it cools off?”


“Undoubtedly,” Barbicane replied. “As the moon's inner fires went out and their molten materials contracted, her crust cooled. Little by little these phenomena led to consequences: organic life vanished, vegetation vanished. Soon the air got thinner, very likely siphoned off by the earth's gravity; oxygen vanished, water vanished simply by evaporating. At this point in time the moon had become lifeless and unlivable. It was a dead world, just as it appears to us today.”


“And you're saying the same fate is in store for the earth?”


“Very likely.”


“But when?”


“When the cooling of its crust will have made it unlivable.”


“And has anybody calculated when our hapless globe will get around to cooling?”


“Surely.”


“And you're familiar with these calculations?”


“Completely.”


“Then speak out, you scaremongering scientist,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, “because you've got me boiling with impatience!”


“All right, my gallant Michel,” Barbicane replied serenely, “we know how much the earth's temperature decreases in the course of a century. Now then, according to some calculations, in another 400,000 years this average temperature will have gone down to zero!”


“Four hundred thousand years!” Michel exclaimed. “Oh, I can breathe again! You had me honestly terrified! To hear you, I figured we had barely 50,000 years left!”


Barbicane and Nicholl couldn't help laughing at their companion's trepidations. Then, wanting to finish things up, Nicholl restated the second question, which had just been under consideration.


“Has life ever existed on the moon?” he asked.


The answer was a unanimous yes.


Though their discussion was full of theories that were a bit chancy, it summed up the general drift of scientific thinking on this topic; in the meantime the projectile was swiftly nearing the moon's equator, while steadily moving farther away from her surface. It went over Wilhelm Crater and the 40th parallel, 500 miles up. Then, leaving Pitatus to the right at 30°, it skirted the southern end of the Sea of Clouds, whose northern regions they'd already approached. Various basins looked blurred in the brilliant white of the full moon: Bullialdus, Purbach (shaped almost like a square with a crater in the middle), then Arzachel whose inner mountain shines with indescribable brilliance.


While the projectile kept getting farther away, these surface characteristics finally faded as the travelers watched, the mountains melted into the distance, and out of that whole wonderful, peculiar, alien panorama of the moon, soon there was nothing left but the undying memory.










CHAPTER 19








Fighting the Impossible






FOR A FAIRLY LONG TIME, Barbicane and his companions were silent and thoughtful, looking at that world they'd seen only from afar like Moses with the land of Canaan, that world they were leaving never to return. The projectile's position in relation to the moon had shifted and its base had swung toward the earth.


This change, which Barbicane verified, didn't fail to surprise them. Since the shell was supposed to be revolving around the moon along an elliptical orbit, why wasn't its heaviest part facing her, as our satellite herself does with respect to the earth? This detail was unclear.


Watching the projectile's course, they could see it veering away from the moon and going along a curve similar to the one it made when approaching her. Consequently it was sweeping around in an ultra long ellipse that most likely would reach to the point of equal attraction, where the gravitational fields of both the earth and its satellite are nullified.


This was the conclusion Barbicane appropriately drew from the facts they'd gathered, a conviction that his two friends shared.


Immediately the questions rained down.


“And when we're back at the neutral point, what will happen to us?” Michel Ardan asked.


“That we don't know,” Barbicane answered.


“But we can sketch some theories, I presume?”


“Two,” Barbicane replied. “Either the projectile won't have enough speed and therefore it'll stay stationary forever on this line of equal attraction—”


“Whatever the other theory is, I prefer it,” Michel remarked.


“Or,” Barbicane went on, “it will have enough speed and it'll resume its elliptical path, revolving forever around that silver orb.”


“Not a very comforting turnabout,” Michel said. “Reduced to the position of humble lackeys to a moon we're used to regarding as our handmaid! And that's the future waiting for us?”


Neither Barbicane nor Nicholl responded.


“You're not saying anything,” Michel went on impatiently.


“There's nothing to be said,” Nicholl replied.


“Which means there's nothing to be done?”


“Nothing,” Barbicane replied. “Are you claiming you can fight the impossible?”


“Why not? We're a Frenchman and two Americans—we should sneer at the very word!”


“But what would you do?”


“Get control over this motion that's sweeping us along.”


“Control?”


“Yes,” Michel continued more heatedly, “check it or change it, then ultimately use it to carry out our plans.”


“How?”


“That's your department! If artillerymen can't control where their shells go, they aren't artillerymen. If the projectile's in charge of the gunner, we might as well load the gunner in the cannon instead. Ye gods, you're a fine pair of experts! You haven't a clue what will happen next, after coercing me—”


“Coercing you!” Barbicane and Nicholl exclaimed. “What are you talking about?”


“No criticism intended!” Michel said. “I'm not complaining! This outing has been a delight! The projectile suits me fine! But let's do everything humanly possible to fall to the ground somewhere, even if it's not on the moon.”


“There's nothing we would like better, my gallant Michel,” Barbicane replied, “but there's no way to do it.”


“Can't we change the projectile's motion?”


“No.”


“Or slow it down?”


“No.”


“Or even lighten it, like they lighten a ship with too much cargo?”


“What would you toss out?” Nicholl responded. “We don't have any ballast on board. And besides, it seems to me that if the projectile were lighter, we would move faster.”


“Slower,” Michel said.


“Faster,” Nicholl contended.


“Neither slower nor faster,” Barbicane replied, trying to get his two friends on the same page. “Because we're hovering in space, where we don't need to take our specific gravity into account.”


“All right,” Michel Ardan snapped in a decisive tone, “there's only one thing left to do.”


“What?” Nicholl asked.


“Eat breakfast,” our daring Frenchman answered unflappably, always coming up with this solution when circumstances were at their most trying.


In fact, though this activity wasn't destined to influence the projectile's course, it was a surefire, troublefree undertaking from a gastric standpoint. No doubt about it, that Michel had the right priorities.


So they ate breakfast at two o'clock in the morning, but never mind the time. Michel dished out his standard menu, topped off by a hearty bottle extracted from his private cellar. If their brains weren't spinning with ideas, we give up on Chambertin 1863.


Their meal finished, they went back on watch.


Around the projectile, the objects tossed outside stayed at a distance that never varied. As it circled the moon during its orbiting motion, the shell obviously hadn't gone through any atmosphere, because the specific gravities of these different objects would have changed their relative speeds.


There was nothing to see on the side facing their planet. New the previous midnight, the earth was just a day old, and two more days needed to go by before its crescent could move out of the sunlight and serve as a clock for moonpeople, since, during its spinning motion, every part of it goes past the same lunar meridian over a 24-hour period.


There was a different sight on the side facing the moon. That silver orb was shining in all her splendor amid countless constellations whose purity couldn't be disturbed by her rays. Over the moon's disk her plains were already recovering that dark shade visible from the earth. The remainder of her halo still glittered, and in the midst of this overall glittering, Tycho continued to stand out like a sun.


Barbicane didn't have any way of gauging the projectile's speed, but common sense told him it had to be steadily decreasing in line with the laws of rational mechanics.


In essence, conceding that the shell would sweep in an orbit around the moon, this orbit would need to be elliptical. Science proves it has to be this way. No moving thing that travels around an attracting object disobeys this law. Every orbit sweeping around in space is elliptical, whether it's a satellite circling its planet, a planet circling its sun, or a sun circling some unknown heavenly body that serves as its central pivot. Why should the Gun Club's projectile be exempt from the natural order of things?


Now then, with an elliptical orbit the attracting object is always at one of the foci of the ellipse. At one moment, then, the satellite is closer to the heavenly body it's revolving around, at another it's farther away. When the earth is nearest the sun, it's at its perihelion, then its aphelion when it's farthest removed. In the moon's case, she's closest to the earth at her perigee and farthest at her apogee. To coin a couple of comparable expressions that will improve every astronomer's vocabulary, if the projectile remains in the role of a lunar satellite, you ought to say that it's at its “periselene” when at its nearest point, its “aposelene” when at its farthest point.


In the latter case the projectile should reach its minimum speed, in the former its maximum. Now then, the shell was obviously moving toward its aposelenical point, and Barbicane had grounds for thinking they would lose speed up to that moment, gradually regaining it as they drew nearer to the moon. If the point itself coincided with the point of equal attraction, their speed would actually go all the way down to zero.


Barbicane was pondering the consequences of these different scenarios and wondering what conclusions to draw, when he was sharply interrupted by a shout from Michel Ardan.


“By God!” Michel exclaimed. “We're absolute numbskulls, I have to admit!”


“I don't say nay,” Barbicane replied. “But what brings this on?”


“We've got a very simple way to curb this speed that's taking us farther from the moon—and we aren't using it!”


“What way is that?”


“We could utilize the recoil power contained in our rockets.”


“That's it!” Nicholl said.


“So far we haven't utilized this power, it's true,” Barbicane said, “but we'll do so.”


“When?” Michel asked.


“When the time is right. My friends, notice the position our projectile's in, a position still at an angle to the lunar disk—while changing our direction, the rockets could make us veer away from the moon instead of drawing nearer. Now then, you do want to reach the moon, don't you?”


“That's the idea,” Michel replied.


“Then wait. Due to some bewildering influence, the projectile is tending to keep its base toward the earth. At the line of equal attraction, its conical cap will very likely point straight at the moon. By then, hopefully, our speed will be zero. That will be the moment to take action, and with the thrust from our rockets, maybe we can make the shell fall right to the surface of the lunar disk.” “Bravo!” Michel put in.


“We didn't do this—we couldn't do this—when we crossed the neutral point before, because the speed impelling our projectile was still so considerable.”


“Makes sense,” Nicholl said.


“Let's wait patiently,” Barbicane went on. “Let's get the odds on our side, and after so much despair, I'm now inclined to think we'll reach our destination!”


This conclusion prompted a round of hip-hips and hoorays from Michel Ardan. But not one of these daring lunatics remembered that they'd answered no on a crucial issue: no, life doesn't exist on the moon; no, it isn't likely life can exist on the moon. Yet they were willing to try anything to reach her!


There was one matter left to settle: exactly when would the projectile reach that point of equal attraction where the travelers would risk all?


In order to calculate this to within a few seconds, Barbicane had to merely revisit his travel notes and check the various entries he'd made at the lunar parallels. Thus the time it took to cover the distance between the neutral point and the moon's south pole should be equal to the distance separating her north pole from that neutral point. He'd carefully jotted down the hours representing their travel time, and the calculation turned out to be easy.


Barbicane found that their projectile would reach the neutral point at one o'clock in the morning on the night of December 7–8. Now then, at that moment it was three o'clock in the morning on the night of December 6–7. So if nothing impeded its progress, the projectile would reach the desired position in twenty-two hours.


The rockets had originally been put in place to slow the shell's fall to the moon, and now these daredevils were going to use them to create exactly the opposite effect. Be that as it may, the devices were all set and our travelers simply had to wait for the right moment to ignite them.


“Since there's nothing left to be done,” Nicholl said, “I have a proposition to make.”


“What's that?” Barbicane asked.


“I propose we take a nap.”


“By thunder!” Michel Ardan exclaimed.


“We haven't shut our eyes in forty hours,”


Nicholl said. “A couple hours' sleep will build our strength back up.”


“Never,” Michel snapped back.


“Fine, suit yourself,” Nicholl went on. “Me, I'm for a nap.”


Nicholl stretched out on a couch and before long was whistling like a 48-pound shell.


“That Nicholl's a sensible man,” Barbicane said after a short while. “I'm doing likewise.”


A few seconds later his snores were adding a ground bass beneath the captain's baritone.


“No doubt about it,” Michel Ardan said, seeing he was on his own, “these practical fellows know an idea whose time has come.”


Stretching his long legs and folding his big arms behind his head, Michel dozed off in his turn.


But their slumber wasn't to be long or restful. Too many worries were swirling around in the brains of these three men, and a few hours later around seven o'clock in the morning, all three were on their feet at the same instant.


The projectile was still heading away from the moon, its conical end leaning toward her more and more. It was a phenomenon that remained bewildering, though luckily it served Barbicane's purposes.


Seventeen hours to go, then it would be time to take action.


How long that day seemed. Daredevils they might be, but our travelers were on pins and needles over the coming of this moment that was to decide everything—either they would fall to the moon or they would be permanently trapped in an unchanging orbit. So they counted off the hours, which went by too slowly for their liking; Barbicane and Nicholl were stubbornly immersed in their calculations, Michel paced back and forth between the cramped walls, contemplating the unresponsive moon with an eager eye.


Sometimes fleeting memories of the earth crossed their minds. They saw their friends from the Gun Club again—especially J. T. Maston, their dearest friend of all. Just then the distinguished secretary should have been manning his post in the Rocky Mountains. If he spotted the projectile in the mirror of his gigantic telescope, what would he make of it? He'd seen it vanish beyond the lunar south pole, only to see it reappear over her north pole! So it was our satellite's satellite! Had J. T. Maston fired off this unexpected news to the world at large? Was this the outcome, then, of that great undertaking?


Meanwhile the day had gone by uneventfully. It was midnight earth time. December 8 was just starting. In another hour they would reach the point of equal attraction. What was the projectile's current speed? They couldn't estimate it. But no error could have blemished Barbicane's calculations. By one o'clock in the morning their speed should and would be zero.


What's more, another phenomenon would mark the projectile's arrival on the neutral line. At this locality the gravitational fields of both moon and earth would be negated. Our travelers wouldn't be dealing with “weighty things” anymore. This distinctive circumstance, which Barbicane and his companions were fascinated to experience on their outbound journey, would be duplicated on their return trip under identical conditions. Which was exactly when they needed to take action.


Already the projectile's conical cap was noticeably swinging toward the lunar disk. The shell would be in a position to take full advantage of the recoil from the thrust of the explosive devices. So the odds favored the travelers. If the projectile's speed at the neutral point was right at zero, any distinct movement toward the moon, no matter how slight, would be enough to make them fall.


“Twelve fifty-five,” Nicholl said.


“We're all set,” Michel Ardan replied, holding a taper in readiness near the gas jet's flame.


“Wait!” Barbicane said, chronometer in hand.


By then gravity was creating no further effects. The travelers felt it completely vanishing from their persons. They were quite close to the neutral line, if not right on it … !


“One o'clock,” Barbicane said.


Michel Ardan lowered the flaming taper to a fuse in direct contact with the rockets.


No explosion was audible outside where there wasn't any air. But through the portholes Barbicane saw a protracted flash of light, which soon faded away.


The projectile gave a definite lurch that was distinctly noticeable inside.


The three friends looked and listened without saying a word, almost without breathing. In the utter silence you could have heard their heartbeats.


“Are we falling?” Michel Ardan finally asked.


“No,” Nicholl replied, “because the projectile's base hasn't swung back toward the moon!”


Just then Barbicane left the window of his porthole and faced his two companions. He was fearfully pale, frowning, tight lipped.


“We are falling!” he said.


“Aha!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Toward the moon?”


“Toward the earth!” Barbicane replied.


“Blast!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. Then he added philosophically, “Fine. When we got inside this shell, we suspected it wouldn't be easy to come back out!”


That frightful descent was indeed under way. The projectile had kept enough speed to take it past the neutral point. The exploding rockets couldn't hold it in check. Its outbound speed had carried the projectile beyond the point of equal attraction, and its inbound speed was carrying it back again. The laws of physics decreed that it must return to every point on its elliptical orbit that it had already gone past.


It was a dreadful fall from 195,000 miles up, and no springs could soften it. According to the laws of ballistics, the projectile was due to hit the earth at the same speed that had impelled it from the columbiad's muzzle, a terminal velocity of “nearly 18,000 yards per second.”


To provide a basis for comparison, it's calculated that an object tossed from the tip of a steeple at Notre Dame Cathedral—which is only 200 feet high—will reach the pavement at a speed of 300 miles per hour. Here the projectile was due to hit the earth at a speed of 144,000 miles per hour.


“We're done for!” Nicholl said coolly.










“All right, if we die,” Barbicane replied in a kind of religious ecstasy, “the outcome of our journey will increase in magnificence! We'll learn the ultimate secret from God's own lips! In the next life our souls will have no need for machines or engines to gain knowledge! We'll become one with eternal wisdom!”


“In fact,” Michel Ardan remarked, “the next world and everything it entails might be a pretty fair substitute for that lowly satellite known as the moon!”


As a gesture of sublime acceptance, Barbicane folded his arms over his chest.


“May Heaven's will be done!” he said.










CHAPTER 20








The Susquehanna's Soundings






“WELL, LIEUTENANT, where are we with this sounding?”


“I think the operation's about over, sir,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied. “But who would have expected it to be this deep so close to land, just 250 miles off the American coast!”


“You're right, Bronsfield, it's a huge depression,” Captain Blomsberry said. “In this locality there's an underwater valley cut by the Humboldt Current, which runs down the American coastline as far as the Strait of Magellan.”


“Bottoms this deep,” the lieutenant went on, “aren't much good for laying telegraph cables. A level plateau works better, like the one bearing up the Atlantic Cable between Valentia Island and Newfoundland.”


“There I agree, Bronsfield. And by your leave, lieutenant, how do things stand at this time?”


“Right now, sir,” Bronsfield replied, “we've payed out 21,500 feet of sounding line, and the sinker tugging it still hasn't hit bottom, because it would have come back up on its own.”


“That Brooke device is a clever piece of equipment,” Captain Blomsberry said. “It lets us take highly accurate soundings.”


Overseeing the operation, a helmsman in the bow shouted just then: “We've hit bottom!”


The captain and the lieutenant made their way to the quarterdeck.


“What's the depth?” the captain asked.


“It's 21,762 feet,” the lieutenant replied, writing this figure in his notebook.


“Good, Bronsfield,” the captain said. “I'll record this total on my chart. Now haul in the sounding line. It's several hours' work. In the meantime the engineer can light the furnaces, and we'll be ready to go as soon as you're through. It's ten o'clock, and by your leave, lieutenant, I'm turning in.”


“Go right ahead, sir!” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied obligingly.


Always at his officers' service and a gallant man if there ever was one, the Susquehanna's captain retired to his cabin, downed a brandy toddy that earned his chief steward no end of praise, turned in after complimenting his manservant on his bed-making skills, and fell peacefully asleep.


By then it was ten o'clock in the evening. That day of December 11 would be changing into a magnificent night.


A 500-horsepower sloop of war in the United States Navy, the Susquehanna had been busy taking soundings in the Pacific about 250 miles off the American coast, level with that lengthy peninsula laid out along the coast of Mexico.


The wind had died down little by little. No turbulence was stirring up the layers of air. Motionless, inanimate, the warship's pennant dangled from the mast of the topgallant sail.


Captain Jonathan Blomsberry was a first cousin of that same Colonel Blomsberry who was a stalwart of the Gun Club—the colonel had married the captain's aunt, the daughter of a respectable Kentucky merchant named Horschbidden; Captain Blomsberry couldn't have asked for better weather for seeing his tricky sounding operations through to completion. His sloop of war hadn't felt even a drop of the huge storm that had cleared those piles of clouds away from the Rocky Mountains, making it possible to track the progress of the notorious projectile. Everything had gone to his liking, and with typical Presbyterian fervor he didn't neglect to thank Heaven for his blessings.


This series of soundings carried out by the Susquehanna aimed to locate the most promising parts of the seafloor for laying an underwater cable that would link the Hawaiian Islands with the coast of America.


This was a tremendous scheme, thanks to the initiative of a mighty corporation. Its chief executive officer, shrewd Cyrus Field, even claimed this vast electrical network would cover all the islands in Oceania, an immense undertaking worthy of America's technological genius.


The sloop of war Susquehanna had been entrusted with the initial sounding operations. During that night of December 11–12, the ship lay right in latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 41° 37' west of the


meridian of Washington, D.C. 9


The moon, then in her last quarter, was starting to peek above the horizon.


After Captain Blomsberry's departure, the lieutenant and a few officers gathered on the afterdeck. When the earth's satellite appeared, their thoughts turned to that heavenly body the eyes of a whole hemisphere were contemplating by then. The finest naval spyglasses couldn't have detected the projectile roaming around its half of the moon and yet they were all aimed at that glittering disk, which millions of eyes were ogling simultaneously.


“They've been gone ten days,” Lieutenant Bronsfield said. “What happened to them?”


“They've arrived, lieutenant!” a young midshipman exclaimed. “And they're doing what every traveler does after arriving in a new country —they've gone for a stroll!”


“Of course, my young friend, if you say so,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied with a smile.


“But,” another officer went on, “there's no question about them arriving. The projectile was due to reach the moon at midnight on the 5th, just as she was full. It's now December 11, which makes six days. Now then, in twenty-four hours of daylight times six, you've got a comfortable amount of time for taking up residence. I can see them now, our gallant countrymen—they're camped at the bottom of some valley on a lunar riverbank, next to them the projectile's half buried in volcanic rubble after its crash landing, Captain Nicholl's starting his survey work, President Barbicane's putting his travel notes into final form, and Michel Ardan's perfuming the lunar wastes with the smell of his Havanas … ”


“Yes, it's bound to be like that—just like that!” the young midshipman cut in, excited by his superior's rose-colored description.


“I wish I could believe it,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied, less carried away. “Unfortunately we're still lacking any direct news from the lunar world.”


“Pardon me, lieutenant,” the midshipman said, “but can't President Barbicane write us?”


A burst of laughter greeted this response.


“Not letters!” the young man went on hastily. “The post office isn't involved yet.”


“So they're going to run telegraph lines?” asked one of the officers sarcastically.


“Not that either,” the midshipman replied, unflustered. “But it's very easy to set up visual contact with the earth.”


“How?”


“By using the telescope on Long's Peak. As you know, it brings the moon within a viewing distance of just five miles from the Rocky Mountains, which makes it possible to see objects on her surface that are nine feet across. All right, if our resourceful friends build an alphabet of gigantic letters, if they spell out words 600 feet long and sentences 2½ miles long, that's how they could send us the latest news.”


The young midshipman, who was blessed with quite an imagination, got a hearty round of applause. Even Lieutenant Bronsfield agreed the idea was doable. He added they could also set up direct contact by sending light rays focused into beams with the aid of parabolic mirrors; in fact these rays would be as visible on the surface of Venus or Mars as the planet Neptune is from the earth. He finished by saying that the specks of light already spotted on nearby planets might well be signals aimed at the earth. But he pointed out that though we could get news from the lunar world with such a method, the earthly world couldn't send any news back, unless people on the moon were equipped with decent instruments for long-distance viewing.


“Obviously,” one of the officers replied. “But what happened to the travelers, what have they done, what have they seen? That's got to be the most intriguing thing about this. What's more, if this experiment was successful—which I don't question—they'll try again. The columbiad is still embedded in Florida soil. So it's only a matter of shells and gunpowder, and every time the moon ascends to the zenith, we can send her a shipment of visitors.”


“It's obvious,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied, “that one of these days J. T. Maston will be rejoining his friends.”


“If he's open to it,” the midshipman exclaimed, “I'm all set to go along!”


“Oh, there'll be no shortage of takers,” Bronsfield remarked. “If we let them, half the people on earth would migrate to the moon in no time!”


The Susquehanna's officers kept up this conversation till around one o'clock in the morning. We can't say what scatterbrained schemes and cockeyed theories these daring thinkers put forward. After Barbicane's endeavor nothing seemed impossible to an American. They were already planning a landing on the moon's beaches, no longer by a committee of scientists but by a whole colony, plus a whole army complete with enough infantry, artillery, and cavalry to conquer the lunar world.


By one o'clock in the morning, they still weren't through hauling in the sounding line. 10,000 feet were out as yet, which meant several hours' more work. In compliance with their commander's orders, the furnaces had been lit and were already up to pressure. The Susquehanna could have gotten under way immediately.


Just then—it was 1:17 in the morning—Lieutenant Bronsfield was all set to go off watch and retire to his cabin, when his attention was caught by a totally unexpected noise, a faraway hissing.


At first he and his comrades thought a steam leak was the cause of this hissing; but when they raised their heads, they could tell this noise was coming from the upper layers of the atmosphere.


Before they had any time to question each other, this hissing became fearfully intense; dazzling the eyes, an enormous meteor suddenly shot into view, on fire from the speed of its descent and from its friction against the layers of air.


This blazing mass grew as they watched, with a thunderous sound struck the sloop of war right on the bowsprit, snapped it off just shy of the stempost, and plunged into the waves with a deafening crash!


A few feet nearer and the Susquehanna would have gone down with all hands.


Just then Captain Blomsberry appeared, half dressed, hurrying to the forecastle where all his officers had rushed.


“By your leave, gentlemen—what happened?” he asked.


And the midshipman, taking it on himself to speak for everybody, blurted out:


“Skipper, it's them—they're back!”










CHAPTER 21








Reenter J. T. Maston






THERE WAS TREMENDOUS excitement aboard the Susquehanna. Officers and sailors forgot the dreadful danger they'd just run—the possibility of being pulverized and sent to the bottom. They thought only about the catastrophe concluding that moon journey. Hence the most daring undertaking of all time had cost the lives of the bold adventurers who had attempted it.


“It's them—they're back!” the young midshipman had said, and everybody knew what he meant. Nobody questioned that this meteor was the Gun Club's projectile. Regarding the travelers locked up inside, there were differing views as to their fate.


“They're dead!” this one said.


“They're alive,” said that one. “The water's deep in this area and it softened their fall.”


“But they were short of air,” another went on, “so they must have died of asphyxiation!”


“They burned to death!” somebody else contended. “When the projectile crossed through the atmosphere, it was nothing but a mass of flame.”


“What difference does it make!” the crew replied to a man. “Whether they're alive or dead, we've got to pull them out!”


Meanwhile Captain Blomsberry had gathered his officers and—by their leave—was conferring with them. This involved their agreeing on an immediate course of action. The most urgent concern was to fish up the projectile—an operation that was difficult though not impossible. But their sloop of war didn't have the requisite equipment, which needed to be both powerful and precise. So they decided to make for the nearest port and send word to the Gun Club that its shell had fallen out of the sky.


This verdict was unanimous. The choice of a port came under discussion. The nearby coast didn't offer any anchorage at latitude 27°. Higher up, on the far side of Monterey Peninsula, sat the major town it's named after. But this community lay on the borders of an honest-to-goodness desert, no network of telegraph lines linked it with cities inland, and only electricity could spread this crucial news swiftly enough.


San Francisco Bay opened a few degrees farther north. This metropolitan area in the California gold country was in easy contact with the heart of the Union. By running at full steam, the Susquehanna could reach the port of San Francisco in less than two days. So they had to leave without delay.


The furnaces had been stoked. They could get going immediately. 10,000 feet of sounding line were still left in the depths. Unwilling to waste valuable time hauling it in, Captain Blomsberry decided to cut it.


“We'll secure the end to a buoy,” he said, “and this buoy will mark exactly where the projectile fell.”


“What's more,” Lieutenant Bronsfield responded, “we know our exact position: latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 41° 37' west.”


“Fine, Mr. Bronsfield,” the captain replied, “and by your leave let's get that line cut.”


The crew deposited a sizeable buoy, reinforced by a couple of spare yards, on the surface of the ocean. The end of the sounding line was tightly lashed to the top of the buoy, which, being subject solely to the comings and goings of the billows, wasn't destined to drift significantly.


Just then the engineer notified the captain they were up to pressure and could depart. The captain thanked him for this excellent news. Then he set their course for north-northeast. Tacking about, the sloop of war headed at full steam for San Francisco Bay. It was three o'clock in the morning.


There were 550 miles to cover, a minor matter for a good racer like the Susquehanna. It gobbled up this distance in thirty-six hours, and at 1:27 in the afternoon on December 14, it stood into San Francisco Bay.


The sight of an American naval craft arriving at top speed, bowsprit shorn and foremast braced, excited substantial public curiosity. A jam-packed crowd had soon gathered along the wharves, waiting for the crew to come on land.


After dropping anchor, Captain Blomsberry and Lieutenant Bronsfield got down into a dinghy equipped with eight oars, which swiftly carried them ashore.


They leaped onto the wharf.


“Where's the telegraph?” they asked, without answering a single one of the thousand questions coming their way.


In the midst of an immense gathering of curiosity seekers, the harbormaster himself led them to the telegraph office.


Blomsberry and Bronsfield went into the office while the crowd clustered around the door.


In a few minutes they'd fired off a telegram in quadruplicate: the first to the Secretary of the Navy in Washington, D.C.; the second to the Vice President of the Gun Club in Baltimore; the third to the honorable J. T. Maston on Long's Peak in the Rocky Mountains; the fourth to the deputy director of the Cambridge Observatory in Massachusetts.


It ran as follows:


On December 12 at 1:17 in the morning, the projectile from the columbiad fell into the Pacific in latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 41° 37' west. Send instructions.


BLOMSBERRY,


Commander Susquehanna.


Five minutes later the whole town of San Francisco had heard the news. Before six o'clock that evening, the various states of the Union knew about this crowning catastrophe. After midnight all Europe learned by cablegram how the great American experiment had concluded.


We'll make no attempt to describe the effect this unexpected outcome had on the whole world.


After receiving the telegram, the Secretary of the Navy wired the Susquehanna, ordering it to wait in San Francisco Bay without shutting down its furnaces. It needed to be ready day or night to put to sea.


The Cambridge Observatory met in a special session and with that stateliness typical of scholarly gatherings, placidly discussed the scientific aspects of the matter.


At the Gun Club there was an explosion. All the artillerymen were convened. Sure enough, the honorable Mr. Wilcome—their vice president—was reading that premature telegram in which Belfast and J. T. Maston announced they'd just spotted the projectile in their gigantic reflector on Long's Peak. This message further conveyed that the shell had gotten caught in the moon's gravitational pull and was playing the role of a junior satellite in the solar system.


You already know the truth of the matter.


But when Blomsberry's wire arrived and flatly contradicted J. T. Maston's telegram, two factions took form in the Gun Club's bosom. On one side were those who accepted that the projectile had fallen to the earth and that the travelers had therefore come back. On the other were the ones who swore by the findings from Long's Peak and concluded that the Susquehanna's commander was mistaken. To this latter group the so-called projectile was just a meteor, nothing more, a shooting star that had fallen out of the sky and smashed the sloop of war in the bow. There weren't many facts that could refute this argument, because the moving object had to have been traveling so swiftly, it would've been very hard to make out. Certainly the Susquehanna's commander and his officers could have committed an error in good faith. Nevertheless one argument worked in their favor: namely, if the projectile had fallen to the earth, it could meet up with our planet only in latitude 27° north and—taking into account the lapse of time and the earth's spinning motion—between longitude 41° and 42° west.


Be that as it may, the Gun Club unanimously decided that cousin Blomsberry, Bilsby, and Major Elphiston should get to San Francisco without delay and settle on a way of pulling up the projectile from the ocean depths.


These dedicated men wasted no time in starting out, and the railroad —which soon would run all across the center of America—took them to St. Louis, where speedy stagecoaches were waiting for them.


Practically at the same instant that the Secretary of the Navy, the Gun Club's vice president, and the observatory's deputy director got their telegrams from San Francisco, the honorable J. T. Maston was experiencing the most intense excitement he'd known in his entire existence, an excitement he hadn't felt even when his notorious cannon blew up, an excitement that once again nearly cost him his life.


As you'll recall, the Gun Club's secretary had left a few seconds after the projectile had (and almost as quickly) for the workstation at Long's Peak in the Rocky Mountains. J. M. Belfast, the Cambridge Observatory's scholarly director, went with him. Arriving at the outpost, the two friends took up residence in short order and didn't leave the topside of their enormous telescope for a moment.


In essence, as you know, this gigantic instrument was set up to be a “frontview” reflector, as the English term it. With this arrangement objects were subjected to just a single reflection, thereby providing a sharper image. Consequently, when J. T. Maston and Belfast watched the skies, they didn't stand at the lower end of the instrument but the upper. They reached this by a spiral staircase, a masterpiece of light construction, and beneath them, culminating in an iridescent mirror, gaped a metal well that was 280 feet deep.


Now then, positioned above the telescope was a cramped platform where the two experts spent their lives, cursing the sunlight for hiding the moon from their eyes, the clouds for stubbornly concealing her at night.


Then, after a few days of suspense, how gleeful they felt on the night of December 5 when they spotted the space vehicle carrying their friends! But their glee gave way to deep disappointment when, relying on their sketchy findings, they fired off their first telegram to the world, which mistakenly claimed the projectile had turned into the moon's satellite and was revolving in an unchanging orbit.


After that the shell was no longer in view, a vanishing act easily explained since by then it had gone behind the moon's invisible side. But when the time came for it to reappear in front of the visible one, the reader can imagine J. T. Maston's seething impatience and the similar impatience of his companion! Every sixty seconds that night they thought they'd spotted the projectile again—but they hadn't! Ergo there were endless debates and vicious quarrels between the two. Belfast insisted the projectile was out of sight, J. T. Maston maintained it was “right under his nose.”


“That's the shell!” J. T. Maston kept saying.


“No!” Belfast replied. “That's an avalanche breaking loose from a lunar mountain!”


“Then we'll see it tomorrow.”


“No, we'll never see it again! It flew off into space.”


“We will!”


“We won't!”


And during these times when exclamations were raining down like hail, the well-known temper of the Gun Club's secretary posed a perpetual danger for the honorable Mr. Belfast.


Their joint existence would soon have become impossible, but an unexpected development cut short their constant feuding.


During the night of December 14–15, the two estranged friends were busy studying the moon's disk. As usual J. T. Maston had been insulting the scholarly Belfast, who was fuming at his side. The Gun Club's secretary was maintaining for the thousandth time that he'd just spotted the projectile, even adding that Michel Ardan's face was visible through one of the portholes. He was backing up his arguments with a series of gestures rendered quite bothersome by his alarming hook.


Just then Belfast's manservant appeared on the platform—it was ten o'clock in the evening—and handed him a wire. It was the telegram from the Susquehanna's commander.


Belfast tore open the envelope, read its contents, and let out a shout.


“Huh?” J. T. Maston put in.


“The shell!”


“What about it?”


“It just fell to the earth!”


He was answered by a second shout, which this time changed into a howl.


He turned to J. T. Maston. The poor fellow had been recklessly leaning out over the metal tube and he'd vanished into that immense telescope. A 280-foot drop! Belfast rushed frantically to the reflector opening.


He breathed again. J. T. Maston had caught himself with his metal hook and was hanging from one of the struts that regulated the telescope's range. He was emitting fearsome shrieks.


Belfast called for help. His assistants came running. They set up pulleys and hauled out the Gun Club's reckless secretary, not without some difficulty.


He reemerged unhurt at the top of the opening.


“Say,” he put in, “what if I'd broken the mirror?”


“You would have to pay for it,” Belfast replied sternly.


“So that damned shell fell out of the sky?” J. T. Maston asked.


“Into the Pacific!”


“Let's get going.”


Fifteen minutes later the two experts were heading down the slopes of the Rocky Mountains; and two days later, at the same instant as their Gun Club friends, they arrived in San Francisco—after working five horses to death on the way.


Elphiston, cousin Blomsberry, and Bilsby rushed up to them on their arrival.


“What's the plan?” they snapped.


“Fish up the shell,” J. T. Maston replied, “and as fast as possible!”










CHAPTER 22








The Rescue






THE ACTUAL LOCALITY where the projectile had plunged under the waves was certain knowledge. The instruments for clutching and carrying it back to the surface of the ocean were still lacking. They had to be invented, then manufactured. This was a minor matter, no problem for American engineers. Once the grappling hooks were in place and steam power applied, they were sure to raise the projectile regardless of its weight, which in any case was lessened by the density of the liquid engulfing it.


But it wasn't enough to fish up the shell. In the travelers' best interests, it was essential to act promptly. Nobody questioned that they were still alive.


“Yes!” J. T. Maston repeated continually, his confidence winning everybody over. “They're skillful men, our friends, and they wouldn't handle this fall like simpletons. They're alive, definitely alive, but we've got to move fast if we're to find them in that state. Food and water don't worry me. They have enough for a good while. But air, air —that's what they'll soon run out of! So let's hurry, let's hurry!”


And hurry they did. They modified the Susquehanna for its new assignment. Its powerful engines were ready to work the hauling chains. That aluminum projectile weighed only 19,250 pounds—much less than the Atlantic Cable, which had been raised under similar circumstances. So the only difficult thing about fishing up this cylindroconical shell was that its walls were so smooth, they might be hard to grip.


Racing to San Francisco with this in mind, Murchison the engineer devised some enormous grappling hooks that worked automatically— they were designed so that they would never relax their hold once they'd managed to clutch the projectile in their powerful pincers. He also got some diving suits ready, which offered strong waterproof protection for undersea explorers scouting out the ocean floor. He likewise put some cleverly designed compressed-air chambers aboard the Susquehanna. Inset with portholes, these were actual rooms that could plummet far into the depths by letting water into various compartments. These diving chambers were already available in San Francisco, where they'd been used in building an underwater jetty. And this was a real stroke of luck because there wouldn't have been time to manufacture any.


But despite the excellence of these devices, despite the cleverness of the experts assigned to work with them, the success of this operation was anything but assured. The odds were iffy, since it was a matter of recovering that projectile from 20,000 feet down! Then, even supposing the shell were brought back to the surface, how would the travelers have borne up under that dreadful impact, if those 20,000 feet of water hadn't softened it sufficiently?


In short, they had to work faster. J. T. Maston drove his hired hands day and night. He was all set to put on a diving suit or test a compressed-air chamber himself, in order to scout out the predicament his courageous friends were in.


But despite all the diligence displayed in readying these various pieces of equipment, despite the considerable sums placed at the Gun Club's disposal by the Union government, five long days—five centuries—went by before preparations were complete. In the meantime public interest had surged to a fever pitch. Telegrams continually shot back and forth over wires and electric cables around the world. Rescuing Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan was an international affair. Every participant in the Gun Club's funding drive had a personal stake in the travelers' welfare.


Finally the hauling chains, the compressed-air chambers, and the automatic grappling hooks had been loaded aboard the Susquehanna. J. T. Maston, Murchison the engineer, and the Gun Club delegation were already occupying their cabins. They had only to set sail.


On December 21 at eight o'clock in the evening, the sloop of war got under way with a smooth sea, a breeze out of the northeast, and a fairly sharp chill in the air. The whole population of San Francisco crowded the wharves, excited but silent, saving their cheers for the ship's return.


Steam up to maximum pressure, the Susquehanna's propeller swiftly carried them out of the bay.


It's pointless to describe the shipboard conversations between officers, sailors, and passengers. Every man had only one thought. Every heart throbbed with the same emotion. While the vessel was racing to their rescue, what were Barbicane and his companions up to? What had happened to them? Were they in a position to attempt some daring move to win their freedom? Nobody could say. The truth is, anything they tried would have failed! Submerged nearly five miles down, that metal prison could defy its prisoners' best efforts.


On December 23 at eight o'clock in the morning, after a quick run, the Susquehanna arrived at the supposed site of the calamity. They needed to wait till noon to get their exact bearings. They still hadn't discovered the buoy with the sounding line lashed to it.


At noon, assisted by the officers who double-checked his readings, Captain Blomsberry took his sights in the presence of the Gun Club delegation. It was an anxious moment for them. According to their position fix, the Susquehanna lay a few minutes west of the actual locality where the projectile had vanished under the waves.


So the sloop of war changed course in order to reach this exact spot.


At 12:47 in the afternoon they turned up the buoy. It was in perfect condition and must have drifted very little.


“Finally!” J. T. Maston exclaimed.


“Shall we get started?” Captain Blomsberry asked.


“Without wasting another second,” J. T. Maston replied.


They took every precaution to keep the sloop of war absolutely still.


First of all, before trying to grab hold of the projectile, Murchison the engineer wanted to scout out its location on the ocean floor. The underwater chamber assigned to this search was supplied with air. Working this equipment had its dangers, because at 20,000 feet below the surface of the waves, it's under considerable pressure and vulnerable to rupturing, with dreadful consequences.


Not worrying about these dangers, J. T. Maston, cousin Blomsberry, and Murchison the engineer took their places in the compressed-air room. Stationed on the bridge, the skipper directed the operation, ready to stop lowering or to haul in the chains at the tiniest signal. The propeller had been thrown in gear, and with the engines' full power put on the winch, they could quickly bring the diving chamber back on board.


The descent began at 1:25 in the afternoon; once its ballast tanks were full of water, the chamber sank below the surface of the ocean and vanished from view.


The officers and sailors on board now divided their anxieties between the projectile's inmates and those in the underwater chamber. As for the latter, they hadn't a thought for themselves, stayed glued to the panes of their portholes, and carefully scanned the mass of liquid they were going through.


It was a swift descent. J. T. Maston and his companions had reached the floor of the Pacific by 2:17. But all they saw was a barren wasteland no longer livened up by marine flora or fauna. In the light from their lamps, which were equipped with powerful reflectors, they could inspect the murky underwater strata over a pretty extensive radius, but the projectile was nowhere to be seen.


These bold divers were consumed with indescribable impatience. Their chamber was in electrical contact with the sloop of war, so they sent it a prearranged signal, and the Susquehanna moved their underwater room here and there over a onemile area, dangling it a few yards above the seafloor.


That's how they explored this whole underwater plain, fooled every second by heartbreaking optical illusions. Here a rock, there a bulge on the bottom, looked to them like the dearly desired projectile; then they quickly realized their mistake and were in despair.


“But where are they? Where are they?” J. T. Maston demanded.


And the poor fellow called for Nicholl, Barbicane, and Michel Ardan at the top of his lungs, as if his unlucky friends could have heard him or answered him back through that impregnable medium!


They continued to search under these conditions till the foul air in the chamber forced the divers to ascend again.


The winch started hauling them in around six o'clock in the evening and didn't finish till past midnight.


“We'll try again tomorrow,” J. T. Maston said, setting foot on the warship's deck.


“Right,” Captain Blomsberry replied.


“And at another location.”


“Right.”


J. T. Maston still felt confident of success, but his companions—no longer as tipsy with excitement as they'd been early on—had already grasped the full difficulty of this undertaking. What seemed easy in San Francisco looked almost unattainable here in midocean. The odds that they would succeed were shrinking tremendously, and they could only hope some stroke of luck would lead them to the projectile.


Despite their exhaustion from the day before, they resumed operations the next morning, December 24. The sloop of war shifted a few minutes to the west, and after the diving chamber was refilled with air, it carried the same explorers back into the ocean depths.


They spent the whole day in fruitless searching. The seabed was empty. Their workday on the 25th didn't produce any results either. Nor did the 26th.


It was agonizing. Think of those unfortunate men closed up in that shell for the past twenty-six days! Maybe at this point they were feeling the first symptoms of asphyxiation—if they'd survived their dangerous fall in the first place. Their air was running out, and along with it, no doubt, their courage and strength of mind.


“Air possibly,” J. T. Maston invariably replied. “But strength of mind never!”


On the 28th, after two more days of searching, they abandoned all hope. That projectile was a flyspeck in the vastness of the sea! They had to give up their quest.


But J. T. Maston wouldn't hear of heading back. He wasn't willing to leave the area without at least finding the grave of his friends. Yet Captain Blomsberry couldn't stay out any longer, and over the good secretary's objections, he had no choice but to get his vessel under way.


On December 29 at nine o'clock in the morning, the Susquehanna aimed its prow to the northeast and plied a course back toward San Francisco Bay.


It was ten o'clock in the morning. The sloop of war was going off under half steam, as if grieving the site of the catastrophe, when there came a sudden shout from the sailor on watch in the crosstrees of the topgallant sail:


“Buoy abreast of us to leeward!”


The officers peered in the direction indicated. Using their spyglasses, they found that the object sighted did indeed look like one of those buoys used for marking entrances to bays or rivers. But oddly enough, a flag was fluttering in the wind on top of its cone, which emerged five or six feet above water. This buoy gleamed in the sunlight as if its walls were made of silver plate.


Captain Blomsberry, J. T. Maston, and the Gun Club delegation climbed onto the bridge and examined this object, which was wandering over the waves at random.


They all looked with feverish anxiety but without saying a word. Nobody dared voice the thought that had occurred to every one of them.


Closing in, the sloop of war lay less than a quarter of a mile from the object.


The whole crew shook with excitement.


That flag was the American flag!


Just then an authentic bellow of pain rang out. It came from our gallant J. T. Maston, who had just fallen in a heap. Forgetting in the first place that an iron hook had replaced his right arm, and in the second that only a guttapercha cap covered his braincase, he'd just given his forehead a fearsome smack.






They rushed over to him. They lifted him up. They revived him. And what were his first words?


“Oh, we're donkeys three times over, morons four times over, and nincompoops five!”


“What's wrong?” exclaimed everybody around him.


“Wrong?”


“Come on, out with it!”


“You numbskulls,” howled the dreaded secretary, “the shell weighs only 19,250 pounds!”


“So?”


“Yet it displaces twenty-eight tons, the same as 56,000 pounds, and consequently it will float! ”


Oh, how the good fellow underlined this verb “float!” And it was the truth! Every one of these experts—yes, every one of them—had forgotten this fundamental law: namely, the projectile had a low specific gravity, so after its fall had dragged it far into the ocean depths, it naturally had to come back to the surface! And now it was floating serenely, at the mercy of the waves …


After J. T. Maston and his friends had hurried into them, the longboats were put to sea. Excitement was running high. All hearts were pounding as the dinghies moved toward the projectile. What did it hold? The living or the dead? The living surely—unless death had claimed Barbicane and his two friends after they'd displayed that flag!


Utter silence reigned on the longboats. Every heart had a seizure. Eyes couldn't see straight. One of the projectile's portholes was open. A few shards were still in the frame, showing that the glass had been knocked out. This porthole was currently located at a height of five feet above the waves.


The longboat carrying J. T. Maston pulled alongside. J. T. Maston lunged at the shattered window …


Just then a bright, cheerful voice rang out; it was Michel Ardan's voice, exclaiming in triumphant tones:


“Double blank, Barbicane, double blank!”


Barbicane, Michel Ardan, and Nicholl were playing a game of dominoes.


`










CHAPTER 23








To Conclude






YOU'LL RECALL THE enormous sympathy that had gone along with our three travelers on their departure. If they aroused such feelings in the New World and the Old at the start of their undertaking, imagine the furor that would greet them on their return! Those millions of spectators overrunning Florida's peninsula—wouldn't they rush to meet these exalted adventurers? Those legions of foreigners racing from every corner of the globe toward the shores of America—would they leave Union territory without getting a look at Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan? Of course not, and the public's fiery enthusiasm was to prove an appropriate response to the greatness of this undertaking. Any human being leaving our planet, then returning from such a strange journey into outer space, was sure to be welcomed as if he were the prophet Elijah come down to earth again. To see them first, then to hear them—that was the world's dearest wish.


This wish was to become reality very quickly for almost every citizen of the Union.


Going back to Baltimore without delay, Barbicane, Michel Ardan, Nicholl, and the Gun Club delegation were greeted by an indescribable furor. President Barbicane was ready to hand over his travel notes to the press. Since this manuscript was destined to be extremely significant, the New York Herald bought it for a price that still hasn't been disclosed. In fact, during its publication of “Journey to the Moon,” this newspaper increased its circulation to 5,000,000 copies. Three days after the travelers had returned to the earth, the tiniest details of their expedition were general knowledge. Nothing remained other than to lay eyes on the heroes of this superhuman undertaking.


While Barbicane and his friends were circling the moon, their investigations allowed them to double-check the body of accepted theories regarding the earth's satellite. These scholars had carried out their examination under absolutely unique conditions and de


visu 10 . As for the creation of that heavenly body, her origins, her ability to support life, people now knew which formulations to reject and which to retain. Her past, present, and future had likewise yielded up their ultimate secrets. How could you argue with these diligent witnesses who from barely twenty-five miles away had surveyed that strange peak of Tycho, the oddest mountain system on the moon? How could anybody talk back to these experts whose eyes had probed the depths of Plato's basin? What human being could contradict these daredevils whose risky endeavor actually took them over the moon's invisible face, which no mortal eyes had glimpsed till that moment? Our travelers were now qualified to have the last word in that science of lunar studies—which had reconstructed the world of the moon as Cuvier had his fossil skeletons—and they were able to say: “The moon was once a world that could support life and it did so before the earth could! The moon is now a world that's lifeless and unlivable!”


To celebrate the return of its most famous member and his two companions, the Gun Club decided to throw a banquet for them, but a banquet worthy of both the victors and the American public—and the circumstances would allow every citizen of the Union to personally participate.


All the main railroad lines in the nation were joined together by temporary tracks. At every train station, now decked out with matching flags and dolled up with matching decorations, stood tables that were identically laid. At consecutive, carefully determined times (designated by electric clocks synchronized to the second), the townspeople were invited to take their seats at the banquet tables.


For four days from January 5 to the 9th, the regular trains didn't run, as they don't every Sunday on Union railroads, and all the tracks stayed free.


During these four days just one high-speed locomotive, pulling a single passenger car of honor, had permission to ride the rails in the United States.


Aboard this locomotive were an engineer and a fireman, plus, as a token of esteem, the honorable J. T. Maston, the Gun Club's secretary.


The passenger car was exclusively for President Barbicane, Captain Nicholl, and Michel Ardan.


After the hip-hips, hoorays, and every onomatopoetic form of praise in the American language, the engine driver blew the whistle and the train left Baltimore Station. It traveled at a speed of 200 miles per hour. But what was this speed compared to the velocity of our three heroes shooting out of the columbiad?


Thus they went from one town to the other, finding the citizenry at table along the way, greeted by identical applause, showered with identical bravos. In this manner they crossed the eastern part of the Union through Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont, Maine, and New Hampshire; they headed north and west through New York, Ohio, Michigan, and Wisconsin; they went back down south through Illinois, Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana; they dashed southeast through Alabama and Florida; they went up through Georgia, then North and South Carolina; they visited the interior by way of Tennessee, Kentucky, Virginia, and Indiana; then after pulling out of the station in Washington, D.C., they reentered Baltimore, and over those four days they must have thought the whole United States of America were at the same table during the same immense banquet, greeting them simultaneously with identical hoorays!


It was a glorification of these heroes worthy of them, these three men whom legend would have raised to the rank of demigods.


And now will this endeavor of theirs, unprecedented in the history of travel, lead to any practical result? Will we ever set up direct contact with the moon? Will we open a service for navigating through space, with stopovers across the solar system? Will we go from planet to planet—Jupiter to Mercury—and later from one star to another—the polestar to Sirius? Will this way of getting places allow us to visit those suns the firmament is swarming with?


These are questions we can't answer. But knowing the daring inventiveness of the Anglo-Saxon race, nobody will be surprised that the Americans tried to make profitable use of President Barbicane's endeavor.


Accordingly, some time after the travelers returned, the public reacted with clear approval to a prospectus from a limited partnership company, with $100,000,000 in capital, split into 100,000 shares of stock at $1,000 per share, and bearing the name National Interstellar Transportation Co. Barbicane was president; Captain Nicholl, vice president; J. T. Maston, recording secretary; Michel Ar-dan, traffic director.


And since it's the American way to plan for every business contingency, even bankruptcy, the honorable Harry Trollope and Mr. Francis Drayton were appointed in advance as presiding judge and trustee!










JULES VERNE








Verne was born in 1828 into a French lawyering family in the Atlantic coastal city of Nantes. Though his father sent him off to a Paris law school, young Jules had been writing on the side since his early teens, and his pet topics were the theater, travel, and science. Predictably enough, his legal studies led nowhere, so Verne took a day job with a stock brokerage, in his off hours penning scripts for farces and musical comedies while also publishing short stories and novelettes of scientific exploration and adventure.


His big breakthrough came when he combined his theatrical knack with his scientific bent and in 1863 published an African adventure yarn, Five Weeks in a Balloon. After that and till his death in 1905, Jules Verne was one of the planet's best-loved and best-selling novelists, publishing over sixty books. In addition to the five visionary classics in this volume, other imaginative favorites by him include The Mysterious Island, Hector Servadac, The Begum's Millions, Master of the World, and The Meteor Hunt. Verne ranks among the five most translated authors in history, along with Mark Twain and the Bible.










FREDERICK PAUL WALTER (Translator)






Scriptwriter, broadcaster, librarian, and amateur paleontologist, Walter is a long-standing member of the North American Jules Verne Society and served as its Vice President from 2000 to 2008. He has produced many media programs, articles, reviews, and papers on aspects of Jules Verne and has collaborated on translations and scholarly editions of three Verne novels: The Meteor Hunt, The Mighty Orinoco, and a special edition of Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea for the U.S. Naval Institute in Anna-polis. Known to friends as Rick Walter, he lives in Albuquerque, New Mexico.










SCIENCE AND SHOWBIZ








GOING PLACES WITH JULES VERNE






Frederick Paul Walter






True or not, a favorite Jules Verne anecdote has the famous Frenchman visiting a Paris government official in the 1880s. By then Verne was an international celebrity, and his novels had taken countless readers where nobody had gone before: the ocean depths, the earth's core, the moon, the whole solar system. When Verne entered the official's chambers, the man pushed him into a chair and plumped pillows around him. “Make yourself comfortable, Monsieur Verne,” the official urged. “You must be exhausted after all that traveling!”


From his childhood Verne had been fascinated by faraway places. He grew up in the medium-sized French metropolis of Nantes on the Loire River, some thirty miles upstream from a major Atlantic seaport. Shipping and transportation were the leading industrial concerns, long-distance travel was in full swing, steam-powered locomotives and ocean liners were available to the general public. Air travel wasn't so available, but the many well-advertised flights by gas balloon were definitely in the public eye. All of these developments tantalized Jules Verne's young imagination.






BOY AUTHOR






He wrote from his boyhood on, a sample of his poetry surviving from his fourteenth year, half of a novel from his eighteenth (Lottman, 13, 17). By his early twenties Verne was already being paid for his writing, though not munificently. During the 1840s and 1850s, he penned over twenty plays (Margot, 14–16), mostly knockabout farces and the books and lyrics for musical comedies. His first staged work, The Broken Straws, enjoyed a professional Paris run of a dozen or so performances in 1850. Over the following decade he kept up the scriptwriting and in addition managed to publish several pieces of short fiction, some of them hinting at his interest in science and its future possibilities.


Another couple decades would go by before Verne turned into a best-selling author, but those early tales already gave off glimmers of the famous novels to come. The science of aeronautics drives his short story “A Journey by Balloon” (1851), likewise one of those death-craving monomaniacs who keep reappearing in his mature fiction. The novelette “Wintering in the Ice” (1855) features a search for a lost sea captain in the subarctic seas, foreshadowing the polar quests in several later works. Another novelette, “Master Zacharius” (1854), unveils the demented, power-hungry side of science, a perspective he would return to in books throughout his career. A third novelette, “The First Ships in the Mexican Navy” (1851), shows young Verne exploiting his source materials as shrewdly as his later self: with just a map and somebody's travel memoirs, he convincingly sketches an inland journey through regions he'd never personally visited (or ever would).


Along with these early yarns, Verne completed about fourteen new scripts (Butcher, 110). A musical comedy, The Comrades of the Mint Leaf (1852), had a performance run just shy of a month: a rustic sex farce with a nitwit plotline, its effect is difficult to judge without the music. But an unproduced script that he wrote the following year makes for enjoyable reading and has plenty of recognizable Verne shenanigans: A Foster Son (1853) is a racy sitcom full of running gags, nonstop wordplay, bawdy double meanings, and shameless plot twists … the piece is hopelessly lightweight, but many of its jokes still work; Verne may not have been a major dramatist, but he was a first-rate gag writer and vaudevillian.


Yet another theater piece foreshadows his great novels as clearly as the first short stories: Mr. Chimpanzee (1857). Staged in Paris the year after its writing (Jules-Verne, 37), it's a slapstick comedy set to music. However its offbeat setting is a natural history museum, it boasts a speculative science angle that's typical Verne, prehistoric monsters such as the ichthyosaurus and megatherium are among the museum exhibits, and there are allusions to the Count de Buffon, the great French naturalist who would be a frequent source for the


masterpieces ahead.*


Meanwhile Verne also did some book-length work during those early days: a chatty UK travelogue that he finished in 1860 but never published in his lifetime (today it's available as Backwards to Britain). Even so, whether he was generating theater pieces, short fiction, or book-size nonfiction, he had little genuine success till he finally hit on this winning combination: stories of science and exploration … that were highly theatrical.






BREAKTHROUGH






When he published his first novel, Verne was already a seasoned pro. He'd been writing for twenty years, and his output had been onstage and in print for over half that time. Then, in 1862, he took a manuscript to an interview with Pierre-Jules Hetzel (1814–1886), described by the author's grandson (Jules-Verne, 54) as “one the greatest publishers France has ever known.” Hetzel's stable of writers was a who's who of 19th century French literature: Balzac, Hugo, Z2ola, Baudelaire, George Sand—and Jules Verne would become his biggest moneymaker.


Verne's manuscript was about balloon travel over Africa and it tackled the crux of the matter. As his grandson wrote a century later (Jules-Verne, 57), “aeronautics was in its infancy. No satisfactory solution had yet been found for steering a balloon.” So Verne's book imagined “a balloon that could climb or descend at will to take advantage of the different wind directions at different altitudes.” Revised and refined, the tale came out in 1863 as Five Weeks in a Balloon. An instant hit, it enjoyed a big print run and was soon turned into actuality by real-life balloonists.


The next year Hetzel had major plans for Verne: he launched one of history's first family magazines, a fortnightly periodical named the Magasin d'éducation et de récréation … a moniker that today's media whizzes might be tempted to translate as Facts and Fun. It grew into one of the century's publishing phenomena (Lottman, 95– 96), and Verne could take much of the credit. Hetzel wanted intriguing stories to serialize in his publication, and Verne supplied him with a sequence of adventure novels that were both educational and entertaining, combining up-to-the-minute scientific fact and dramatic exploits spiced with humor. After their serialization Verne's visionary yarns were published in deluxe hardcover editions, and over the years he produced some sixty books in this fashion. Hetzel marketed the whole line under the enticing rubric of Voyages extraordinaires, and the English wording Amazing Journeys captures both the sense and verve of the French.


At last the ideas in Verne's early short fiction came to full bloom. “Wintering in the Ice,” a search for a lost mariner in the North Sea, led to full-scale polar quests in The Adventures of Captain Hatteras (1866), 20,000 Leagues Under the Seas (1870), and The Fur Country (1873), not to mention the mighty three-volume search for another missing seaman in Captain Grant's Children (1868). As for the aeronautics in his short story “A Journey by Balloon,” they supplied ingredients not only for his breakthrough book Five Weeks in a Balloon but also for important later novels, including his desert-island masterwork The Mysterious Island (1875), his interplanetary comedy Hector Servadac (1877), and his tale of aerial warfare Robur the Conqueror (1886). Finally his spooky novelette “Master Zacharius,” dealing with science's dark, sinister potential, raised concerns he would revisit in novels throughout his career: 20,000 Leagues, The Begum's Millions (1879), Facing the Flag (1896), and Master of the World (1904). In short, the seeds were there from the start.










FABULOUS FIRST DECADE








For the rest of his life, Verne stayed under contract to the Hetzel publishing house, but his best-remembered books appeared during their first decade together: the five “visionary classics” in this volume. His instincts and skills fully developed, Verne shot like a comet into public view, and he took that public on some staggering first-time journeys: into the earth, to the ocean floor, to the moon, around the globe in record time. His later novels, splendid as many of them are, come off as variations on a theme: in the The Black Indies (1877) Verne goes back underground, in Hector Servadac back into outer space, in The Steam House (1880) and The Robinson Crusoe School (1882) back to locales on Phileas Fogg's 80-day itinerary. In that fabulous first decade of 1863–1872, Verne's powers were on full display.


What were those powers? Consider this: by some estimates Jules Verne is the “most translated writer in the world,” the “most read” of all authors (Butcher, xix). What magic had he mastered to account for this phenomenal standing?


Verne's virtuosity as a storyteller isn't well understood in America and England. A good deal of nonsense has been recycled about him by critics who apparently haven't read his works or studied his life; no need to name names—the bunkum that follows can be found in many reference works and blanket surveys. Several, for instance, describe Verne as a cockeyed optimist whose yarns look on science's bright side, darkening only late in his career. Wildly inaccurate: even the fiction from Verne's youth is jittery about science's potential, as are two of the early novels in this volume. Others, meanwhile, call Verne a stay-at-home, an armchair recluse who journeyed only in his head. Equally untrue: he was an energetic tourist and yachtsman, visiting America and traveling repeatedly around the UK, mainland Europe, and the Mediterranean. Still another contingent claims his fiction is incurably conventional and wedded to bourgeois values. Hopelessly wrong: Verne's heroes are innovators, oddballs, outcasts, rebels, and anti-imperialists.


Finally, and least justified of all, they rate him a stodgy writer, lacking in color, finesse, or talent for characterization. This is more than wrong, it's loony: in their original French these novels bubble with jokes, pranks, theatrics, scientific thrills, and bigger-than-life characters. It's their raddled old Victorian translations that are stodgy —and it's the scholarship relying on them that's lacking. Consequently, before moving on to this volume's accurate new translations, this essay intends to celebrate that storytelling virtuosity mentioned above.


Though Verne had no in-depth scientific training, he clearly had a knack for giving the sciences popular appeal. It helped that he also had a knack for legwork and research, and his grandson (Jules-Verne, 58) describes how the famed novels came into being: “A mass of facts are skillfully incorporated into the narrative—facts that by themselves would have remained unattractive or even inaccessible to the general readers that Verne had in mind. In this respect alone, Verne shows himself to be a consummate storyteller.” And just how dependable were those vaunted facts? His grandson again: they were “scrupulously accurate and up to date…. [He] kept a “respect for accuracy throughout his life. Indeed, on many occasions Hetzel used his influence to get Verne introduced to specialists whose brains he wished to pick.”


As a consequence his novels have often been praised for their farseeing science. Walter James Miller, spearheading Verne scholarship in America (Miller, viii), once commented that the Frenchman's two moon novels “anticipated every stage of the actual space effort of the 1960s.” And while their nomenclature may be in continual flux, the extinct life forms in Journey to the Center of the Earth (1864) or the marine fauna in 20,000 Leagues can still be found in today's databases and textbooks. Apparently he was a man who never forgot a fact, and his personal library housed thousands of books, clippings, and memoranda. One day the English crime novelist Marie A. Belloc paid both Verne and his library a visit. “The room is lined with bookcases, and in the middle a large table groans under a carefully sorted mass of newspapers, reviews, and scientific reports,” she writes (Belloc, 209). “A number of cardboard pigeonholes … contain the twenty-odd thousand notes garnered by the author during his long life.”






THEATRICAL FLAIR






A zest for science is only part of Verne's magic, the rest is his theatricality. This kicks in immediately, at the research stage. He has a flair for sifting through his subject matter and cherry-picking its most dramatic aspects, its angles that have storytelling and attention-getting potential. He has particular fun with the mores and folkways of far-off cultures: Icelandic cuisine with its 20-year-old butter sauces in Journey to the Center of the Earth … the Yankee willingness to smoke cigars around high explosives in From the Earth to the Moon (1865) … the goofy product lines (false teeth and hairpieces) of his traveling salespeople in Claudius Bombarnac (1892).


Similarly, when his objectives are educational or he's laying factual groundwork, he can dramatize and sugarcoat with the best of them, adding color with an anecdote, a joke, a parable. In From the Earth to the Moon, for instance, you can duplicate the moon's movements (p. 150) simply by strolling around your dinner table … or, in Chapter 6 of Circling the Moon (1869), a train engineer can illustrate the effect of heat on motion just by applying the brakes. Nor does Verne balk at exaggerating for effect, at overdoing things in a good cause: 20,000 Leagues is loaded with outsized marine life—25-foot reef sharks, 60-foot narwhals, 185-foot rorquals, even “giant lobsters” and “titanic crabs.” As for the prehistoric reptiles in Journey to the Center of the Earth, they're familiar to paleontologists, but their sizes (“forty feet wide,” “at least a hundred feet long”) are heftier than any known fossils.


The astounding punch line to Chapter 36 in the latter book is an example of an additional Verne specialty: the eye-popping plot twist. Others include the switcheroo at the halfway point of The Mighty Orinoco (1898) … the reverse-English endings of Around the World in 80 Days (1872) and Michael Strogoff (1876) … the windup of his low comedy Keraban the Pigheaded (1883), where Verne paints his title character into the tightest possible corner, then extricates him with a cheeky surprise gimmick. On the other hand he also knows how to get serious with his theatrics: three of the yarns in this volume feature vicious storms at sea, events actually expressive of his characters' inner turmoil. The tempests in Journey to the Center of the Earth (pp. 102–4), 20,000 Leagues (524–25), and Around the World in 80 Days (602–4) are among the most horrific in literature— their gale speeds “are four times that of a locomotive shooting along at full throttle,” they unleash “lightning bolts like broods of snakes running loose in the sky,” they fill the air with “complex noises made up of crashing breakers, howling winds, claps of thunder.”


And Verne's terrifying set pieces are sometimes more than just good


theater (Walter 2008, 2): they can “strike us at a visceral level, assail our animal essence, prey on our most primitive fears.” Among these harrowing episodes: the crisis in 20,000 Leagues where the submarine runs short of oxygen … and the narrator's near-death experience in Chapters 26–28 of Journey to the Center of the Earth. If Verne seems flamboyant and prankish elsewhere, in these


instances he's all ruthless economy and specificity (Walter 2008, 3): “He doesn't pussyfoot, sentimentalize, or parade strings of adjectives. No, he narrows his narrative to the tightest, leanest, most disquieting details.”






ARCHETYPAL CHARACTERS






Two other facets of Verne's theatricality are central to his storytelling power: his large-scale characters and his versatile comedy.


As for the first, he's rarely given credit for his feats of characterization, though Captain Nemo and Phileas Fogg are household words and many of his other creations are now stock figures. In fact his engineers, astronomers, and geologists are true originals for one simple reason: unlike such earlier savants as Faustus, Frankenstein, and Coppelius, Verne's researchers are engaged in recognizable scientific pursuits. Some, such as the naturalist Aronnax in 20,000 Leagues Under the Seas or Dr. Clawbonny in The Adventures of Captain Hatteras, are rational, capable professionals. Others are the original versions of two familiar archetypes, science's yin and yang: the absent-minded professor and the mad inventor.


Earliest of Verne's “nutty professors” is the high-strung Lidenbrock in Journey to the Center of the Earth: heart of gold, stressful to live with. His immediate successors include the disoriented Paganel in Captain Grant's Children and the oblivious Thomas Black in The Fur Country, resident funny men, Verne's designated sources of comic relief. As for the mad inventors and explorers, the maniacs bent on destruction, domination, or some other grim objective, Verne's initial attempt—and a genuinely scary one—is the nameless skyjacker in his short story “A Journey by Balloon.” Next comes the pole-seeking Captain Hatteras, who does go certifiably mad, then Verne's most complex creation, the multilayered, ambivalent, darkly elusive Captain Nemo. A later figure, the aeronaut Robur, is a Nemo variant: beneficial in Robur the Conquerer, bad news in Master of the World.


There's more to be said about Captain Nemo, but first a quick look at the obsessives and compulsives who pack Verne's pages. Generally they're played for laughs: the chatterbox Frenchman Ardan … the diehard manhunter Inspector Fix … and even more extreme, the warmongering J. T. Maston, who tends to go off the deep end in the most literal sense—he nearly topples into a 900-foot well, barely avoids “a nasty fall” off a stage, almost tumbles down the 280-foot tube of a giant telescope, then at last personally brains himself and collapses in a heap. As for female characters, women and wooing scenes are common in Verne's plays but scarce in his fiction: Hetzel's contracts restricted him to adventure writing for a family audience. Yet when women do show up in the novels, they're assertive and independent: the efficient Grauben in Journey to the Center of the Earth … the tough explorers Paulina Barnett in The Fur Country and the titular heroine of Mrs. Branican (1891) … even the voluptuous Aouda in Around the World in 80 Days.


And in one case, finally, a character assumes mythic stature: Captain Nemo is the result of special circumstances, of a character not turning out as planned. At first he was simply one man against the world—though, unlike Dumas's Count of Monte Cristo, a man bent on political rather than private revenge. But the original Captain Nemo had a detailed history, nationality, cause, and antagonist. The published novel specifies none of these things and the book's aura and effect are different from nearly anything else in Verne.


Some of this may have been a lucky accident, but in any event Verne's publisher Pierre-Jules Hetzel was to blame. Like many an editor since, Hetzel could be invasive and tyrannical; today's scholars roast him regularly, not only for his trigger-happy interfering with Verne's texts but also for his profiteering and hard financial bargains. Yet good things sometimes came from his meddling: the political particulars in Verne's first drafts of 20,000 Leagues worried Hetzel, and Verne ended up steering the book down a new path, a path he hadn't taken since his eerie novelette “Master Zacharius.” Clearly it was meant to be. Though far from its author's first intentions, the novel's revamped version became colossally successful and today is often regarded as Verne's magnum opus. Nemo is shadowy, mystifying, numinous, his drives and objectives taking vague shape only near the end. Yet we experience enough of him to see him as human—his sardonic humor, his impressive IQ, his flickers of temper—so when he hates, lashes out, and inflicts fearful suffering, he's the Verne hero who approaches tragic stature. Unlike Fogg, who also has mysterious antecedents, Nemo is never comic material.


But he rises even above tragedy to the otherworldly: his nebulous background gives him a mythic, almost preternatural presence. At the end Captain Nemo grows “astoundingly” in the narrator's mind, evolves into “the Man of the Waters, the Spirit of the Seas,” and takes on “superhuman proportions.” Ultimately he himself becomes that “shrouded human figure” the narrator recalls from Poe.










NOSE-THUMBING HUMOR








The first English-speaking scholar to look closely at Verne's comedy, Arthur B. Evans (2005, 96–99) calls his novels “humorous, witty, theatrical,” repeatedly lauds them for their “humor and wordplay,” and finds that “they're teeming with double entendres, authorial ‘winks’ and self-referential parody.” He concludes that “anglophone readers have never been able to savor Verne's wit.”


Sad but true. This major aspect of Verne is often missed entirely in his English translations, likewise in their English commentaries. Unfortunately some types of jokes don't carry over from language to language: puns, for instance, with their dependence on soundalikes and multiple meanings. And Verne was a chronic punster, whether he's mauling a maxim of the zoologist Linnaeus (approximated on p. 324), or mingling the sports of knitting and hitting (p. 648 substitutes a different sort of joke). In any case nose-thumbing humor is Verne's bodyguard, and he uses it not only for itself but to lubricate a wide range of snags and bottlenecks: plot slowdowns, dreary technical details, far-fetched developments, even utterly insoluble problems such as the takeoff acceleration in From the Earth to the Moon. And as Evans notes (1988, 144), Verne's gag writing covers the waterfront: “slapstick, situation comedy, witticisms, exaggerations, social satire, understatement, ethnic humor, absurdities, black humor, and so on.” If the translator has the spunk to look for decent English equivalents, much of this humor can cross the Atlantic.


Understatement? A Verne trademark is the deadpan wisecrack. Here's the stoic guide in Journey to the Center of the Earth: “He carried economy of motion to the point of stinginess.” Or Barbicane after bypassing Texas as the site for his moon shot: “his unpopularity in Texas was on a par with General Santa Anna's.” Or the Frenchman Ardan's role aboard the space capsule: “In this miniature cosmos he stood for Gallic impulsiveness and talkativeness, and believe me, these attributes were adequately represented.” Self-referential parody? Verne will sometimes kid his own scholarly apparatus, as with his two impish footnotes in The Mysterious Island


(Walter 1999, 9): “Footnote 1 refers us to Footnote 2, which refers us right back to Footnote 1.” Nor, conversely, is there any shortage of humor at the service of graver purposes. Miller (162) calls From the Earth to the Moon an “all-out satire on militarism…. no writer—not even Aristophanes, Voltaire, or Joseph Heller—has conceived of better ways to satirize war and the military mind.”






JULES VERNE'S LEGACY






As stated, the five “visionary classics” in this volume appeared during the incandescent first decade of Verne's collaboration with Hetzel. They're a staggering legacy: Journey to the Center of the Earth, the first time-travel novel … From the Earth to the Moon and Circling the Moon, the first hard-science tales of space exploration … 20,000 Leagues Under the Seas, the first novel of a vendetta that's global rather than personal … and as for Around the World in 80 Days, it remains one of the planet's favorite thrillers to this moment.


The first four are regularly regarded as milestones of science fiction, but Verne also wrote a large number of straight adventure stories, yarns where the sciences are simply geography and sociology. His other achievements in that first decade included The Adventures of Captain Hatteras, a fictional conquest of the North Pole forty years before Peary, and one of Verne's most massive works, a triple-decker rescue mission entitled Captain Grant's Children. From then on, as previously noted, his novels tended to be variations on a theme. Most were geographic adventures, but aside from the spy thriller Michael Strogoff and the desert-island epic The Mysterious Island, it's his occasional sorties into scientific speculation that provoke the most interest today: his interplanetary journey Hector Servadac, his high-tech gothic novel Castle in the Carpathians (1892), his mad-inventor sagas Facing the Flag and Master of the World, the grisly dystopia he unveils in The Begum's Millions.


During much of the 20th century, it was traditional to call Verne “The Father of Science Fiction.” This has come under noisy reassessment in recent decades: SF has grown increasingly respectable in many graduate schools, and new approaches are needed for master's theses, doctoral dissertations, and career-building papers. Many who write about Verne have had to duck the conventional wisdom and find new tacks. Unfortunately some of this rethinking has verged on the silly. Certain UK scholars, for instance, insist that Verne had no actual interest in science—somehow forgetting his hundreds of pages on the topics of chemistry, biology, astronomy, geology, paleontology, and meteorology, not to mention nautical and aeronautical engineering. And speaking of the latter, one American critic even claims that Verne's futuristic vehicles were already technically feasible when he wrote about them—ignoring, of course, the famous ones such as the space capsule in the moon novels, the supersub in 20,000 Leagues, the giant helicopter in Robur the Conquerer, the all-terrain walker in The Steam House, the mobile landmass in Propeller Island (1895), etc.


Even so, the old labeling of Verne as “Father of Science Fiction” has come in for backtalk. Of course the legitimacy of this title has always relied on what one means by “father” and “science fiction”: for example, a good case can be made for the genre's springing up in antiquity, in assorted creation myths or Plato's utopias. Once again it depends on how you define SF, both the science part and the fiction


part. * To illustrate: if the science has to be a recognizable discipline, if the fiction has to be genuine narrative prose, and if both have to deal with some visionary or speculative development, then a plausible candidate for first SF novel might be Verne's Journey to the Center of the Earth with its prehistoric monsters and time-travel motif. Or, if we raise the bar and the science has to be rigorously pragmatic and provable, then the palm might go to Verne's From the Earth to the Moon, the pioneering specimen of “hard” SF. But either way there's still a hitch. What about unknown competitors? Earlier works by obscure authors? Stories that fell through the cracks? Citing only French authors, Evans asserts (1988, 2) that there “were many writers of this brand of narrative who preceded [Verne] … and remain all but forgotten today.”


Finally, and pertinent to the above, it has become trendy in recent years (Mann, 8) to classify Mary Shelley's horror classic Frankenstein (1818) as “the first true SF novel.” This has been tempting for some Anglophile critics (Wolfe, xix): they can leave Verne out altogether and bookend the form's genesis with two Brits, Shelley and H. G. Wells, “the first real science fiction writers.” The snag is that Frankenstein itself flatly disagrees with this classification. Shelley's unique novel has been cherished for its seminal insights on human duality and the creator-creation relationship: there's virtually no recognizable science onstage in the body of the story, certainly not in the brief “workshop” sequence


where Victor Frankenstein fabricates his humanoid creature. Chapter


4 candidly refuses to tell the reader how he manages this: “that cannot be,” the text insists, and a leading British literary critic (Sutherland, 29) calls Shelley's writing here “a piece of magnificent Gothic fuzz.” Does Victor employ the arts of sorcery, alchemy, or surgery? There isn't a single specific. And that's because Shelley had minimal thematic interest in Victor's labwork; her novel would have proceeded along the same lines had he simply waved a magic wand.


This notion of Frankenstein as SF was first proposed by British novelist Brian Aldiss, who claims Shelley imbued her book (Aldiss, 23) with “new scientific ideas” but doesn't say where those ideas actually are in the story. This hasn't kept others from likewise calling the novel true SF. How so? Because (Clute and Nicholls, 1099) Victor builds a “mechanically sound body and shocks it into life.” Or because (Mann, 8) Shelley contributes “the added dimension of science” and the monster is “literally shocked into existence by electricity.”


The only problem is that nobody seems to have read Shelley's novel, at least not recently or carefully. They're confusing the story on the page with the story at the cinema. In the novel the monster is emphatically not shocked into life by electricity—that tidbit is from the 1931 Boris Karloff movie! So these folks are fixated on the films, Aldiss, for instance, repeatedly calling Victor “Baron Frankenstein,” even though the word “baron” doesn't occur even once in Shelley's text. As for Wolfe's skipping everybody between Frankenstein and H. G. Wells, he seems ignorant not just of Shelley but of several SF pioneers—not only Jules Verne but the Americans Poe and Perce, the Russian Mikhailov, the Rosny brothers in France, the time-traveling Twain, even the Britishers Rider Haggard and Conan Doyle, all of whom penned varieties of science fiction before Wells.


Sadly, all scholarship suffers when some participants play fast and loose, and you wonder if this instance is simply nationalistic vanity. Not content with claiming Shakespeare, Austen, and Chaucer, do some Brits also need to claim a first in science fiction? There are precedents for such obfuscating: in 1911–12 when the Norwegian Amundsen raced the Britisher Scott to the South Pole, Amundsen was the first to reach it by over a month. Yet, as a later historian noted (Huntford, 513), the “most astonishing manipulations of facts were performed in order to prove that the British had not been worsted…. English schoolchildren were taught that Scott discovered the South Pole.” If you can't win playing by the rules, rewrite the rules.






VERNE FOR AMERICANS






Whether or not Verne “fathered” the genre of science fiction, clearly he was the writer who first brought the form to world notice, the writer who first lionized science's achievements and possibilities, and —most crucially—the writer who first produced a body of science fiction. Alone among those early authors, he was more than a one-shot wonder, he was an actual career professional: in his lifetime he wrote eighteen SF novels, including half a dozen of the genre's best-known titles. As for their literary standing, one of his major modern successors (Asimov, xii) called Verne's science fiction “the first truly successful tales of this type.” And like Asimov himself, the Frenchman also produced a huge amount of engrossing and entertaining work in other genres: adventure, mystery, intrigue, even nonfiction.


Since Verne's era science fiction has come a good way. Yet in some respects science fact still hasn't caught up with him. Of the journeys in this volume, only Phileas Fogg's is realistic for today's readers— assuming they can budget the travel dollars. Two others, the moon shot and the Nautilus's underwater voyage, are theoretically possible but well out of reach for civilians. As for a trip to the earth's core, not in this lifetime. What's more, Verne raised other burning questions that have yet to be resolved: one biggie (p. 193) is the issue of “whether life exists on other worlds.” Astronomers haven't a definitive answer today any more than they had in 1865. Fiction, of course, has given thousands of answers … science none.


To read Jules Verne, then, is to go back to the basics, back to first causes, back to the sparkling source. It isn't surprising that he remains enormously popular around the globe, and even in our English-speaking world new translations and annotated editions of his books keep appearing, some of them titles never previously available in our language. New film versions keep premiering as well. His best-known books continue to thrive on high school reading lists.


Even so, his books can be a consumer challenge. Here in America Verne is for sale in so many adaptations and condensations: decent English renderings of the full-length originals are often tricky to come by. Why? In the 19th century (Taves and Micheluk, xi), “Verne's stories were rushed into publication—poorly translated, extensively abridged, and even censored for American and British readers.” Though improved translations have since entered the U.S. and UK markets, truncated and error-ridden versions of his most famous titles are still rampant.


The book in your hands is an effort to solve the problem. It's a handy omnibus volume of Verne's best-loved novels in new, accurate, communicative translations. These five classics are more than household words, they're joyous parts of our American heritage, from their films and Saturday morning cartoons to their connections with the U.S.S. Nautilus, the NASA space missions, and our other technological triumphs. And the USA itself is crucial to these novels: two have major American sequences, one divides its time between America and outer space, and still another takes place entirely in the U.S. So this volume is targeted to the American public: these are reader-friendly translations, translations complete down to the smallest substantive detail, translations that aim to convey the humor, theatricality, and scientific excitement this essay has been honoring.


For American purchasers, then, the texts convert metric figures to feet, miles, pounds, and other U.S. equivalents. The Americana, too, will be convincing for U.S. readers, sparing you the eye-rolling moments that can occur with overseas translators. In addition these new translations benefit not only from current Verne scholarship but from today's worldwide access to academic, institutional, and educational databases: it's possible to compare and cross-check multiple versions of the original French, and it's possible, too, to render the marine biology in 20,000 Leagues, the surface features in Circling the Moon, and the obscure locales on Phileas Fogg's itinerary with unprecedented clarity and accuracy.


Finally these translations work to suggest Verne's style and tone— the stealthy wit, irreverent prankishness, tale-spinning virtuosity, and showbiz flamboyance of one of literature's leading humorists and satirists. This is a Verne almost completely unknown to Americans … yet a Verne who has an uncannily American mindset.


Specialists, educators, and students are encouraged to consult the Textual Notes starting on p. 657: these pinpoint the policies, priorities, and textual decisions underlying the translations. In preparing this volume I've run up unpayable debts to a host of kindly individuals: my wife Barbara Ann Bryant for her boundless patience and support; leading SF novelist Jane Lindskold for her invaluable mentoring; Dr. Gary Dunham, SUNY Press's Executive Director, for his dedication to Jules Verne and good books in general; Laurie Searl, Senior Production Editor, for her gifts of ingenuity and diplomacy; Dr. Alan Hale, President of the Earthrise Institute, for help with the cosmology in From the Earth to the Moon; and Verne specialists Dr. William Butcher, Dr. Arthur B. Evans, Dennis Kytasaari, Dr. Julia Mastro, Andrew Rogulich, and Dr. Peter Schulman for help with matters too numerous to record. This volume wouldn't have been possible without their benevolent assistance, however all errors and shortcomings are my own.






REFERENCES






Aldiss, Brian. 1973. Billion year spree: The true history of science


fiction. New York: Doubleday.


Asimov, Isaac. 1966. Introduction. In A journey to the center of the


earth by Jules Verne. New York: Heritage.


Belloc, Marie A. 1895. Jules Verne at home. Strand Magazine 9


(February): 206–213. Full text online at


http://jv.gilead.org.il/belloc/


Butcher, William. 2006. Jules Verne: The definitive biography. New


York: Thunder's Mouth.


Clute, John, and Peter Nicholls, eds. 1993. The encyclopedia of


science fiction. New York: St. Martin's.


Evans, Arthur B. 1988. Jules Verne rediscovered: Didacticism and


the scientific novel. New York: Greenwood.


Evans, Arthur B. 2005. Jules Verne's English translations. Science


Fiction Studies 32 I (March) 80–104.


Huntford, Roland. 1986. The last place on earth. New York:


Atheneum.


Jules-Verne, Jean. 1976. Jules Verne: A biography. Translated and


adapted by Roger Greaves. New York: Taplinger.


Lottman, Herbert R. 1996. Jules Verne: An exploratory biography.


New York: St. Martins.


Mann, George, ed. 2001. The mammoth encyclopedia of science


fiction. New York: Car-roll & Graf.


Margot, Jean-Michel. 2005. Jules Verne: The successful, wealthy


playwright. Extraordinary Voyages 12 (October): 10–16. Miller, Walter James. 1995. The annotated Jules Verne: From the


earth to the moon. 2nd ed. New York: Gramercy.


Sutherland, John. 2000. The literary detective: 100 puzzles in classic


fiction. New York: Oxford.


Taves, Brian, and Stephen Michaluk, Jr. 1996. The Jules Verne


encyclopedia. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow.


Walter, Frederick Paul. 1999. Chronological disorder in The


Mysterious Island. Extraordinary Voyages 5 (July), 8–9


Walter, Frederick Paul. 2008. Jules Verne faces death. Extraordinary


Voyages 15 (Sept.), 1–5.


Wolfe, Gene. 2007. Introduction: Speak science fiction like an


earthling. In Brave new worlds: The Oxford dictionary of science fiction, ed. Jeff Prucher. New York: Oxford.










* American Vernian Frank Morlock has created English acting versions of these and other


scripts by Jules Verne. They're online at http://jv.gilead.org.il/works.html#plays (accessed November 3, 2009).


* The web page http://scifi.about.com/od/scififantasy101/a/SCIFI_defs.htm offers over fifty


definitions by critics and practitioners. Most insist on a dash of bona fide science (accessed November 3, 2009).










TEXTUAL NOTES










These English renderings adhere to the paragraphing in the original French texts and are complete down to the smallest substantive detail. I've used the Livre de Poche red-cover reissues as working editions, but since no editions seem entirely free of typos and production slips, I've double-checked the LdP reprints against the many available online texts as well as early Hetzel and Hachette editions.


My translations are intended for the U.S. public. Consequently I've worked to create English texts that are both faithful and communicative—faithful in mirroring the effect and apparent intent of the original French, communicative in their overall wording, in their efforts to suggest Verne's comic and narrative styles, and in their presentation of period, cultural, and specialized detail. Where the original French texts refer to people, places, things, or concepts that may be obscure to a 21st century American, I've sometimes attached a footnote or incorporated a quick gloss in the text proper. My footnotes are labeled Translator's note. All others are from the French editions.


As for rendering proper names, the translations favor spellings in regular use today; modern usages are likewise favored for geographical designations except where this could create an obtrusive anachronism. Where helpful equivalents aren't certain, I've kept the versions in the original French. For American readers my translations also convert metric figures to feet, miles, pounds, and other U.S. equivalents: in the process I've attempted to approximate the effect of the French—where Verne works with round numbers, I have too; where Verne's numbers are specific, I've sought their close equivalents. Metric tons in the French are converted to short tons in the English, Celsius readings to Fahrenheit. To insure accuracy I've used two conversion instruments:


http://www.convertit.com/Go/ConvertIt/Measurement/Converter. ASP, double-checked against


http://www.sciencemadesimple.com/conversions.html.


Among other figures found in the French, there are many references to the league, a unit of measurement that seems surprisingly dicey, its sense fluctuating from place to place and period to period. The most frequent allusions are to the “geographic league,” which equals 4 kilometers, or 2.484 statute miles, and which my translations often round up to 2½ miles. Sometimes, too, the original texts favor slightly lower equivalences for no stated reason: Chapter 7 of From the Earth to the Moon, for instance, features an aerial league that works out to about 2⅓miles; in chapters 11 and 12 of A Journey to the Center of the Earth, Lidenbrock's league seems to equal about 1⅓miles. Otherwise Verne's best-known league citations are in the title and text of Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea: his “nautical league” also rounds up to 2½ statute miles but remains unconverted in my rendering of this novel.


As for currency, I generally convert francs into U.S. money using a rough rate of 5 francs = $1.00, a rate consistent through most of the 19th century according to Gold and Silver Standards at


http://www.cyberussr.com/hcunn/gold-std.html. I generally convert pounds sterling at a rough rate of £1 = $5.00. The purchasing power of one 19th century dollar seems to have been equal to around twenty modern dollars.


A final point. As mentioned on p. 10, “the USA itself is crucial to these novels,” so American mores and folkways often figure prominently. At times, then, the French texts add footnotes for the purpose of explaining Anglo-American usages and customs to Gallic readers. Even where an American doesn't require such explanations, I've kept them for the sake of completeness but have shifted them to these endnotes. And I've made additional shifts of this sort in instances where foreign moneys are converted to French currency in the original texts but to U.S. currency in my translations.


Of course scholars and specialists will need to concentrate on the French originals, which, fortunately, are available these days at many websites. Even so, I hope these endnotes will interest both the educator and the general reader.






AROUND THE MOON






First published as Autour de la Lune in the Journal des débats, November–December 1869.


The translation makes the following adjustments where the French editions appear to contain production errors or other problematic details.


Item: Note:






1,100 geographic 4,500 leagues in French texts (here leagues and in From the Earth to the Moon,


Ch. 28); apparently Verne meant


kilometers.






v to the second power French texts give v zero to the


second power.






Meanwhile tell me this, Ardan's line, per the MS at the Barbicane—do you think Bibliothèque municipale de Nantes; in


the moon was once a French editions it's a separate line comet?” from an unidentified speaker.






December 5 November 5 in French texts.






fifteen feet per hour French texts add an equivalent per


second: one 590,000th of a line.






75 on the surface of the French texts give the equivalent of moon 66.






410 miles per hour French texts give the equivalent of


425.


Earl of Rosse John Ross in French texts.






27,000 feet The French equivalent is closer to


29,000 feet, which conflicts with p.


291 and Ch. 5 of From the Earth to the Moon.






six o'clock in the morning five o'clock in French texts.






below -38° Fahrenheit French texts give the equivalent of


-43.6°.






thirty miles up It's nearer forty miles in the French—


which disagrees with pp. 278 and


280.






audible outside audible inside, according to French


texts.






coast of Mexico New Mexico in French texts.






10,000 feet French texts give the equivalent of


12,000.






latitude 27° 7' north French texts give 20° 7'.






cousin Blomsberry Brother Blomsberry in the French,


though the Blomsberrys are called


first cousins in Ch. 20.






Captain Blomsberry French texts call him commander


twice here.






New Hampshire French texts give New Brunswick.


TRANSLATOR'S NOTES










1 Translator's note. In this case “irradiation” refers to the optical illusion where a bright


object seems bigger when viewed against a dark background.


2 Translator's note. Félix Nadar (1820–1910) was Verne's model for Michel Ardan, whose


last name is an anagram of “Nadar.”


3 Translator's note. Diana, sister of Apollo.


4 Translator's note. View of an object projected onto a drawing surface.


5 It's understood, of course, that this word “seas” refers to those huge areas that most


likely were underwater in the past but today are only wide plains.


6 Translator's note. Parisian theater district.


7 As a matter of fact, Herschel has verified that a satellite's spinning motion on its axis is


always equal to its revolving motion around the planet. Consequently it always shows the same face. Only the planet Uranus offers a pretty distinct difference: its moons move almost at right angles to the paths of their orbits, plus they move in re- verse, in other words, these satellites head in the opposite direction of other heavenly bodies in the solar system.


8 The earth moves along its ecliptic at an average speed of only 18½ miles per second.


9 Right at longitude 119° 55′ west of the meridian of Paris.


10 Translator's note. Latin: “with their own eyes.”










RECOMMENDED READING










OTHER BOOKS BY VERNE IN MODERN TRANSLATIONS






Adventures of Captain Hatteras, The. 2005. Translated by William


Butcher. New York: Oxford.


Conquest of the North Pole four decades before Peary.


Backwards to Britain. 1992. Translated by Janice Valls-Russell.


Edinburgh: Chambers.


Chatty but hard-hitting UK travelogue that took 130 years to


reach print.


Begum's millions, The. 2005. Translated by Stanford L. Luce.


Middletown, CT: Wesleyan.


Grimly prophetic tale of German armament building and


military aggression.


Fantasy of Dr. Ox, A. 2003. Translated by Andrew Brown. London:


Hesperus.


Comic SF novella featuring behavior modification of an entire


town.


Fur country, The. 1987. Translated by Edward Baxter. Toronto: NC


Press.


Scientific thriller where a polar expedition goes badly astray.


Golden volcano, The. 2008. Translated by Edward Baxter. Lincoln:


University of Nebraska.


Adventure tale set in the Yukon during the gold rush era.


Green ray, The. 2009. Translated by Karen Loukes. Edinburgh:


Luath.


Highland romance inspired by Verne's own travels in the


Hebrides.


Invasion of the sea. 2001. Translated by Edward Baxter. Middletown,


CT: Wesleyan.


Techno thriller about creating an inland sea in the Sahara


desert.


Journey through the impossible. 2003. Translated by Edward Baxter.


Amherst, NY:


Prometheus.


Three-act play on SF and fantasy themes drawn from Verne's


bestsellers.


Kip brothers, The. 2007. Translated by Stanford L. Luce. Middletown,


CT: Wesleyan.


Scientific crime thriller about murder in the South Seas.


Lighthouse at the end of the world. 2007. Translated by William


Butcher. Lincoln: University


of Nebraska.


Duel to the death on the lowermost crags of South America.


Meteor hunt, The. 2006. Translated by Frederick Paul Walter and


Walter James Miller.


Lincoln: University of Nebraska.


Comic SF tale in which U.S. astronomers feud over a mind-


boggling meteor.


Mighty Orinoco, The. 2002. Translated by Stanford L. Luce.


Middletown, CT: Wesleyan.


Jungle adventure thriller about searching for the Orinoco's


headwaters.


Mysterious island, The. 2001. Translated by Jordan Stump. New


York: Modern Library.


Masterful desert-island yarn complete with do-it-yourself


science.


Paris in the twentieth century. 1996. Translated by Richard Howard.


New York: Random.


“Long lost” character novel featuring future developments in


the City of Light.


Underground city, The. 2005. Translated by Sarah Crozier.


Edinburgh: Luath.


Spooky, mystical thriller set in a Scottish coal mine; aka The


Black Indies.






NOTABLE MODERN BOOKS ABOUT VERNE






Butcher, William. 2006. Jules Verne: The definitive biography. New


York: Thunder's Mouth.


Gorgeously written and full of valuable new detail, though no


Verne biography can be literally “definitive” till more is known about his love life.


Chesneaux, Jean. 1972. The political and social ideas of Jules


Verne. Translated by Thomas Wikely. London: Thames and Hudson.


Near-classic investigation of an important side of Verne little


known to Americans.


Evans, Arthur B. 1988. Jules Verne rediscovered: Didacticism and


the scientific novel. New York: Greenwood.


Lively exploration of educational strategies and gimmicks in


Verne's fiction.


Jules-Verne, Jean. 1976. Jules Verne: A biography. Translated and


adapted by Roger Greaves. New York: Taplinger.


Indispensable biography by Verne's grandson.


Lottman, Herbert R. 1996. Jules Verne: An exploratory biography.


New York: St. Martins.


Controversial modern biography, but tightly researched and


highly readable.


Martin, Andrew. 1990. The mask of the prophet: The extraordinary


fictions of Jules Verne. New York: Oxford.


Examines mythic archetypes and symbols in Verne's fiction.


Saint-Bris, Gonzague. 2006. The world of Jules Verne. Translated by


Helen Marx. New York: Mars.


Colorfully illustrated celebration of Verne for the general


reader.


Taves, Brian, and Stephen Michaluk, Jr. 1996. The Jules Verne


encyclopedia. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow.


Miscellany that's fun to browse; invaluable for its listings and


descriptions of early English editions.










Published by




State University of New York Press, Albany


Translations and critical materials


© 2010 by Frederick Paul Walter


All rights reserved


Printed in the United States of America


No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written


permission. No part of this book may be stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any


form or by any means including electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical,


photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior permission in writing of the


publisher.


For information, contact


State University of New York Press, Albany, NY


www.sunypress.edu


Production, Laurie Searl


Marketing, Fran Keneston


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data


Verne, Jules, 1828–1905.


[Novels. English. Selections]


Amazing journeys : five visionary classics /


in new, complete translations by Frederick Paul Walter.


p. cm.


Includes bibliographical references.


ISBN 978-1-4384-3238-0 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Verne, Jules, 1828–1905—Translations into


English. 2. Science fiction, French—Translations into English. I. Walter, Frederick Paul. II.


Verne, Jules, 1828–1905. Voyage au centre de la terre. English III. Verne, Jules, 1828–


1905. De la terre à la lune. English IV. Verne, Jules, 1828–1905. Autour de la lune. English


V. Verne, Jules, 1828–1905. Vingt mille lieues sous les mers. English VI. Verne, Jules,


1828–1905. Tour du monde en quatre-vingts jours. English VII. Title.


PQ2469.A2 2010


843’.8—dc22


2009040087