Pierre Boulle


PLANET
OF THE
APES




 Translated by Xan
 Fielding






SIGNET Science Fiction Books You Will Enjoy


A SIGNET BOOK
PLANET
OF THE
APES


part one
This is an authorized reprint of a hardcover edition published by Vanguard Press, Inc.




     BTONBT TBADBMARK RHG. U.B. PAT. OFr. AND FOREIGN OOUNTKIHS BHGISTEBBD TBADBMARK——MAECA BBOI3IHADA EECHO BN


     CHICAGO, U.S.A.






SIGNET, SIGNET CLASSICS, MENTOR, PLUME AND MERIDIAN BOOKS




are published by The New American Library, Inc.,




1301 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York 10019




FIRST PRINTING, NOVEMBER, 1964




        21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28




PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA








CHAPTER ONE




Jinn and Phyllis were spending a wonderful holiday, in space, as far away as
possible from the inhabited stars.




  In those days interplanetary voyages were an everyday occurrence, and
interstellar travel not uncommon. Rockets took tourists to the wondrous
sites of Sirius, or financiers to the famous stock exchanges of Arcturus and
Aldebaran. But Jinn and Phyllis, a wealthy leisured couple, were
distinguished in their cosmos for their originality and a few grains of
poetry. They wandered over the universe for their pleasure —by sail.
  Their ship was a sort of sphere with an envelope—the sail—which was
miraculously fine and light and moved through space propelled by the
pressure of light-radiation. Such a machine, left to its own devices in the
vicinity of a star (though far enough away for the field of gravity not to be
too powerful), will always move in a straight line in the opposite direction
to the star; but since Jinn and Phyllis' stellar system contained three suns
that were relatively close to one another, their vessel received rays of light
along three different axes. Jinn had therefore conceived an extremely
ingenious method of steering. His sail was lined inside with a series of
black blinds that he could roll up or unroll at will, thus changing the effect
of the light-pressure by modifying the reflecting power of certain sections.






  Furthermore, this elastic envelope could be stretched or contracted as the
navigator pleased. Thus, when Jinn wanted to increase his speed, he gave it
the biggest diameter possible. It would then take the blasts of radiation on
an enormous surface and the vessel would hurtle through space at a furious
velocity, which made his mate Phyllis quite dizzy. He would also be
overcome by vertigo, and they would then cling passionately to each other,
their gaze fixed on the mysterious and distant depths to which their flight
propelled them. When, on the other hand, they wanted to slow down, Jinn
pressed a button. The sail would shrink until it became a sphere just big
enough to contain them both, packed tightly together. The effect of the light
became negligible, and this minute bubble, reduced to nothing more than its
own inertia, seemed motionless, as though suspended in the void by an
invisible thread. The young couple would spend rapturous idle hours in this
reduced universe, erected on their own scale and for them alone, which Jinn
compared to a becalmed sailing ship and Phyllis to the air bubble of the sea
spider.






  Jinn knew a number of other tricks, considered as the height of art by
sailing cosmonauts: for example, making use of the shadows of the planets
and certain satellites in order to change course. He imparted this skill to
Phyllis, who was now almost as accomplished as he himself and often more
daring. When she held the tiller, she would sometimes fire a broadside that
swept them right to the borders of the stellar system, heedless of the resulting
magnetic storm, which would start to upset the light-rays and to shake their
skiff like a cockleshell. On two or three occasions, waked up with a start by
the tempest, Jinn had had quite a struggle snatching the tiller from her and,
in order to run for shelter as quickly as possible, starting the auxiliary
rocket, which they made it a point of honor never to use except in case of
danger.


  One day Jinn and Phyllis were lying side by side in the middle of their
spacecraft without a care in the world, making the most of their holiday by
exposing themselves to the rays of their three suns. Eyes closed, Jinn was
thinking only of his love for Phyllis. Phyllis lay stretched out on her side,
gazing at the immensity of the universe and letting herself be hypnotized,
as she often did, by the cosmic sensation of the void.




All of a sudden she came out of her trance, wrinkled her brow, and sat up.
An unusual flash of light had streaked across this void. She waited a few
seconds and saw a second flash, like a ray being reflected off a shiny object.
The cosmic sense she had acquired in the course of these cruises could not
deceive her. Moreover, Jinn, when it was pointed out to him, agreed with
her, and it was inconceivable that he should make a mistake in this matter: a
body sparkling in the light was floating through space, at a distance they
could not yet assess. Jinn picked up a pair of binoculars and focused them
on the mysterious object, while Phyllis leaned on his shoulder.






   "It's not a very big object," he said. "It seems to be made of glass. . . . No,
let me look. It's drawing closer. It's going faster than we are. It looks like . .
."






 A puzzled expression came into his eyes. He lowered the binoculars,
 which she at once snatched up.


 "It's a bottle, darling." "A bottle!" She looked at it, in turn.
  "Yes, it's a bottle. I can see it quite clearly. It's made of light-colored glass.
It's corked; I can see the seal. There's something white inside that looks like
paper"—a message, obviously. Jinn, we've got to get hold of it!"






  Jinn was of the same opinion and had already embarked on some skillful
maneuvers to place the sphere on the trajectory of the unusual body. He
soon succeeded and then reduced his own speed to enable it to catch up
with him. Meanwhile Phyllis donned her diving suit and made her way out
of the sail by the double trapdoor. There, holding onto a rope with one hand
and brandishing a long-handled scoop in the other, she stood in readiness to
retrieve the bottle.






It was not the first time they" had come across strange bodies, and the
scoop had already been in use. Sailing at low speed, sometimes completely
motionless, they had enjoyed surprises and made discoveries that were
precluded to travelers by rocket. In her net Phyllis had already gathered up
remnants of pulverized planets, fragments of meteorites that had come from
the depths of the universe, and pieces of satellites launched at the outset of
the conquest of space. She was very proud of her collection; but this was the
first time they had come across a bottle, and a bottle containing a message
—of that she was certain. She trembled from head to foot with impatience,
gesticulating like a spider on the end of its thread as-she shouted down the
telephone to her companion:






"Slower, Jinn. . . . No, a bit faster than that, it's going to pass us. . . .
Starboard. . . . Now hard to port. . . . Hold it. . . . I've got it!"






She gave a triumphant cry and came back inside with her trophy
It was a largish bottle and its neck had been carefully sealed. A roll of
paper could be seen inside.






"Jinn, break it open, hurry up!" Phyllis begged, stamping her foot.






  Less impatient, Jinn methodically chipped off the sealing wax. But when
the bottle was thus opened, he saw that the paper was stuck fast and could
not be shaken out. He therefore yielded to his mate's entreaties and smashed
the glass with a hammer. The paper unrolled of its own accord. It consisted
of a large number of very thin sheets, covered with tiny handwriting. The
message was written in the language of the Earth, which Jinn knew
perfectly, having been partly educated on that planet.






 An uncomfortable feeling, however, restrained him from starting to read a
document that had fallen into their bands in such an incongruous manner;
but Phyllis' state of excitement decided him. She was not so well
acquainted with the language of the Earth and needed his help.




 "Jinn, please!"






 He reduced the volume of the sphere so that it floated idly in space, made
sure that there was no obstacle in front of them, then lay down beside his
companion and began to read the manuscript.




CHAPTER TWO
I am confiding this manuscript to space, not with the intention of saving myself,
but to help, perhaps, to avert the appalling scourge that is menacing the human
race. Lord have pity onus! . . .


 "The human race?" Phyllis exclaimed, stressing the second word in her
astonishment.


  "That's what it says here," Jinn assured her. "Don't start off by interrupting
me." And he went on with his reading.
  As for me, Ulysse Merou, I have set off again with my family in the
spaceship. We can keep going for several years. We grow vegetables and
fruit on board and have a poultry run. We lack nothing. One day perhaps we
shall come across a friendly planet. This is a hope I hardly dare express.
But here, faithfully reported, is the account of my adventure.


 It was in the year 2500 that I embarked with two companions in the
cosmic ship, with the intention of reaching the region of space where the
super gigantic star Betelgeuse reigns supreme.




  It was an ambitious project, the most ambitious that had ever been
conceived on Earth. Betelgeuse—or Alpha Orionis, as our astronomers
called it—is about three hundred light-years distant from our planet. It is
remarkable for a number of things. First, its size: its diameter is three or
four hundred times greater than that of our sun; hi other words, if its center
were placed where the sun's center lies, this monster would extend to
within the orbit of Mars. Second, its brilliance: it is a star of first
magnitude, the brightest in the constellation of Orion, visible on Earth to
the naked eye hi spite of its distance. Third, the nature of its rays: it emits
red and orange lights, creating a most magnificent effect. Finally, it is a
heavenly body with a variable glow: its luminosity varies with the seasons,
this being caused by the alterations in its diameter. Betelgeuse is a
palpitating star.
Why, after the exploration of the solar system, all the planets of which are
inhabited, why was such a distant star chosen as the target for the first
interstellar flight? It was the learned Professor Antelle who made this
decision. The principal organizer of the enterprise, to which he devoted the
whole of his enormous fortune, the leader of our expedition, he himself had
conceived the spaceship and directed its construction. He told me the reason
for his choice during the voyage.




  "My dear Ulysse," he said, "it is not much harder, and it would scarcely
take any longer, for us to reach Betelgeuse than a much closer star: Proxima
Centauris, for example."


  At this I saw fit to protest and draw his attention to some recently
ascertained astronomical data:


 "Scarcely take any longer! But Proxima Centauris is only four light-years
away, whereas Betelgeuse . . ."


  "Is three hundred, I'm well aware of that. But we shall take scarcely more
than two years to reach it, while we should have needed almost as much
time to arrive in the region of Proxima Centauris. You don't believe it
because you are accustomed to mere flea hops on our planets, for which a
powerful acceleration is permissible at the start because it lasts no more
than a few minutes, the cruising speed to be reached being ridiculously low
and not to be compared with ours. . . . It is time I gave you a few details as
to how our ship works.


  "Thanks to its perfected rockets, which I had the honor of designing, this
craft can move at the highest speed imaginable in the universe for a material
body—that is to say, the speed of light minus epsilon."




  "Minus epsilon?"
  "I mean it can approach it to within an infinitesimal degree: to within a
thousand-millionth, if you care to put it that way."




   "Good," I said. "I can understand that"






  "What you must also realize is that while we are moving at this speed, our
time diverges perceptibly from time on Earth, the divergence being greater
the faster we move. At this very moment, since we started this
conversation, we have lived several minutes, which correspond to a passage of
several months on our planet. At top speed, time will almost stand still for us, but of course we shall not be aware of this. A few
seconds for you and me, a few heartbeats, will coincide with a passage of several years on Earth."








"I can understand that, too. In fact, that is the reason why we can hope to reach our destination before dying. But in that case, why
a voyage of two years? Why not only a few days or a few hours?"








"I was just coming to that. Quite simply because, to reach the speed at which time almost stands still, with an acceleration
acceptable to our organisms, we need about a year. A further year will be necessary to reduce our speed. Now do you understand our
flight plan? Twelve months of acceleration; twelve months of reducing speed; between the two, only a few hours, during which we
shall cover the main part of the journey. And at the same time you will understand why it scarcely takes any longer to travel to
Betelgeuse than to Proxima Centauri. In the latter case we should have to go through the same indispensable year of acceleration, the
same year of deceleration, and perhaps a few minutes instead of a few hours between the two. The overall difference is insignificant.
As I'm getting on in years and will probably never be able to make another crossing, I preferred to aim at a distant point straight
away, in the hope of finding a world very different from our own."








This sort of conversation occupied our leisure hours on board and at the same time made me appreciate Professor Antelle's prodigious
skill all the more. There was no field he had not explored, and I was pleased to have a leader like him on such a hazardous
enterprise. As he had foreseen, the voyage lasted about two years of our time, during which three and a half centuries must have
elapsed on Earth. That was the only snag about aiming so far into the distance: if we came back one day we should find our planet
older by seven or eight hundred years. But we did not care. I even felt that the prospect of escaping from his contemporaries was
an added attraction to the professor. He often admitted he was tired of his fellow men. . . .








   "Men!" Phyllis again exclaimed.


   "Yes, men," Jinn asserted. "Thafs what it says."






  There was no serious incident on the flight. We had started from the Moon. Earth and its planets quickly disappeared. We had
seen the sun shrink till it was nothing but an orange in the sky, then a plum, and finally a point of light without dimensions, a
simple star that only the professor's skill could distinguish from the millions of other stars in the galaxy.








  We thus lived without sun, but were none the worse for this, the craft being equipped with equivalent sources of light Nor were
we bored. The professor's conversation was fascinating; I learned more during those two years than I had learned in all my
previous existence. I also learned all that one needed to know in order to guide the spacecraft. It was fairly easy: one merely gave
instructions to some electronic devices, which made all the calculations and directly initiated the maneuvers.








  Our garden provided an agreeable distraction. It occupied an important place on board. Professor Antelle, who was interested,
among other subjects, in botany and agriculture, had planned to take advantage of the voyage to check certain of his theories on the
growth of plants in space. A cubic compartment with sides about thirty feet long served as a plot. Thanks to some trays, the whole
of its volume was put to use. The earth was regenerated by means of chemical fertilizers and, scarcely more than two months after
our departure, we had the pleasure of seeing it produce all sorts of vegetables, which provided us with an abundance of healthy
food. Food for the eye, too, had not been forgotten: one section was reserved for flowers, which the professor tended lovingly.
This eccentric had also brought some birds, butterflies, and even a monkey, a little chimpanzee whom we had christened Hector and
who amused us with his tricks.








It is certain that the learned Antelle, without being a misanthrope, was not interested at all in human beings. He would often
declare that he did not expect much from them any more, and this probably explains . . .








   "Misanthrope?" Phyllis again broke in, dumfounded. "Human beings?"
"If you keep interrupting me every other second," said Jinn, "we shall
never get to the end. Do as I do: try to understand."
 Phylus promised to keep quiet till the end of the reading, and she kept her
promise.




  This probably explains why he had collected in the craft—which was big enough to accommodate several families countless vegetable
species and some animals, while limiting the number of the passengers to three: himself; his disciple Arthur Levain, a young physician
                                                 met the professor as a result
with a great future; and myself, Ulysse Merou, a little-known journalist who had
of an interview. He had suggested taking me with him after learning that I
had no family and played chess reasonably well. This was an outstanding
opportunity for a young journalist. Even if my story was not to be published
for eight hundred years, perhaps for that very reason it would have unusual
value. I had accepted with enthusiasm.






The voyage thus occurred without a setback. The only physical
inconvenience was a sensation of heaviness during the year of acceleration
and the one of reducing speed. We had to get used to feeling our bodies
weigh one and a half times their weight on Earth, a somewhat tiring
phenomenon to begin with, but to which we soon paid no attention.
Between those two periods there was a complete absence of gravity, with all
the oddities accruing from this phenomenon; but that lasted only a few hours
and we were none the worse for it.






And one day, after this long crossing, we had the dazzling experience of
seeing the star Betelgeuse appear in the sky in a new guise.






CHAPTER THREE


The feeling of awe produced by such a sight cannot be described: a star,
which only yesterday was a brilliant speck among the multitude of
anonymous specks in the firmament, showed up more and more clearly
against the black background, assumed a dimension in space, appearing first
of all as a sparkling nut, then swelled in size, at the same time becoming
more definite in color, so that it resembled an orange, and finally fell into
place in the cosmos with the same apparent diameter as our own familiar
daytime star. A new sun was born for us, a reddish sun, like ours when it
sets, the attraction and warmth of which we could already feel.


Our speed was then very much reduced. We drew still closer to Betelguese,
until its apparent diameter far exceeded that of all the heavenly bodies
hitherto seen, which made a tremendous impression on us. Antelle gave some
instructions to the robots and we started gravitating around the super gjant.
Then the scientist took out his astronomical instruments and began his
observations.






  It was not long before he discovered the existence of four planets whose
dimensions he rapidly determined, together with their distances from the
central star. One of these, two away from Betelguese, was moving on a
trajectory parallel to ours. It was about the same size as Earth; it possessed
an atmosphere containing oxygen and nitrogen; it revolved around
Betelguese at a distance equivalent to thirty times the space between the
Sun and Earth, receiving a radiation comparable to that received by our
planet, thanks to the size of the super gjant combined with its relatively low
temperature.




We decided to make it our first objective. After fresh instructions were
given to the robots, our craft was quickly put into orbit around it. Then,
with engines switched off, we observed this new world at our leisure. The
telescope revealed its oceans and continents.






 The craft was not equipped for a landing, but this eventuality had been
provided for. We had at our disposal three much smaller rocket machines,
which we called launches. It was in one of these that we embarked, taking
with us some measuring instruments and Hector, the chimpanzee, who was
equipped as we were with a diving suit and had been trained in its use. As
for our ship, we simply let it revolve around the planet. It was safer there
than a liner lying at anchor in a harbor, and we knew it would not drift an
inch from its orbit.




Landing on a planet of this kind was an easy operation with our launch. As
soon as we had penetrated the thick layers of the atmosphere, Professor
Antelle took some samples of the outside air and analyzed them. He found
they had the same composition as the air on Earth at a similar altitude. I
hardly had time to ponder on this miraculous coincidence, for the ground
was approaching rapidly; we were no more than fifty miles or so above it.
Since the robots carried out every maneuver, I had nothing to do but press
my face to the porthole and watch this unknown world rising toward me,
my brain reeling with the excitement of discovery.






  The planet bore a strange resemblance to Earth. This impression became
clearer every second. I could now discern the outline of the continents with
my naked eye. The atmosphere was bright, slightly tinged with a pale green
color verging from time to time on yellow, rather like our sky in Provence
at sunset. The ocean was light blue, also with green tinges. The form of the
coastline was very different from anything I had seen at home, though my
feverish eye, conditioned by so many analogies, insisted wildly on
discerning similarities even there. But there the resemblance ended.
Nothing in the planet's topography recalled either our Old or New Worlds.






  Nothing? Come now! On the contrary, the essential factor! The planet was
inhabited. We flew over a town: a fairly big town, from which roads
radiated, bordered with trees and with vehicles moving along them. I had
time to make out the general architecture: broad streets and white houses
with long straight lines.
  But we were to land a long way farther off. Our flight swept us first over
cultivated fields, then over a thick russet-colored forest that called to mind
our equatorial jungle. We were now at a very low altitude. We caught sight
of a fairly large clearing occupying the top of a plateau, the ground all
around it being rather broken. Our leader decided to attempt a landing there
and gave his last orders to the robots. A system of retrorockets came into
action. We hovered motionless for a moment or two above the clearing, like
a gull spotting a fish.






Then, two years after leaving our Earth, we came down gently and landed
without a jolt in the middle of the plateau, on green grass reminiscent of our
meadows in Normandy.






CHAPTER FOUR
We were silent and motionless for quite a time after making contact with
the ground. Perhaps this behavior will seem surprising, but we felt the need
to recover our wits and concentrate our energy. We were launched on an
adventure a thousand times more extraordinary than that of the first
terrestrial navigators and were preparing ourselves to confront the wonders
of interstellar travel that have fired the imaginations of several generations of
poets.
  For the moment, talking of wonders, we had landed without a hitch on the
grass of a planet that contained, as ours did, oceans, mountains, forests,
cultivated fields, towns, and certainly inhabitants. Yet we must have been
fairly far from the civilized regions, considering the stretch of jungle over
which we had flown before touching down.




  We eventually came out of our daydream. Having donned our diving suits,
we carefully opened one porthole of the launch. There was no hiss of ^air.
The pressures inside and outside were the same. The forest surrounded the
clearing like the walls of a fortress. Not a sound, not a movement disturbed
it. The temperature was high but bearable: about seventy-seven degrees
Fahrenheit.






We climbed out of the launch, accompanied by Hector. Professor Antelle
insisted first of all on analyzing the atmosphere by a more precise method.
The result was encouraging: the air had the same composition as the Earth's,
in spite of some differences in the proportion of the rare gases. It was
undoubtedly breathable. Yet, to make doubly sure, we tried it out first on
our chimpanzee. Rid of his suit, the monkey appeared perfectly happy and
in no way inconvenienced. He seemed overjoyed to find himself free and on
land. After a few skips and jumps, he scampered off to the forest, sprang
into a tree, and continued his capering in the branches. He drew farther away
and finally disappeared, ignoring our gestures and shouts.






  Then, shedding our own space suits, we were able to talk easily. We were
startled by the sound of our voices, and ventured only timidly to take a step
or two without moving too far from our launch.




There was no doubt that we were on a twin planet of our Earth. Life existed.
The vegetable realm was, in fact, particularly lush: some of these trees must
have been over a hundred and fifty feet tall. The animal kingdom soon
appeared in the form of some big black birds, hovering in the sky like
vultures, and other smaller ones, rather like parakeets, that chased one
another chirping shrilly. From what we had seen before landing, we knew
that a civilization existed, too. Rational beings—we dared not call them
men yet—had molded the face of the planet. Yet the forest all around us
appeared to be uninhabited. This was scarcely surprising; landing at random
in some corner of the Asiatic jungle, we should have had the same impression
of solitude.
Before taking a further step, we felt it was urgent to give the planet a
name. We christened it Soror, because of its resemblance to our Earth.




  Deciding to make an initial reconnaissance without delay, we entered the
forest, following a sort of natural path. Arthur Levain and I were armed
with carbines. As for the professor, he scorned material weapons. We felt
light-footed and walked briskly: not that our weight was less than on Earth
—there again the similarity was complete—but the contrast with the ship's
force of gravity prompted us to scamper along like young goats.






We were marching hi single file, calling out every now and then to Hector,
but with no success, when young Levain, who was leading, stopped and
motioned us to listen. A murmur, like running water, could be heard in the
distance. We made our way in that direction and the sound became clearer.






  It was a waterfall. On coming to it, all three of us were moved by the
beauty of the site. A stream of water, clear as our mountain torrents, twisted
above our heads, spread out into a sheet on a ledge of level ground, and feE
at our feet from a height of several yards into a sort of lake, a natural
swimming pool fringed with rocks mingled with sand, the surface of which
reflected the light of Betelguese, which was then at its zenith.






The sight of this water was so tempting that the same urge seized both
Levain and me. The heat was now intense. We took off our clothes and got
ready to dive into the lake. But Professor Antelle cautioned us to behave with
a little more prudence when coming up against the system of Betelguese for
the first time. Perhaps this liquid was not water at all and might be extremely
dangerous. He went up to the edge of it, bent down, examined it, then
cautiously touched it with his finger. Finally he scooped a little up in the
palm of his hand, smelled it, and wetted the end of his tongue with it.
"It can't be anything but water," he muttered.






 He bent down again to plunge his hand into the lake, when we saw him
suddenly stiffen. He gave an exclamation of surprise and pointed toward
something he had just discerned in the sand. I experienced, I believe, the
most violent emotion of my life. There, beneath the scorching rays of
Betelgeuse that filled the sky above our heads like an enormous red balloon,
visible to all of us and admirably outlined on a little patch of damp sand,
was the print of a human foot.




CHAPTER FIVE
"It's a woman's foot," Arthur Levain declared.
  This peremptory remark, made in a strangled voice, did not surprise me at
all. It confirmed my own opinion. The slimness, the elegance, the singular
beauty of the footprint had disturbed me profoundly. There could be no doubt
as to the humanness of the foot. Perhaps it belonged to an adolescent or to a
small man, but with much more likelihood—and this I hoped with all my heart
—to a woman.


  "So Soror is inhabited by humans," Professor Antelle murmured.




  There was a hint of disappointment in his voice, which made me at that
moment less well disposed toward him. He shrugged his shoulders with a
gesture that was habitual with him and joined us in inspecting the sand
around the lake. We discovered other footprints, obviously left by the same
creature. Levain, who had moved away from the water's edge, drew our
attention to one on the dry sand. The print itself was still damp.






"She was here less than five minutes ago," the young man exclaimed. 4,
"She was swimming, heard us coming, and fled."
  It had become an implicit fact for us that the subject under discussion was
a woman. We fell silent, scanning the forest, but without hearing so much
as the noise of a branch breaking.






"We've got all the time in the world," said the professor, shrugging his
shoulders again. "But if a human being swam here, we could no doubt do the
same without any danger."






  Without further ado the learned scientist shed his clothes and plunged his
skinny body into the pool. After our long voyage the pleasure of this swim
in cool, delicious water made us almost forget our recent discovery. Levain
alone seemed harassed and lost in thought. I was about to make a taunting
remark about his melancholy expression when I saw the woman just above
us, perched on the rocky ledge from which the cascade fell.






  I shall never forget the impression her appearance made on me. I held my
breath at the marvelous beauty of this creature from Soror, who revealed
herself to us dripping with spray, illuminated by the blood-red beams of
Betelgeuse. It was a woman—a young girl, rather, unless it was a goddess.
She boldly asserted her femininity in the light of this monstrous sun,
completely naked and without any ornament other than her hair, which
hung down to her shoulders. True, we had been deprived of any point of
comparison for over two years, but none of us was inclined to fall a victim
to mirages. It was plain to see that the woman, who stood motionless on the
ledge like a statue on a pedestal, possessed the most perfect body that could
be conceived on Earth. Levain and I were breathless, lost hi admiration, and
I think even Professor Antelle was moved.
  Standing upright, leaning forward, her breasts thrust out toward us, her
arms raised slightly backward in the attitude of a diver taking off, she was
watching us, and her surprise clearly equaled our own. After gazing at her
for a long time, I was so dazzled that I could not discern any particular
feature: her body as a whole hypnotized me. It was only after several
minutes that I saw she belonged to the white race, that her skin was golden
rather than bronzed, that she was tall, but not excessively so, and slender.
Then I noticed, as though in a dream, a face of singular purity. Finally I
looked at her eyes.






Then I became more alert, my attention sharpened, and I stiffened, for in
her expression there was an element that was new to me. In it I discerned
the outlandish, mysterious quality all of us had been expecting in a world so
distant from our own. But I was unable to analyze or even define the nature
of this oddity. I only sensed an essential difference from individuals of our
own species. It did not come from the color of her eyes: these were of a
grayish hue not often found among us, but nevertheless not unknown. The
anomaly lay hi their emanation, a sort of void, an absence of expression,
reminding me of a wretched mad girl I had once known. But no! it was not
that, it could not be madness.






When she saw that she herself was an object of curiosity— or, to be more
accurate, when my eyes met hers—she seemed to receive a shock and
abruptly looked away with an automatic gesture as swift as that of -a
frightened animal. It was not out of shame at being this scrutinized. I had a
feeling that it would have been an exaggeration to suppose her capable of
such an emotion. It was simply that her gaze would not, or could not,
withstand mine. With her head turned to one side, she now watched us
stealthily, out of the corner of her eye.






"As I told you, it's a woman," young Levain muttered.
He had spoken in a voice stifled with emotion, almost a whisper: but the
young girl heard him and the sound of his voice produced a strange effect
on her. She recoiled, but so swiftly that once again I compared her
movement to the reflex of a frightened animal pausing before taking flight.
She stopped, however, after taking two steps backward, the rocks then
concealing most of her body. I could discern no more than the top of her
head and an eye that was still trained on us.


  We dared not move a muscle, tortured by the fear of seeing her rush away.
Our attitude reassured her. After a moment she stepped out again onto the
ledge. But young Levain was decidedly too excited to! be able to hold his
tongue.




"Never in my life . . ." he began.






He stopped, realizing his imprudence. She had recoiled in the same manner
as before, as though the human voice terrified her.






  Professor Antelle motioned us to keep quiet and started splashing about in
the water without appearing to pay the slightest attention to her. We adopted
the same tactics, which met with complete success. Not only did she step
forward once more, but she soon showed a visible interest in our
movements, an interest that was manifested in a rather unusual manner,
rousing our curiosity even more. Have you ever watched a timid puppy on
the beach while his master is swimming? He longs to join him in the water,
but dares not. He takes three steps in one direction, three in another, draws
away, scampers back, shakes his head, paws the ground. Such, exactly, was
the behavior of this girl.
  And all of a sudden we heard her: but the sounds she uttered only added
to the impression of animality created by her attitude. She was then
standing on the very edge of her perch, as though about to fling herself into
the lake. She had broken off her sort of dance for a moment. She opened
her mouth. I was standing a little to one side and was able to study her
without being noticed. I thought she was going to speak, to give a shout. I
was expecting a cry. I was prepared for the most barbarous language, but
not for the strange sounds that came out of her throat; specifically out of
her throat, for neither mouth nor tongue played any part in this sort of shrill
mewing or whining, which seemed yet again to express the joyful frenzy of
an animal. In our zoos, sometimes, young chimpanzees play and wrestle
together giving just such little cries.




Since, despite our astonishment, we forced ourselves to go on swimming
without paying attention to her, she appeared to come to a decision. She
lowered herself onto the rock, took a grip on it with her hands, and started
climbing down toward us. Her agility was extraordinary. Her golden body,
appearing to us through a cloud of spray and light, like a fairy-tale vision,
moved quickly down the rock face along the thin transparent blade of the
waterfall. In a few moments, clinging to some imperceptible projections, she
was down at the level of the lake, kneeling on a flat stone. She watched us a
few seconds longer, then took to the water and swam toward us.






  We realized she wanted to play and therefore continued with our frolics,
which had given her such confidence, modifying our movements whenever
she looked startled. Soon we were all involved in a game in which she had
unconsciously laid down the rules: a strange game indeed, with a certain
resemblance to the movements of seals in a pool, which consisted of
alternately fleeing from us and approaching us, suddenly veering away
when we were almost within reach, then drawing so close as to graze us but
without ever actually coming into contact. It was childish; but what would
we not have done in order to tame the beautiful stranger! I noticed that
Professor Antelle took part in this play with unconcealed pleasure.
  This had been going on for some time, and we were getting out of breath,
when I was struck by the paradoxical nature of the girl's expression: her
solemnity. There she was, taking evident pleasure in the games she was
inspiring, yet not a smile had appeared on her face. For some time this had
given me a vague feeling of uneasiness, without my knowing exactly why.
I was now relieved to discover the reason: she neither laughed nor smiled;
from time to time she only uttered one of those little throaty cries that
evidently expressed her satisfaction.






I decided to make an experiment. As she approached me, cleaving the water
with a peculiar swimming action resembling a dog's and with her hair
streaming out behind her like the tail of a comet, I looked her straight in the
eye and, before she could turn her head aside, gave her a smile filled with all
the friendliness and affection I could muster.






The result was surprising. She stopped swimming, stood up in the water,
which reached to her waist, and raised her hands in front of her in a gesture
of defense. Then she quickly turned her back on me and raced for the shore.
Out of the water, she paused and half turned around, looking at me askance,
as she had on the ledge, with the startled air of an animal that has just seen
something alarming. Perhaps she might have regained her confidence, for
the smile had frozen on my lips and I had started swimming again in an
innocent manner, but a fresh incident renewed her emotion. We heard a
noise hi the forest and, tumbling from branch to branch, our friend Hector
came into view, landed on his feet, and scampered over toward us,
overjoyed at finding us again. I was amazed to see the bestial expression,
compounded of fright and menace that came over the young girl's face
when she caught sight of the monkey. She drew back, hugging the rocks so
closely as to melt into them, every muscle tensed, her back arched, her
hands contracted like claws. All this because of a nice little chimpanzee who
was about to greet us!
  As he passed close by, without noticing her, she sprang out. Her body
twanged like a bow. She seized him by the throat and closed her hands
around his neck, holding the poor creature firmly between her thighs. Her
attack was so swift that we did not even have time to intervene. The
monkey hardly struggled. He stiffened after a few seconds and fell dead
when she let go of him. This gorgeous creature in a romantic flight of fancy
I had christened her "Nova," able to compare her appearance only to that of
a' brilliant star—Nova had strangled a harmless pet animal with her own
hands.






  When, having recovered from our shock, we rushed toward her, it was far
too late to save Hector. She turned to face us as though to defend herself,
her arms again raised in front of her, her lips curled back, in a menacing
attitude that brought us to a standstill. Then she uttered a last shrill cry,
which could be interpreted as a shout of triumph or a bellow of rage, and
fled into the forest. In a few seconds she had disappeared into the
undergrowth that closed back around her golden body, leaving us standing
aghast in the middle of the jungle, now completely silent once again.


CHAPTER SIX
"A female savage," I said, "belonging to some backward race like those
found in New Guinea or hi our African forests?"


  I had spoken without the slightest conviction. Arthur Levain asked me,
almost violently, if I had ever noted such grace and fineness of feature
among primitive tribes. He was a hundred times right and I could think of
nothing else to say. Professor Antelle, who appeared to be lost in thought,
had nevertheless listened to our conversation.


 "The most primitive people on our planet have a language," he finally said.
"This girl cannot talk."


  We searched for the stranger around the region of the stream, but unable
to find the slightest trace of her, made our way back to our launch hi the
clearing. The professor thought of taking off again to attempt a landing at
some more civilized spot, but Levain suggested stopping where we were for
at least twenty-four hours to try to establish another contact with this
jungle's inhabitants. I supported him in this suggestion, which eventually
prevailed. We dared not admit to one another that the hope of seeing the girl
again held us to the area.


  The afternoon went by without incident; but toward evening, after admiring
the fantastic setting of Betelgeuse, which flooded the horizon beyond all
human imagination, we had the impression of some change in our
surroundings. The jungle gradually became alive with furtive rustlings and
snappings, and we felt that invisible eyes were spying on us through the
foliage. We spent an uneventful night, however, barricaded in our launch,
keeping watch in turns.


At dawn we experienced the same sensation, and I fancied I heard some
shrill little cries like those Nova had uttered the day before. But none of
the creatures with which our feverish imagination peopled the forest
revealed itself.


 So we decided to return to the waterfall. The entire way, we were
obsessed by the unnerving impression of being followed and watched by
creatures that dared not show themselves. Yet Nova, the day before, had
been willing to approach us.


 "Perhaps it's our clothes that frighten them," Arthur Levain said suddenly.


  This seemed a most likely explanation. I distinctly remembered that when
Nova had fled after strangling our monkey, she had found herself in front
of our pile of clothes. She had then sprung aside quickly to avoid them,
like a shy horse
  .


  "We'll soon see."
  And, diving into the lake after undressing, we started playing again as on
the day before, ostensibly oblivious of all that surrounded us.


  The same trick worked again. After a few minutes we noticed the girl on
the rocky ledge, without having heard her approach. She was not alone.
There was a man standing beside her, a man built like us, resembling men
on Earth, a middle-aged man also completely naked, whose features were
so similar to those of our goddess that I assumed he was her father. He was
watching us, as she was, hi an attitude of bewilderment and concern.
  And there were many others. We noticed them little by little, while we
forced ourselves to maintain our feigned indifference. They crept furtively
out of the forest and gradually formed an unbroken circle around the lake.
They were all sturdy, handsome specimens of humanity, men and women
with golden skin, now looking restless, evidently prey to a great excitement
and uttering an occasional sharp cry.


  We were hemmed in and felt somewhat anxious, remembering the
incident with the chimpanzee. But their attitude was not menacing; they
simply appeared to be interested in our actions.




 That was it. Presently Nova—Nova whom I already regarded as an old
acquaintance—slipped into the water and the others followed one by one
with varying degrees of hesitation. They all drew closer and we began to
chase one another in the manner of seals as we had done the previous day;
only now we were surrounded by a score or more of these strange
creatures, splashing about and playing, all with solemn expressions
contrasting oddly with these childish frolics.






  After a quarter of an hour of this I was beginning to feel tired. Was it just
to behave like school children that we had come all the way to the universe
of Betelgeuse? I felt almost ashamed of myself and was vexed to see that
the learned Antelle appeared to be taking great pleasure in this game. But
what else could we do? It is hard to imagine the difficulty of establishing
contact with creatures who are ignorant of the spoken word or of laughter.
Yet I did my best. I went through a few motions that I hoped might convey
some meaning. I clasped my hands in as friendly a manner as possible,
bowing at the same time, rather like the Chinese. I waved kisses at them.
None of these gestures evoked the least response. Not a glimmer of
comprehension appeared in their eyes.


  Whenever we had discussed, during the voyage, our eventual encounter
with living beings, we saw in our mind's eye monstrous, misshapen
creatures of a physical aspect very different from ours, but we always
implicitly imagined the presence in them of a mind. On the planet Soror
reality appeared to be quite the reverse: we had to do with inhabitants
resembling us hi every way from the physical point of view but who
appeared to be completely devoid of the power of reason. This indeed was
the meaning of the expression I had found so disturbing in Nova and that I
now saw in all the others: a lack of conscious thought; the absence of
intelligence.




They were interested only in playing. And even then the game had to be
pretty simple! With the idea of introducing into it a semblance of coherence
that they could grasp, the three of us linked hands and, with the water up to
our waists, shuffled around in a circle, raising and lowering our arms
together as small children might have done. This seemed not to move them
in the slightest. Most of them drew away from us; others gazed as us with
such an obvious absence of comprehension that we were ourselves
dumfounded.






It was the intensity of our dismay that gave rise to the tragedy. We were so
amazed to find ourselves, three grown men, one of whom was a world
celebrity, holding hands while executing a childish dance under the
mocking eye of Betelgeuse, that we were unable to keep straight faces. We
had undergone such restraint for the last quarter of an hour that we needed
some relief. We were overcome by bursts of wild and uncontrollable laughter.
  This explosion of hilarity at last awakened a response in the onlookers,
but certainly not the one we had been hoping for. A sort of tempest ruffled
the lake. They started rushing off in all directions in a state of fright that in
other circumstances would have struck us as laughable. After a few moments
we found ourselves alone in the water. They ended up by collecting
together on the bank at the edge of the pool, in a trembling mob, uttering
their furious little cries and stretching their arms out toward us in rage. Their
gestures were so menacing that we took fright. Levain and I made for our
weapons, but the wise Antelle whispered to us not to use them and even'
not to brandish them so long as they did not approach us.






We hastily dressed without taking our eyes off them. But scarcely had we
put on our trousers and shirts than their agitation grew into a frenzy. It
appeared that the sight of men wearing clothes was unbearable to them.
Some of them took to their heels; others advanced toward us, their arms
outstretched, their hands clawing the air. I picked up my carbine.
Paradoxically for such obtuse people, they seemed to grasp the meaning of
this gesture, turned tail, and disappeared into the trees.




 We made haste to regain the launch. On our way back I had the
impression that they were still there, albeit invisible, and were following our
withdrawal in silence.




CHAPTER SEVEN
The attack was launched as we came within sight of the clearing, with an
abruptness that precluded all defense. Leaping out of the thickets like stags,
the men of Soror were upon us before we could lift our weapons to our
shoulders.




 The curious thing about this aggression was that it was not exactly directed
against our persons. I sensed this at once, and my intuition was soon
confirmed. At no moment did I feel myself in danger of death, as Hector
had been. They were not after our lives, but after our clothes and all the
accessories we were carrying. In a moment we were overwhelmed. A mass
of probing hands stripped us of our weapons and ammunition pouches and
threw these aside, while others struggled to peel off our clothes and tear
them to shreds. Once I had understood what had provoked their fury, I
passively gave in, and though I received a few scratches I was not seriously
injured. Antelle and Levain did the same, and presently we found ourselves
stark naked in the midst of a group of men and women who, visibly
reassured to see us in this state, started dancing around us, encircling us too
tightly for us to be able to escape.






  There were now at least a hundred of them on the edge of the clearing.
Those who were farther away then fell upon our launch with a fury
comparable to that which had induced them to pull our clothes to pieces. In
spite of the despair I felt at seeing them pillage our precious vehicle, I
pondered on their behavior and fancied I could discern an essential
principle in it: these beings were roused to fury by objects. Things that were
manufactured provoked their anger as well as their fear. When they seized
an instrument, they held it in their hands only long enough to break it, tear
it apart, or twist it. Then they promptly hurled it as far away as possible, as
though it were a live coal, only to pick it up again and complete its
destruction. They made me think of a cat fighting with a big rat that was
half dead but still dangerous, or of a mongoose that had caught a snake. I
had already noted the curious fact that they had attacked us without a single
weapon, without even using sticks.






Powerless, we witnessed the sacking of our launch. The door had soon
yielded to their blows. They rushed inside and destroyed everything that
could be destroyed, in particular the precious navigating instruments, and
scattered the bits and pieces. This pillage lasted quite a time. Then, since
the metal envelope alone remained intact, they came back to our group. We
were jostled, pulled this way and that, and finally dragged off into the depths
of the jungle.
Our situation was becoming more and more alarming. Disarmed, stripped,
obliged to march barefoot at too fast a pace, we could neither exchange our
impressions nor even complain. The slightest attempt at conversation
provoked such menacing reactions that we had to resign ourselves to painful
silence. And yet these creatures were men like us. Clad and shod, they
would scarcely have drawn attention in our world. Their women were all
beautiful, though none could rival Nova's splendor.






The latter followed close behind us. On several occasions, when I was
jostled by my guards, I turned around toward her, imploring a sign of
compassion, which I fancied I discerned once on her face. But this, I think,
was only wishful thinking. As soon as my gaze met hers, she tried to avoid
it, without her eyes expressing any sentiment other than bewilderment.






  This calvary lasted several hours. I was overwhelmed with fatigue, my
feet bleeding, my body covered with scratches caused by the reeds through
which these men of Soror made their way with impunity, like snakes. My
companions were in no better shape than I was, and Antelle was stumbling
at every step by the time we finally reached what appeared to be the end of
the march. The forest was less thick at this spot and the undergrowth had
given place to short grass. Here our guards released us and, without
bothering about us, started playing once more, chasing one another
through the trees, which seemed to be their main occupation. We sank to
the ground, numb with fatigue, taking advantage of this respite to hold a
consultation.






It needed all the philosophy of our leader to prevent us from being engulfed
in dark despair. Night was falling. We could no doubt attempt an escape by
taking advantage of the general inattention; but then what? Even if we
managed to retrace our steps, there was no chance of our being able to use
the launch. It seemed wiser to remain where we were and to try to win over
these disconcerting beings. Moreover, we were famished.
We rose to our feet and took a few timid steps. They went on with their
senseless games without paying any attention. Nova alone seemed not to
have forgotten us. She started following us at a distance, always turning her
head away when we looked at her. After wandering at random, we
discovered we were in a sort of encampment where the shelters were not
even huts, but nestiike constructions like those built by the big apes in our
African forests: a few interwoven branches, without any binding, placed on
the ground or wedged into the forks of low trees. Some of these nests were
occupied. Men and women—I cannot see how else I can describe them—
lay stretched out inside them, often in couples, fast asleep and snuggling up
together as dogs do in the cold. Other, larger shelters served entire families,
and we noticed several children who looked extremely handsome and healthy.






  This provided no solution to our feeding problem. At last we saw at the
foot of a tree a family getting ready to eat, but their meal was hardly
designed to tempt us. They. were puffing to pieces, without the aid of any
utensil, a fairly large animal resembling a deer. With their nails and their
teeth they tore off bits of the raw meat, which they devoured after merely
removing a few shreds of skin. There was no sign of a fireplace in the
neighborhood. This feast turned our stomachs, and in any case, after
drawing a little closer, we realized we were by no means welcome to share
it. Quite the contrary! Angry growls made us draw back quickly.






It was Nova who came to our rescue. Did she do so because she had finally
understood that we were hungry? Could she really understand anything? Or
was it because she was famished herself? In any case, she went up to a big
tree, encircled the trunk with her thighs, climbed up into the branches, and
disappeared in the foliage. A few moments later we saw a shower of fruit
resembling bananas fall to the ground. Then she climbed down again,
picked up one or two of these and began eating them without taking her
eyes off us. After a moment's hesitation we grew bold enough to imitate her.
The fruit was quite good and we were able to eat our fill while she watched
us without protesting. After drinking some water from a stream, we decided
to spend the night there.






Each of us chose a corner in the grass in which,to build a nest similar to the
others in the colony. Nova showed some interest in our work, even to the
point of approaching me and helping me to break a recalcitrant branch.






I was moved by this gesture; young Levain found it so vexing that he lay
down at once, buried himself in the grass, and turned his back on us. As for
Professor Antelle, he had already fallen asleep, dead tired.






  I took some time to finish my bed, still closely watched by Nova, who had
drawn some distance, away. When I lay down, she stood motionless for a
moment or two, as though unable to make up her mind; then she took a few
hesitant steps toward me. I did not move a muscle for fear of frightening her
away. She lay down beside me. I still did not move. She eventually
snuggled up against me, and there was nothing to distinguish us from the
other couples occupying the nests of this strange tribe. But although this
giri was marvelously beautiful, I still did not regard her as a woman. Her
manner was that of a pet animal seeking the warmth of its master. I
appreciated the warmth of her body, without its ever crossing my mind to
desire her. I ended up by falling asleep in this outlandish position, half dead
from fatigue, pressed against this strangely beautiful and unbelievably
mindless creature, after bestowing no more than a glance on the satellite of
Soror, which, smaller than our Moon, cast a yellowish light over the jungle.






CHAPTER EIGHT
The sky was turning pale through the trees when I awoke. Nova was still
asleep. I watched her in silence and sighed as I remembered her cruelty to
our poor monkey. She had probably also been the cause of our
misadventure by pointing us out to her companions. But how could one hold
this against her when faced with the perfection of her body?




  Suddenly she stirred and raised her head. A gleam of fear came into her
eyes and I felt her muscles contract Since I did not move, however, her face
gradually relaxed. She remembered; she managed for the first time to
withstand my gaze for a moment. I regarded this as a personal victory and
went so far as to smile at her again, forgetting her previous reaction to this
earthly manifestation.






This time it was less intense. She shivered, stiffened again as though about to
take flight, but stayed where she was. Encouraged, I smiled more broadly.
She trembled again but eventually calmed down, her face soon expressing
nothing but profound astonishment. Had I succeeded in taming her? I became
bold enough to put my hand on her shoulder. A shiver ran down her spine,
but she still did not move. I was intoxicated by this success, and was even
more so when I thought she was trying to imitate met.




  It was true. She was trying to smile. I could sense her painful efforts to
contract the muscles of her delicate face. She made several attempts,
managing only to produce a sort of painful grimace. There was something
tremendously moving about this excessive labor on the part of a human
being to achieve an everyday expression, and with such a pitiful result. I
suddenly felt extremely touched, filled with compassion as though for a
crippled child. I increased the pressure of my hand on her shoulder. I
brought my face closer to hers. She replied to this gesture by rubbing her
nose against mine, then by passing her tongue over my cheek.




I was bewildered and hesitant. To be on the safe side, I imitated her in my
clumsy fashion. After all, I was a foreign visitor and it was up to me to
adopt the customs of the great Betelgeuse. system. She appeared satisfied. We
had gone thus far in our attempts at communication, myself none too sure
how to continue, frightened of committing some blunder with my Earthly
manners, when a terrifying hullabaloo made us start up in alarm.






I found myself with my two companions, whom I had selfishly
forgotten, standing bolt upright in the gathering dawn. Nova had sprung to
her feet even more quickly and showed signs of the deepest terror. I
understood immediately that this din was a nasty surprise not only for us
but for all the inhabitants of the forest, for all of them, abandoning their
lairs, had started running hither and thither in panic. This was not a game,
as on the previous day; their cries expressed sheer terror.






  This din, suddenly breaking the silence of the forest, was enough to make
one's blood run cold, but I felt besides that the men of the jungle knew
what was in the offing and that their fear was caused by the approach of a
specific danger. It was a strange cacophony, a mixture of rattling sounds
like a roll of drums, other more discordant noises resembling a clashing of
pots and pans, and also shouts. It was the shouts that made the most
impression on us, for although they were in no language familiar to us, they
were incontestably human.


  The early morning light revealed a strange scene in the forest: men,
women, and children running in all directions, passing and bumping into
one another, some of them even climbing into the trees as though to seek
refuge there. Soon, however, some of the older ones stopped to prick up
their ears and listen. The noise was approaching rather slowly. It came from
the region where the forest was thickest and seemed to emanate from a
fairly long unbroken line. I compared it to the noise made by beaters in one
of our big shoots.


  The elders of the tribe appeared to make a decision. They uttered a series
of yelps, which were no doubt signals or orders, then rushed off in the
opposite direction from the noise. The rest of them followed, and we saw
them galloping all around us like a driven herd of deer. Nova, too, was
about to take to her heels, but she paused suddenly and turned around
toward us—above all toward me, I felt. She uttered a plaintive whimper,
which I assumed to be an invitation to follow her, then took one leap and
disappeared.


  The din grew louder and I fancied I heard the undergrowth snapping as
though beneath some heavy footsteps. I admit that I lost my composure.
Caution prompted me, however, to stay where I was and to face the
newcomers who, it became clearer every second, were uttering these human
cries. But after my ordeal of the day before, this horrible racket'! unnerved
me. I was infected by the terror of Nova and the others. I did not pause to
think; I did not even want to consult my companions; I plunged into the
undergrowth and took to my heels in the young girl's footsteps.






 I ran as fast as I could for several hundred yards without being able to
catch up with her, and then noticed that Levain alone had followed me,
Professor Antelle's age precluding such rapid flight. Levain was panting
beside me. We looked at each other, ashamed of our behavior, and I was
about to suggest going back or at least waiting for our leader, when some
other noises made us jump in alarm.




As to these, I could not be mistaken. They were gunshots echoing through
the jungle: one, two, three, then several more, at irregular intervals,
sometimes one at a time, at other times two consecutive shots,
strangely reminiscent of a double-barreled gun. They were firing in front of
us, on the path taken by the fugitives. While we paused, the line from which
the first din had come, the line of beaters, drew closer, very close to us,
sowing panic in us once again. I do not know why the shooting seemed to me
less frightening, more familiar than this hellish din. Instinctively I resumed
my headlong flight, taking care nevertheless to keep under cover of the
undergrowth and to make as little noise as possible. My companion followed
after me.
  We thus reached the region in which the shots had been heard. I slowed
 down and crept forward, almost on all fours. Still followed by Levain, I
 clambered up a sort of hillock and came to a halt on the summit, panting
 for breath. There was nothing in front of me but a few trees and a curtain
 of scrub. I advanced cautiously, my head on a level with the ground.
 There I lay for a moment or two as though floored by a blow,
 overpowered by a spectacle completely beyond my poor human
 comprehension.






CHAPTER NINE
 There were several incongruous features in the scene that unfolded before
 my eyes, some of them horrifying, but my attention was at first drawn
 exclusively to a figure standing motionless thirty paces away and peering in
 my direction.




   I almost shouted aloud in amazement. Yes, in spite of my terror, in spite
 of the tragedy -of my own position—I was caught between the beaters and
 the guns—stupefaction overrode all other emotion when I saw this
 creature on the lookout, lying in wait for the game. For it was an ape, a
 large-sized gorilla. It was in vain that I told myself I was losing my
 reason: I could entertain not the slightest doubt as to his species. But an
 encounter with a gorillaon the planet Soror was not the essential
 outlandishness of the situation. This for me lay in the fact that the ape was
 correctly dressed, like a man of our world, and above all that he wore his
 clothes in such an easy manner. This natural aspect was what struck me
 first of all. No sooner had I seen the animal than I realized that he was not
 in any way disguised. The state in which I saw him was normal, as normal
 to him as nakedness was to Nova and her companions.






He was dressed as you and I are, I mean as you and I would be if we were
taking part in one of those drives organized for ambassadors or other
distinguished persons at official shooting parties. His dark-brown jacket
seemed to be made by the best Paris tailor and revealed underneath a
checked shirt of the kind our sportsmen wear. His breeches, flaring out
slightly above his calves, terminated in a pair of leggings. There the
resemblance ended: instead of boots he wore big black gloves.






It was a gorilla, I tell you! From his shirt collar emerged a hideous head, its
top shaped like a sugar loaf and covered with black hair, with a flattened
nose and jutting jaws. There he stood, leaning slightly forward, in the
posture of a hunter on the lookout, grasping a rifle in his long hands. He
was facing me, on the other side of a large gap cut out of the jungle at right
angles to the direction of the drive


.


  All of a sudden he stiffened. He had noticed, as I had, a faint sound in the
bushes a little to my right. He turned around and at the same time raised his
weapon, ready to •put it to his shoulder. From my position I could see the
furrow left in the undergrowth by one of the fugitives who was running
blindly straight ahead. I almost shouted out to warn him, so obvious was
the ape's intention. But I had neither the time nor the strength; the man was
already racing like a mountain goat across the open ground. The shot rang
out while he was still halfway across the field of fire. He gave a leap in the
air, collapsed in a heap on the ground, and after a few convulsions lay
motionless.


  But it was only a little later that I noticed the victim's death agony, my
attention being still focused on the gorilla. I had followed the changes in his
expression from the moment he was alerted by the noise, and had noted a
number of surprising facts: first, the cruelty of the hunter stalking his prey
and the feverish pleasure he derived from this pastime; but above all, the
human character of his expression in this animal's eyes there was a spark of
understanding that I had sought in vain among the men of Soror.
  The realization of my own position soon roused me from my stupor. The
shot made me turn my gaze again toward the victim, and I was the horrified
witness of his final twitches. I then noticed with terror that the cleared
space in the forest was littered with human bodies. It was no longer
possible to delude myself as to the meaning of this scene. I caught sight of
another gorilla like the first one, a hundred paces off. I was witnessing a
drive—alas, I was taking part in it!—a fantastic drive in which the guns,
posted at regular intervals, were apes and the game consisted of men, men
like me, men and women whose naked, punctured bodies, twisted in
ridiculous postures, lay bleeding on the ground.


  I turned aside from this unbearable horror. I preferred the sight of the
merely grotesque, and I gazed back at the gorilla barring my path. He had
taken a step to one side, revealing another ape standing behind him, like a
servant beside his master. It was a chimpanzee, a rather small chimpanzee,
a young chimpanzee, it seemed to me, but a chimpanzee, I swear, dressed
with less elegance than the gorilla, in a pair of trousers and a shirt, and
easily playing his part in the meticulous organization that I was beginning
to discern. The hunter had just handed him his gun. The chimpanzee
exchanged it for another he was holding in his hand. Then, with precise
gestures, using the cartridges in the belt he was wearing around his waist
and that sparkled in the rays of Betelgeuse, the little chimpanzee reloaded
the weapon. Then each resumed his position
  .
  All these impressions had taken only a few seconds. I should have liked to
think about these discoveries, to analyze them; I had no time to do so. Lying
beside me, Arthur Levain, numb with terror, was incapable of giving me
the slightest help. The danger was increasing at every second. The beaters
were approaching from behind. The din they made was now deafening. We
were at bay like wild beasts, like those wretched creatures whom I could
still see flitting all around us. The size of the colony must have been bigger
than I had suspected, for many men were still rushing along the track, to
meet there a ghastly death
  .


   Not all, however. Forcing myself to recover a little composure, from the
 top of my hillock I studied the behavior of the fugitives. Some of them,
completely panic-stricken, rushed along snapping the undergrowth in their
 flight, thus alerting the apes, who easily shot them down. But others gave
 evidence of more cunning, like old boars who have been hunted several
 times and have learned a number of tricks. These crept forward on all
 fours, paused for a moment on the edge of the clearing, studied the nearest
 hunter through the leaves, and waited for the moment when his attention
 was drawn in another direction. Then, in one bound and at full speed, they
 crossed the deadly alley. Several of them thus succeeded in reaching the
 opposite side unhurt, and disappeared into the forest


  .


  Therein perhaps lay a chance of safety. I motioned to Levain to follow me
and slipped soundlessly forward as far as the last thicket in front of the
path. There I was overwhelmed by a ridiculous scruple. Should I, a man,
really resort to such tricks merely to get the better of an ape? Surely the
only behavior worthy of my condition was to rise to my feet, advance on
the animal, and give it a good beating? The ever-increasing hullabaloo
behind me reduced this mad inclination to nought.




The hunt was ending in an infernal din. The beaters were at our heels. I saw
one of them emerge from the foliage. It was an enormous gorilla, laying
about him at random with a club and screeching fit to burst his lungs. He
made an even more terrifying impression on me than the hunter with the
gun. Levain started chattering with fear and trembling from head to foot,
while I kept my eye on the newcomer in front of me and waited for an
opportune moment.






My wretched companion unconsciously saved my life by his imprudence. He
had gone completely out of his mind. He got up without taking any
precaution, started running off at random, and came out into the alley in full
view of the hunter's field of fire. He went no farther. The shot seemed to
snap him hi two and he collapsed, adding his body to all those that already
lay there. I wasted no time in mourning him—what could I do for him?—but
waited feverishly for the moment when the gorilla would hand his gun to
his servant. As soon as he did so, I sprang out and raced across the alley. I
saw the hunter, as though in a dream, hasten to seize his weapon, but I was
already under cover by the time he could lift it to his shoulder. I heard an
exclamation that sounded like an oath, but had no time for thought about this
latest oddity.




 I had got the best of him. I felt a strange joy, which was balm to my
humiliation. I went on running at full speed, leaving the carnage behind
me, until I could no longer hear the noise of the beaters. I was saved.




Saved! I was underestimating the maliciousness of the apes on the planet
Soror. Hardly had I gone a hundred yards when I stumbled headfirst into an
obstacle concealed in the foliage. It was a wide-meshed net stretched above
the ground and equipped with large pockets, in one of which I was now
entangled. I was not the only captive. The net ran across a large section of
the forest, and a crowd of fugitives who had escaped being shot had let
themselves be caught as I had. To my right and left frenzied jerks
accompanied by furious whines bore witness to their efforts to break free.






A wild rage overcame me when I felt myself thus imprisoned, a rage
stronger than terror, leaving me utterly incapable of thought. I did exactly
what my reason advised me not to do—I struggled in an utterly insane
manner, with the result that the net became even more tightly wound around
me. I was eventually so closely bound that I could not move at all and was
at the mercy of the apes I heard approaching.






CHAPTER TEN


I was seized by a deadly terror when I saw their troop advancing. After
witnessing their cruelty, I thought they were going to engage in wholesale
massacre.
The hunters, all of them gorillas, led the advance. I noticed that they had
abandoned their weapons, which gave me a little hope. Behind them came
the loaders and beaters, among whom there was a more or less equal
number of gorillas and chimpanzees. The hunters seemed to be the masters
and their manner was that of aristocrats. They did not appear to be ill-
disposed, and chatted among themselves as cheerfully as one could wish. . . .




 In fact, I am now so accustomed to the paradoxes of this planet that I
wrote the preceding sentence without thinking of lie absurdity it represents.
And yet it's the truth! The gorillas had the manner of aristocrats. They
chatted together happily in an articulate language, and each moment their
faces expressed human sentiments, not a trace of which I had found in
Nova. Alas! What had become of Nova? I shuddered as I recalled the
bloodstained alley. I now understood her emotion at the sight of our
chimpanzee. There existed a fierce hatred between the two races. To
realize this one only had to see the attitude of the captive men at the apes'
approach. They struggled frenziedly, thrashing out with hands and feet,
ground their teeth, foamed at the mouth, and gnawed furiously at the strings
of the net.




   Without paying attention to this hubbub, the hunter gorillas —I caught
 myself calling them the nobility—gave some orders to their servants. Some
 big carts, rather low-lying and completely caged in, were lined up on a
 track on the other side of the net. Into these we were bundled, ten or so to a
 vehicle: a fairly lengthy operation, for the prisoners struggled desperately.
 Two servant gorillas, their hands encased in leather gloves to protect them
 from bites, took hold of the prisoners one by one, freed them from the trap,
 and flung them into the cages, the doors of which were then shut fast,
 white the nobles directed the operation leaning negligently on their walking
 sticks.
When it came to my turn, I tried to draw attention to myself by talking. But
no sooner had I opened my mouth than one of the apes, no doubt mistaking
my action for a menace, brutally stuffed his enormous glove into my face. I
was forcibly silenced and thrown like a bundle into a cage together with a
dozen men and women who were still too agitated to pay any attention to me.






When we were all loaded inside, one of the servants checked the lock on each
cage and went to report to his master. The latter gave a signal, and a roar of
engines echoed through the forest. The carts started to move forward, each
one towed by a sort of tractor driven by an ape. I could distinctly see the
driver of the vehicle behind mine. He was a chimpanzee. From time to time
he made sarcastic remarks at us, and when the engines slowed down I could
hear him humming a rather melancholy little tune not altogether lacking hi
harmony.




  This first stage was so short that I scarcely had time to recover my senses.
After driving for a quarter of an hour along a rough track, the convoy came
to a halt on a stretch of open ground in front of a house built of stone. It
was the edge of the forest; beyond it I could see a plain covered with crops
that looked like cereals.


  The house, with its red tiled roof, green shutters, and an inscription on a
panel at the entrance, looked like an inn. I realized at once it was a meeting
place for the hunt. The she-apes had come here to wait for then- lords and
masters, who presently arrived in private cars along the same track we had
taken. The lady gorillas sat around in armchairs chatting together in the
shade of some big trees that looked like palms. One of them was sipping a
drink through a straw.


 As soon as the vehicles were parked, the females drew nearer, curious to
see the results of the hunt and especially the game that had been shot,
which some gorillas, protected by aprons, were extracting from two big
vans to display in the shade of the trees.
  It was a classical hunting scene. Here again the apes worked methodically.
They placed the bleeding bodies on their backs, side by side, in a long row
as though along a chalk line. Then, while the she-apes uttered little cries of
admiration, they applied themselves to making the game attractive. They
stretched the arms down along the sides of the bodies and opened the hands
with the palms facing upward. They straightened the legs, arranging the
joints so as to give each body a less corpselike appearance, corrected a
clumsily twisted limb, and reduced the contraction of a neck. Then they
carefully smoothed down the hair, particularly the women's, as some
hunters smooth down the coat or feathers of an animal they have just shot.


  I am afraid I am unable to convey the grotesque and diabolical quality this
scene had for me. Have I adequately stressed the absolutely and totally
simian appearance of these monkeys, apart from the expression in their
eyes? Have I described how these she-gorillas, also dressed in sports clothes
but with great elegance, jostled one another to view the best specimens and
point them out while congratulating their lords and masters? Have I said
that one of them, taking a little pair of scissors out of her bag, leaned over a
body, cut off a lock of brown hair, curled it around her finger, and then,
with the others soon following her example, pinned it onto her hat?




  The exhibition of the game was soon completed: three rows of bodies
carefully laid out, men and women alternately, the latter displaying a line of
golden breasts to the monstrous sphere blazing in the sky. Looking away in
horror, I noticed a new figure, carrying an oblong box fastened to a tripod.
It was a chimpanzee. I quickly recognized in him the photographer making
a pictorial record of these trophies for simian posterity. The session lasted
more than a quarter of an hour, me gorillas having themselves
photographed first individually, in good poses, some of them placing one
foot on one of their victims with a triumphant air; then as a compact group,
each of them putting an arm around his neighbor's shoulder. The she-
gorillas in turn were then photographed and assumed graceful postures in
front of the slaughter, with their decorated hats well to the fore.
  This scene was imbued with a horror incomprehensible to the normal
mind. My blood boiled, but I succeeded for some time in restraining
myself. However, when I noticed the body on which one of these females
had sat down to take a more sensational picture, when I recognized on the
face of the corpse stretched out among the others the boyish, almost
childish features of my luckless companion, Arthur Levain, it was no
longer possible to contain myself.






• My emotion exploded in an outlandish manner, in keeping with the
grotesque aspect of this macabre scene. I gave way to a fit of wild hilarity,
bursting out in hysterical laughter.






•     I had not thought of my companions in the cage. I was utterly
incapable of thinking! The tumult unleashed by my laughter reminded me
of their proximity, which was no doubt as dangerous for me as that of the
apes. Menacing hands were stretched in my direction. I realized the peril
and stifled my laughter by burying my head in my arms. I am not sure,
however, that I should have avoided being strangled and torn to bits if some
of the apes, alarmed by the din, had not re-established order with a few
thrusts of their pikes. Moreover, another incident soon diverted the general
attention. The gorillas made their way in small groups toward the house,
chatting merrily together, while the photographer gathered up his equipment
after taking a few shots of our cages.






 We men, however, had not been forgotten. I had no idea of the fate the
monkeys had hi store for us, but it was clearly their policy to look after us.
Before disappearing into the inn, one of the nobles gave some instructions
to a gorilla who appeared to be a team leader. The latter came over to us,
assembled his subordinates, and presently the servants brought us
something to eat in basins and some buckets of water to drink. The food
consisted of a sort of porridge. I was not hungry but was determined to eat
in order to keep up my strength. I approached one of the receptacles
around which several prisoners were squatting. I did as they did and
stretched out a timid hand. They gave me a surly look but, the food being
ample, did not try to stop me. It was a thick mash with a cereal base that did
not taste bad. I swallowed several handfuls without displeasure. Our menu
was, moreover, enriched by the good will of our guards. Now that the
hunt was over, these beaters, who had so frightened me, proved to be less
unpleasant so long as we behaved ourselves. They walked up and down in
front of the cages and threw us some fruit from time to time, deriving great
amusement from the stampede these offerings never failed to provoke.


  I even witnessed a scene that gave me food for thought. A little girl had
caught a piece of fruit in the air, when her neighbor rushed at her to snatch
it away. One of the gorillas then brandished his pike, poked jt through the
bars, and pushed the man back as hard as he could; then he put another bit
of fruit inthe same child's hand. I thus realized that these creatures were
capable of pity.




  When the meal was over, the team leader and his assistants set about
rearranging the convoy by transferring some of the captives from one cage
to another. They seemed to be making some sort of selection, but on what
basis I could not tell. Finding myself placed in a group of extremely
handsome men and women, I tried to persuade myself that this was because
we were the most remarkable subjects, deriving a bitter consolation from
the thought that the apes, at first glance, had judged me worthy of being
included in an elite.






I was surprised and overjoyed to see Nova among my new companions. She
had escaped the massacre and I gave thanks to the heaven of Betelgeuse. It
was with her, above all, in mind that I had scrutinized the victims at great
length, fearful of seeing at any moment her lovely body among the pile of
corpses. I felt as though I had recovered a being that was dear to me and,
losing my head once more, I rushed over to her, opening my arms wide. It
was utter madness; my gesture terrified her. Had she forgotten, then, our
intimacy of the night before? Was such a marvelous physique not animated
by any sort of mind? I felt downcast to see her shrink away at my approach,
her hands extended like claws as though to throttle me, which she probably
would have done had I persisted.




  Yet when I checked myself she calmed down fairly quickly. She lay down
in a corner of the cage and I followed her example with a sigh^ All the other
captives had done likewise. They now looked listless, prostrate, and
resigned to their fate.


  Outside, the apes were getting ready for the convoy to move off. A
tarpaulin was stretched over our cage and fastened halfway down the sides,
letting in some light. Orders were issued; the engines started. I found myself
traveling at high speed toward an unknown destination, terrified by the
thought of the fresh horrors that awaited me on the planet Soror.




CHAPTER ELEVEN
I was utterly exhausted. The events of the last two days had broken me
physically and plunged my mind into such confusion that I had been
incapable until now of bewailing the loss of my comrades or even of
picturing concretely all that was involved for me in the pillaging of our
launch.






It was with relief that I welcomed the half-light, then isolation in the almost
total darkness that followed, for the dusk was very swift and we drove all
through the night. I racked my brains to discover some sense in the events I
had witnessed. I needed this intellectual exercise to escape from the despair
that haunted me, to prove to myself that I was a man, I mean a man from
Earth, a reasoning creature who made it a habit to discover a logical
explanation for the apparently miraculous whims of nature, and not a beast
hunted down by highly developed apes.
I reviewed all that I had observed, often without being aware of it. A
general overall impression prevailed: these apes, male and female, gorillas
and chimpanzees, were not in any way ridiculous. I have already mentioned
that they had never struck me as being animals in disguise, like the tame
monkeys exhibited in our circuses. On Earth a hat on the head of a she-
monkey was a hilarious sight to some people, to me a painful one. Not so
here. Both head and hat were in keeping, and there was nothing at all
unnatural about any of their gestures. The she-ape sipping a drink through a
straw looked like a lady. I also remember having seen one of the hunters
take a pipe out of his pocket, fill it methodically, and light it. Well, nothing
about this act had shocked my sensibilities, so natural were his movements.
I had had to think about it before recognizing it as a paradox. I pondered
over this at great length and, for the first time since my capture, I deplored
the disappearance of Professor Antelle. In his wisdom and knowledge he
would doubtless have been able to find an explanation for these paradoxes.
What had become of him? I was certain he was not among the victims that
had been shot. Was he among the captives? It was not impossible; I had not
seen them all. I dared not hope that he had succeeded in preserving his
liberty.






With my feeble resources I tried to piece together an hypothesis, but it was
not very satisfactory. Could the inhabitants of this planet, the civilized
beings whose towns we had seen, could they have succeeded hi training
apes so as to instill more or less rational behavior in them—this, after
patient selection and efforts lasting several generations? After all, on Earth
there are chimpanzees who manage to perform astonishing tricks. The very
fact that they had a language was perhaps not so outlandish as I had
thought. I now remembered a discussion I had had on this subject with a
specialist. He had told me there were learned scientists who spent a large
part of their time trying to teach primates to talk.
They claimed that there was nothing in the conformation of these animals
to prevent it. Until then all their efforts had been in vain, but they were
persevering, maintaining that the only obstacle was the fact that monkeys
were unwilling to talk. Perhaps one day they had proved willing on the
planet Soror? This enabled these hypothetical inhabitants to use them for
certain rough work, like the hunt during which I had been captured*
  I clung desperately to this explanation, recoiling in horror at the thought
of another, simpler one, so essential for my safety did it seem that there
should exist on this planet properly rational creatures, that is, men, men like
myself, to whom I could reveal myself.




Men! Of what race, then, were the beings whom the apes had killed and
captured? Some sort of backward tribe? If that were the case, how cruel the
masters of this planet were to tolerate and perhaps decree such massacres!






  I was distracted from these thoughts by a figure creeping toward me. It
was Nova. Around me, all the prisoners were lying in groups on the floor
boards. After a moment's hesitation she snuggled up against me, as on the
previous night. Once again I vainly tried to discern in her eyes the gleam by
which this gesture of hers might have been construed as an act of
friendliness. She turned her head away and presently closed her eyes. In
spite of this I felt reassured by her mere presence and eventually fell asleep
beside her, trying not to think of the morrow.




CHAPTER TWELVE


I succeeded in sleeping till daybreak through a defense mechanism against
the intrusion of thoughts that were too unbearable. My sleep was
interrupted, however, by feverish nightmares, in which Nova's body
appeared in the guise of a monstrous serpent wound around my own body. I
opened my eyes to the light. She was already awake. She had drawn a little
away from me and was watching me with her eternally bewildered gaze.




  Our vehicle slowed down and I saw we were entering a town. The
captives had risen and were squatting beside the bars, glancing out beneath
the tarpaulin at a spectacle that seemed to revive their emotions of the
previous day. I followed their example; I pressed my face against the bars
and for the first time viewed a civilized city on the planet Soror.






  We were driving down a fairly broad street flanked with pavements. I
anxiously examined the passers-by: they were apes. I saw a tradesman, a
sort of grocer, who had just raised the shutters of his shop, turn around
curiously to watch us go by; he was an ape. I tried to see the passengers and
drivers of the motor cars flashing past us: they were dressed in the same
way as people at home and they were apes.






My hope of discovering a civilized human race became chimerical, and I
spent the last part of the drive in gloomy despair. Our vehicle slowed down
even more. I then noticed that the convoy had been split up during the
night, for it consisted of only two vehicles, the others evidently having
taken another direction. After passing through an entrance gate we came to
a halt in a courtyard. Some apes immediately surrounded us and tried to calm
down the captives' mounting agitation with a few blows of their pikes.






The courtyard was enclosed by buildings several stories high with identical
rows of windows. The general effect was that of a hospital, and this
impression was confirmed by the arrival of some new figures who came
forward to meet our guards. They were all dressed in white smocks and little
caps: they were apes.
  They were apes, every one of them, gorillas and chimpanzees. They
helped our guards unload the carts. We were taken out of the cages one by
one, stuffed into big sacks, and carried inside the building. I put up no
resistance and let myself be hauled off by two gorillas dressed in white.
For several minutes I had the feeling that we were going down some long
corridors and climbing some staircases. Eventually I was dumped down on
the ground; then, after the sack had been opened, I was thrown into another
cage, this time a stationary one, its floor covered with straw. I was alone.
One of the gorillas carefully locked the door from the outside.


  The room in which I found myself contained a large number of cages like
mine, lined up in two rows and facing a long passage. Most of them were
already occupied, some of them by my companions of the roundup who
had just been brought here, others by men and women who must have been
captured some time earlier. The latter could be recognized by their attitude
of resignation. They looked at the newcomers with a listless air, scarcely
pricking up their ears when one of them gave a plaintive moan. I also
noticed that the newcomers had been placed, as I had, in individual cells,
whereas the old hands were generally locked up in pairs. Putting my nose
through the bars, I saw a bigger cage at the end of the corridor containing a
large number of children. Unlike the adults, these appeared






to be extremely excited by the arrival of our batch. They gesticulated, jostled one another, and pretended" to shake the bars, uttering
little cries like young monkeys quarreling.








   The two gorillas came back carrying another sack. My friend Nova emerged from it, and again I had the consolation of seeing her
put into the cage directly across from mine. She protested this operation in her own way, trying to scratch and bite. When the door
was closed on her, she rushed to the bars, tried to break them down, grinding her teeth and whimpering enough to rend one's heart.
After a few minutes of this behavior she caught sight of me, stood stock-still, and extended her neck slightly, like a surprised
animal. I gave her a cautious half-smile and a little wave, which to my intense delight she clumsily tried to imitate.
   I was distracted by the return of the two gorillas in white jackets. The unloading had been completed, for they carried no further
bundle, but they pushed in front of them a handcart laden with food and buckets of water that they dished out to the captives, thus
restoring order among them.








It was soon my turn. While one of the gorillas mounted guard, the other entered my cage and placed in front of me a bowl
containing some mash, a little fruit, and a bucket. I had decided to do all I could to establish contact with these apes, who seemed to
be the only rational and civilized beings on the planet. The one who brought my food did not look unpleasant. Observing my
tranquillity, he even gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder. I looked him straight in the eye, then, putting my hand on my chest,
gave a ceremonious bow. I saw intense surprise on his face as I raised my head again. I then smiled at him, putting all my heart into
this gesture. He was just about to leave; dumbfounded, he stopped short and uttered an exclamation. At last I had succeeded in
attracting attention to myself. Wishing to reinforce this success by showing all my abilities, I uttered rather stupidly the first phrase
that came into my head:








   "How do you do? I am a man from Earth. I've had a long journey."






   The meaning was unimportant. I only needed to speak in order to reveal my true nature to him. I had certainly achieved my aim.
Never before had such stupefaction been seen on an ape's face. He stood breathless and gaping, and so did his companion. They both
started talking together in an undertone, but the result was not what I had hoped for. After peering at me suspiciously, the gorilla
briskly drew back and stepped out of the cage, which he closed behind him with even greater care than before. The two apes then
looked at each other for a moment and began roaring with laughter. I must have represented a truly unique phenomenon, for they
could not stop making merry at my expense. Tears were streaming down their faces, and one of them had to put down the bowl he
was holding to take out his handkerchief.








My disappointment was such that I immediately broke into a towering rage. I, too, began shaking the bars, baring my teeth and
cursing them in every language I knew. When I had exhausted my repertoire of invectives I went on giving incoherent yells, the only
result being that they shrugged their shoulders.








Nevertheless I had succeeded in drawing their attention to me. As they went off, they turned around several times to look back at
me. When I had finally calmed down, completely exhausted, I saw one of them take a notebook from his pocket and scribble
something in it after carefully recording a sign inscribed on a panel at the top of my cage, which I assumed to be a number.
They disappeared. The other captives, at first agitated by my demonstration, had resumed eating. There was nothing else I could do but eat
and rest while waiting for a more favorable opportunity to reveal my noble nature. I gulped down another mash of cereals and
some delicious fruit. Opposite me, Nova stopped munching every now and then to dart a furtive glance in my direction.








CHAPTER THIRTEEN




We were left to ourselves for the rest of the day. In the evening, after giving us another meal, the gorillas withdrew, putting out the
lights. I slept little that night, not because of the discomfort of the cage—the straw litter was thick and afforded an acceptable bed—
but I could not stop working out ways and means to enter into communication with the apes. I resolved never to lose my temper
again but to seek patiently and ceaselessly every opportunity to display my mental faculties. The two warders with whom I had dealt were
probably lowly underlings incapable of interpreting my movements, but there surely existed other apes who were more civilized.




  On the following morning I saw that this hope was not unfounded. I had been awake for an hour.
Most of my companions were restlessly pacing up and down their cages in the manner of captive animals. When I realized I was
doing likewise, arid had been doing so for some time without noticing it, I was ashamed of myself and forced myself to sit down
behind the bars, assuming as human and as pensive an attitude as possible. It was then that the door of the corridor was pushed open
and I saw a new figure enter the room accompanied by the two warders. It was a female chimpanzee, and I realized from the way
the gorillas kept in the background that she held an important post in the establishment.








The warders must have given her a report about me, for no sooner had she come in than she questioned one of them, who
promptly pointed his finger in my direction. Thereupon she came straight over to my cage.








  I watched her carefully as she approached. She, too, was dressed in a white smock, cut more elegantly than those worn by the
gorillas, gathered in at the waist by a belt and with short sleeves that revealed two agile dangling arms. What struck me most about
her was her expression, which was remarkably alert and intelligent. I felt this augured well for our future relationship. She seemed to
be quite young in spite of the simian wrinkles that framed her white muzzle. In her hand she carried a leather brief case.






   She came to a halt in front of my cage and began to scrutinize me, at the same time taking a notebook out of her brief case.






   "Good day to you, madame," I said with a bow.






   I had spoken in my gentlest voice. A look of intense surprise came over the she-ape's face, but she maintained her composure and with
a gesture of authority silenced the gorillas, who had started sniggering again.




   "Madame or mademoiselle," I went on, feeling encouraged, "I am sorry to present myself to you in these conditions and in this state
of undress. Believe me, I'm not in the habit "
   I was again spouting whatever nonsense came into my head, selecting only words in keeping with the polite tone I had made up
my mind to maintain. When I finished speaking, punctuating my speech with the gentlest of smiles, her surprise changed to stupefaction.
Her eyes blinked several times and the wrinkles on her forehead grew more pronounced. It was obvious that she was trying desperately to
find the solution to a difficult problem. She in turn smiled at me, and I had the impression that she was beginning to suspect a part
of the truth.






      During this scene the men in their cages watched us, this time without showing the hatred that the sound of my voice usually
   provoked in them. They showed signs of curiosity. One after another, they stopped their feverish pacing and came and glued their
   faces against the bars to see us better. Nova looked furious and could not keep still.






     The she-ape took a fountain pen from her pocket and inscribed several lines in her notebook. Then, raising her head and again
 meeting my anxious gaze, she smiled once more. This encouraged me to make another friendly advance. I stretched an arm out
 through the bars, keeping my hand open. The gorillas gave a start and made as though to come between us. But the she-ape, whose first
 reaction had been to draw back, recovered herself, stopped them with one word, and, without taking her eyes off me, likewise stretched
 out her hairy arm, which trembled a little, toward mine. I did not move. She drew nearer still and placed her hand with its
 excessively long fingers on my wrist. I felt her tremble at this contact. I did my best not to make any movement that might
 startle her. She felt my hand, stroked my arm, then turned around to her assistants with an air of triumph.






  I was breathless with hope, feeling more and more certain that she was beginning to recognize my noble quality. When she spoke
haughtily to one of the gorillas, I was insane enough to hope that my cage was about to be thrown open, . with a million apologies.
Alas, that was not what happened! The warder fumbled in his pocket and took out a small white object that he handed to his
superior. She herself put it in my hand with a charming smile. It was a lump of sugar.






    A lump of sugar! I fell from such a height, I suddenly felt so discouraged by the humiliation of this reward, that I almost
 flung it back in her face. Just in time I remembered my good resolutions and forced myself to remain calm. I took the sugar, bowed,
 and munched it with as intelligent an air as possible.






   Such was my first encounter with Zira. Zira was the she-ape's name, as I presently learned. She was the head of the department to
which I had been brought. In spite of my disappointment, her manner gave me some hope and I had a feeling that I would manage to
enter
into communication with her. She had a long conversation with the warders
and I fancied she was giving them instructions about me. Then she
continued on her rounds, inspecting the other occupants of the cages.




  She carefully scrutinized each of the newcomers and made a few notes,
more succinct than in my case. She never ventured to touch one of them.
Had she done so, I believe I should have been jealous. I was beginning to
feel proud of being the exceptional subject who alone deserved privileged
treatment. When I saw her stop in front of the children and throw some sugar
to them as well, I felt definitely vexed, certainly no less vexed than Nova,
who, after baring her teeth at the she-ape, had lain down in fury at the
bottom of her cage with her back turned on me.






CHAPTER FOURTEEN


The second day went by like the first. The apes did not bother about us
except to bring us food. I was more and more puzzled about this strange
establishment when, on the following day, we were given a series of tests, the
memory of which humiliates me even today but which provided some
distraction at the time.






  The first one struck me at first as rather unusual. One of the warders came
up to me while his colleague was working in another cage. My gorilla kept
one hand hidden behind his back; in the other he held a whistle. He looked
at me to attract my attention, put the whistle to his mouth, and produced a
series of shrill blasts: this for a whole minute. Then he held out his other
hand, ostentatiously showing me one of those bananas that I had enjoyed
and to which all the men appeared to be partial. He held the fruit out in front
of me, without taking his eyes off me.
  I stretched out my hand, but the banana was out of reach and the gorilla
did not come any closer. He looked disappointed and seemed to be
expecting another gesture. After a moment he gave up, hid the fruit away
again, and resumed his whistling. I was nervous, intrigued by this play-
acting, and I almost lost patience when he once more waved the fruit out of
reach. I managed to stay calm, however, trying to guess what was being
expected of me, for he looked more and more surprised, as though confronted
with behavior that was abnormal. He went through the same motions five or
six times, then moved along to another captive. i had a distinct feeling of
frustration when I saw that this captive was given the banana at the very
first trial, and so was the next one. I closely watched the other gorilla, who
was going through the same ceremony with the row opposite. Since he was
now dealing with Nova, I did not miss one of her reactions. He whistled,
then brandished the fruit as his colleague had done. Immediately the young
girl became excited, moving her jaws and…






   All of a sudden I understood. Nova, the gorgeous Nova, had started
 watering at the mouth at the sight of this titbit, like a dog when it is
 offered a lump of sugar. That was what the gorilla was waiting for, as far
 as this day was concerned. He let her have the desired object and went on
 to another cage.


   I had understood, I tell you, and I was not very proud of it! I had studied
 biology at one time, and Pavlov's work held no secrets for me. Here they
 were, applying to men the very experiments he had carried out on dogs.
 And I, who had been so stupid a few minutes before, now, with my
 rational brain and education, not only grasped the nature of this test but
 also foresaw those that were to follow. For several days, perhaps, the
 monkeys would operate in this manner: blasts on a whistle, then the offer
 of a favorite food, the latter causing the subject's mouth to water. After a
 certain period it would be the sound of the whistle alone that would
 produce the effect. The meri* would have acquired what are known in
 scientific jargon as conditioned reflexes.
  I could not stop congratulating myself on my perspicacity and could
hardly wait to put it to good use. As my gorilla walked past me again,
having finished his rounds, I tried by every means to attract his attention.
I tapped on the bars; I made sweeping gestures, pointing at my mouth,
with the result that he condescended to resume the experiment. Then, at
the first blast of the whistle, and well before he had waved the fruit, I
started watering at the mouth, watering at the mouth in fury, in frenzy—I,
Ulysse Merou, started watering at the mouth as though my very life
depended on it, such pleasure did I derive from showing him my
intelligence.


 As a matter of fact he appeared extremely dismayed, called his
colleague over, and had a long talk with him, as on the previous day. I
could follow the elementary reasoning of these clodhoppers: here was a
man who only a moment before had no reflexes at all and who suddenly
has acquired conditioned reflexes, which required a long time and consider
able patience in the case of the others! I felt pity for the weakness of their
intellect, which prevented them from discerning the only possible cause for
this sudden progress: the capacity for thought. I am sure Zira would have
been brighter.


Yet my skill and excess of zeal had a very different result from what I had
expected. They went away without giving me the fruit, which one of them
started munching himself. There was no longer any point in rewarding me,
since the desired end had been achieved without it.






They came back the following day with other equipment. One of them was
carrying a bell; the other trundled before him a machine that bore a close
resemblance to an electric generator. This time, prepared for the kind of
experiment to which we were to be subjected, I understood what they
planned to do with these instruments even before they were put into action.






They began with Nova's neighbor, a big strapping fellow with a particularly
dull expression who had come up to the edge of his cage and was clutching
the bars as we all did nowadays at our jailers' approach. One of the gorillas
started swinging the bell, which gave out a solemn ring, while the other
connected the generator to the bars of the cage. When the bell had sounded
for some time, the second operator started turning the handle of the
machine. The man leaped backward, uttering a plaintive cry.
They went through this business several times on the same subject, who
was coaxed by the offer of some fruit to come back and cling to the bars.
The object, I knew, was to make him leap backward at the sound of the bell
and before the electric shock (yet another conditioned reflex), but it was not
achieved that day, the man's faculties not being sufficiently developed to
enable him to relate cause and effect.






  I waited for them, on the other hand, chuckling to myself, eager to show
them the difference between instinct and intelligence. At the first sound of
the bell I let go of the bars and retreated to the middle of the cage. At the
same time I looked at them and gave a mocking smile. The gorillas
wrinkled their brows. They no longer laughed at my behavior and for the
first time appeared to suspect that I was teasing them.






 They had decided nevertheless to do the experiment over a second tune,
when their attention was diverted by the arrival of some new visitors.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Three figures were coming down the passage: Zira, the female chimpanzee,
and two other apes, one of whom was plainly in a high position.




He was an orangutan, the first I had seen on the planet Soror. He was
shorter than the gorillas and slightly round-shouldered. His arms were
relatively longer so that he often touched the ground with his hands as he
walked, which the other apes did only rarely. He thus gave me the odd
impression of using a couple of walking sticks. His head adorned with long
coarse hair and sunk between his shoulders, his face frozen in an expression
of pedantic meditation, he looked like a venerable and solemn old pontiff. He
was also dressed quite differently from the others, in a long black frock coat
with a red star in the buttonhole and black-and-white-striped trousers, both
somewhat dusty.
He was followed by a little female chimpanzee carrying a heavy brief case.
Her attitude suggested that she was his secretary. By this time no one is
surprised, I imagine, by my repeated reference to significant attitudes and
expressions among these apes. I am convinced that any rational being
confronted with this couple would have concluded, as I did, that the one was
a learned elder and the other his humble secretary. Their arrival gave me an
opportunity of noting again the sense of hierarchy that seemed to exist among
the apes. Zira showed every sign of respect for this superior of hers. The
two gorillas went forward to meet him as soon as they caught sight of him
and bowed low before him. The orangutan gave a condescending little wave
of his hand.




  They made straight for my cage. Was I not the most interesting subject of
the lot? I welcomed the great authority with my most affable smile and
addressed him in ringing tones:






"My dear orangutan, how happy I am to find myself at last in the presence
of a creature who exhales wisdom and intelligence! I am sure we are going
to understand each other, you and I."






The old dear had given a start at the sound of my voice. He scratched his ear
for some time and peered suspiciously into my cage as though scenting
some trickery. Zira then addressed him, notebook in hand, reading out the
particulars she had jotted down about me. She did her best, but it was plain
to see that the orangutan refused to be convinced.


He uttered two or three sentences in a pompous manner, shrugged his
shoulders several times, shook his head, then put his hands behind his back
and started pacing up and down the corridor, passing and repassing my cage
and darting glances in my direction that were far from kindly. The other
apes waited for his decision in respectful silence.
In seemingly respectful silence, at least—for their respect appeared far from
genuine when I intercepted a furtive sign from one gorilla to the other, the
sense of which allowed no room for doubt: they were making fun of the
boss behind his back. This, combined with the annoyance I felt at his attitude
toward me, inspired me with the idea of putting on a little act designed to
convince him of my mental ability. I started pacing to and fro hi the cage,
imitating his gait, my shoulders hunched, my hands behind my back, my
brow wrinkled in an air of profound meditation.






The gorillas choked with laughter and Zira herself was unable to keep a
straight face. As for the secretary, she was obliged to plunge her muzzle
into her brief case to hide her amusement. I was congratulating myself on
my demonstration when I suddenly realized it was dangerous. Noticing my
mimicry, the orangutan looked very annoyed and in a dry voice uttered a
few sharp words that restored order immediately. Then he stopped in front
of me and started dictating his notes to his secretary.






He went on dictating for a long time, punctuating his phrases with
pompous gestures. I was beginning to have enough of his blindness and
resolved to give him fresh proof of my capacities. Stretching my arms out
toward him, I spoke up to the best of my ability: "My Zaius."




I had noticed that all the underlings who addressed him began with these two
words. Zaius, I subsequently learned, was the pontiff's name, "mi" an
honorific title.




  The monkeys were flabbergasted. They no longer wanted to laugh, least
of all Zira, who seemed extremely perturbed, especially when I pointed a
finger at her and added "Zira," a name I had also remembered and that
could only be hers. As for Zaius, he was completely flustered and started
pacing up and down the corridor again, shaking his head with an air of
incredulity.




Having finally recovered his composure, he gave orders for me to be
subjected in his presence to the tests I had been given the previous day. I
acquitted myself well. I watered at the mouth at the first blast of the whistle.
I leaped back at the sound of the bell. He made me repeat this last operation
a dozen times, dictating countless comments to his secretary.




  In the end I had an inspiration. At the moment the gorilla began to ring
the bell, I unfastened the clip that connected the electric wire to my cage
and threw the cable outside. Then I held on to the bars and stayed where I
was, while the other warder, who had not noticed my trick, struggled to turn
the handle of the now harmless generator.


  I was very proud of this move, which was bound to be irrefutable proof of
wisdom to any rational creature. In fact, Zira's attitude showed me that she,
at least, was extremely impressed. She looked at me with singular intensity
and her white muzzle turned pink—which, as I learned later, is a sign of
emotion in chimpanzees. But there was nothing I could do to convince the
orangutan. This fiendish ape again started shrugging his shoulders nastily
and shaking his head energetically when Zira spoke to him. He was a
methodical scientist; he refused to listen to such nonsense. He gave further
instructions to the gorillas and I was given another test, a combination of the
first two.


  I knew this one, too. I had seen it practiced on dogs in certain
laboratories. The idea was to bewilder the subject, to provoke a mental
confusion by combining two reactions. One of the gorillas emitted a series
of blasts on his whistle as the promise of a reward, while the other rang the
bell that announced a punishment. I recalled the conclusions of a noted
biologist concerning a similar experiment: it was possible, he said, by so
abusing an animal, to produce in him emotional disorders strangely
reminiscent of neurosis in men, and sometimes even to send him out of his
mind by repeating these maneuvers fairly often.
  I took care not to fall into the trap: but, clearly pricking up my ears at the
sound of the whistle, then at that of the bell, I sat down halfway between
the two, my chin resting in my hand, in the traditional attitude of the
thinker. Zira could not help clapping her hands. Zaius took a handkerchief
out of his pocket and mopped his brow.


  He was sweating, but nothing could shake his stupid skepticism. This I
could see from his expression after a vehement discussion he had with the
she-ape. He dictated some more notes to his secretary, gave some detailed
instructions to Zira, who listened to them with a far from satisfied air, and
finally went off after darting another churlish glance at me.






 Zira spoke to the gorillas and I quickly realized she was giving them
orders to leave me in peace, at least for
The rest of the day, for they went off with their equipment. Then she came
back to my cage by herself and observed me again, in silence, for a long
time. After which, of her own accord, she stretched out her hand in a friendly
gesture. I seized it with emotion, meanwhile gently whispering her name.
The blush that mantled her muzzle showed me she was deeply touched.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Zaius came back a few days later, and bis visit was the signal for a complete
reorganization of the room. But I must first describe how I had meanwhile
distinguished myself still further in the eyes of the apes.




The day after the orangutan's first inspection an avalanche of new tests
descended upon us, the first at mealtimes. Instead of putting our food in the
cages as they usually did, Zoram and Zanam, the two gorillas whose names I
had finally learned, hoisted them to the ceiling in baskets by means of a
system of pulleys with which the cages were equipped. At the same time they
placed four fairly big wooden cubes in each cell. Then, stepping back, they
observed us.




  It was heartrending to see my companions' discomfort. They tried to jump,
but none of them could reach the basket. Some climbed up the bars but,
having reached the top, they stretched out their arms in vain since they
could not get hold of the food, which was some distance away from the
sides of the cages. I was ashamed at the stupidity of these men. I, needless
to say, had found the solution to the problem immediately. One merely had
to pile the four cubes one on top of another, then climb onto this scaffolding
and unhook the basket. This is what I did, with an air of detachment that
concealed my pride. It was not a stroke of genius, but I was the only one to
show myself so skillful. Zoram and Zanam's obvious admiration went
straight to my heart.




  I started to eat, without concealing my contempt for the other captives,
who were incapable of following my example even after having watched
the maneuver. Nova herself could not imitate me that day, although I
repeated the action several times for her benefit. She di<l try, however —she
was certainly one of the most intelligent of the lot—she tried to pile one cube
on another, but she placed it crookedly so that it overbalanced; then, terrified
by the crash it made !n falling, she took refuge in a corner. This girl,
endowed with remarkable suppleness and agility, whose every gesturewas
graceful, proved to be as hopelessly clumsy as the others when it came to
handling an object. She succeeded, however, in mastering the trick within
two days.






That morning I took pity on her and threw her two of the best bits of fruit
through the bars. This gesture earned me a caress from Zira, who had just
come in. I allowed myself to be stroked by her hairy hand, much to the
displeasure of Nova, whom these demonstrations enraged and who forthwith
started jumping up and down and whimpering.






I distinguished myself in many other tests; but above all, by listening
carefully, I managed to retain a few simple words of the simian language and
to understand their meaning. I practiced pronouncing them whenever Zira
went past my cage, and she looked more and more astounded. I had reached
this stage when Zaius' new inspection took place.
Once again he was escorted by his secretary, but accompanied also by
another orangutan as solemn as he and wearing the same decoration, and
who chatted with him on an equal footing. I assumed he was a colleague
who had been called into consultation over the disturbing case that I
represented. They started a long discussion in front of my cage with Zira,
who had meanwhile joined them. The she-ape spoke at great length and
with fervor. I knew she was trying to plead my cause, pointing out the
exceptional keenness of my intelligence, which no longer could be
contested. But the only result of her intervention was to provoke an
incredulous smile from the two scientists.






I was once again required to undergo the tests at which I had proved so
adroit. The last one consisted in opening a box that was closed by nine
different systems (bolt, pin, key, hook, etc.). Someone on Earth, Kinnaman,
I think it was, had invented a similar device to assess the discernment of
monkeys, and this problem was the most complicated any of them had
succeeded in solving. The same no doubt applied here in the case of men. I
had acquitted myself with honor after the first few attempts.






Zira herself handed me the box, and I saw from her air of entreaty that she
was fervently hoping to see me perform brilliantly, as though her own
reputation was involved in the test. I did my best to satisfy her and operated
the nine mechanisms in a flash, without a moment's hesitation. Nor did I
confine myself to that. I took out the fruit that the box contained and
gallantly offered it to her. She accepted with a blush. Then I revealed my
major achievement and pronounced the few words I had mastered, pointing
out the objects to which they corresponded.






 This time I felt it was impossible that they could entertain further doubt as
to my true condition. Alas, I did not yet know the blindness of orangutans!
They again gave that skeptical smile that enraged me so much, paid no
attention to Zira, and went on with their discussion. They had listened to
me as though I were a parrot. I felt they were only prepared to attribute my
talents to a sort of instinct and a keen sense of mimicry. They had probably
adopted the scientific rule that one of our learned men at home summarized
as follows: "In no case may we interpret an action as the outcome of the
exercise of a higher psychical faculty if it can be interpreted as the outcome
of one that stands lower in the psychological scale."






Such was the obvious meaning of their jargon, and I began fuming with
rage. No doubt I should have yielded to some angry outburst had I not
intercepted a glance from Zira. It was plain to see that she did not agree
with them and felt ashamed to hear them talking like this in front of me.






His colleague having eventually gone off, doubtless after pronouncing a
categorical opinion on my case, Zaius embarked on some other exercises. He
did the rounds of the hall, examining each of the captives in turn and giving
fresh instructions to Zira, who noted them down. His movements seemed to
indicate numerous changes in the occupancy of the cages. It did not take me
long to discover his plan and to understand the purpose of the evident
comparisons he was making between certain characteristics of such-and-
such man and those of such-and-such woman.






I was not mistaken. The gorillas were now carrying out the boss's orders,
which Zira had passed on to them. We were redistributed in couples. What
fiendish tests were indicated by this pairing off? What peculiarities of the
human race did these apes, with their mania for experiments, wish to study?
My acquaintance with biological laboratories had suggested the answer to
me: to a scientist who has chosen instinct and reflexes as his field of study,
the sexual instinct has an exceptional interest.
  That was it! These demons wanted to use us—to use me, who found
myself attached to this herd by an extravagant whim of fate—to study in
captivity the amorous practices of men, the methods of approach of the
male and the female, the manner in which they copulate, in order to
compare them perhaps with earlier observations of the same men in the wild
state. Doubtless they also intended to experiment with sexual selectivity?






As soon as I understood then- plan, I felt more humiliated than I had ever
been in my life and swore to die rather than lend myself to these degrading
schemes. Yet my shame was substantially reduced, I must admit, although
my resolution was still firm, when I saw the woman whom science had
assigned as my mate. It was Nova. I felt almost inclined to forgive the old
pedant his stupidity and blindness, and I made no protest when Zoram and
Zanam seized me around the waist and flung me at the feet of the nymph of
the torrent.






CHAPTER SEVENTEEN


I shall not give a detailed account of the scenes that took place in the cages
during the weeks that followed. As I had guessed, the apes had taken it into
their heads to study the amorous behavior of humans, and they tackled this
task in their usual methodical manner, noting the slightest developments,
struggling to provoke relationships, making use of their pikes now and then
to correct a recalcitrant subject's conduct.


  I had begun to make a few observations myself, hoping to include them in
the account I intended publishing on my eventual return to Earth, but I soon
grew tired of this, finding nothing very intriguing to note—nothing, that is,
apart from the strange manner in which each man courted his woman before
approaching her. He indulged in a display similar in every way to that
executed by certain birds: a sort of slow, hesitant dance consisting of steps
forward, backward, and sideways. He moved thus in an ever-decreasing
circle, a circle whose center was occupied by the woman, who merely
pivoted around without shifting from her position. I witnessed with interest
several of these displays, the essential ritual of which was always the same,
the details varying only occasionally. As for the copulation that concluded
these preliminaries, even though I was slightly astonished when I first
witnessed it, I soon ended up by paying no more attention to it than the rest
of the captives. The only surprising element in these displays was the
scientific ardor with which the apes followed them, never omitting to make
copious notes on the procedure.


 It was a different matter when, noticing I did not indulge in these frolics
—I had sworn that nothing would induce me to make such an exhibition of
myself—the gorillas took it into their heads to compel me by force and to
belabor me with their pikes—me, Ulysse Merou, a man created in the
image of God! I resisted them energetically. These brutes persisted and I
don't know what would have become of me had it not been for the arrival
of Zira, to whom they reported my lack of cooperation.






 She pondered for a long time; then, looking at me with her fine intelligent
eyes, came up and started stroking the back of my neck, meanwhile
addressing me in terms that I assumed to signify something like this:


  "Poor little man," she seemed to be saying. "How odd you are! No one of
your species has ever behaved like this before. Look at the others all
around you. Do what you have been asked to do and you will be rewarded."


  She took a lump of sugar out of her pocket and offered it to me. I was in
despair. So she too regarded me as an animal, perhaps a slightly more
intelligent one than the others. I shook my head furiously and went and lay
down ha a corner of the cage, far from Nova, who gazed at me in
incomprehension.


  That would doubtless have been the end of the business had not Zaius
reappeared at that moment, looking more overbearing than ever. He had
come to see the outcome of his experiments and as usual he inquired first
about me. Zira was obliged to tell him of my recalcitrance. He seemed
extremely displeased, paced up and down for a minute or two with his hands
behind his back, then gave some decisive orders. Zoram and Zanam
opened my cage, took Nova away from me, and brought back instead an
elderly matron. That idiot Zaius, steeped in scientific method, was
determined to try the same experiment with a different subject.


  Worse was to come, however, and I did not even think of my own sad
fate. In anguish I watched my friend Nova being bundled off and was
horrified to see her put into the cage directly opposite, delivered to a man
with hefty shoulders, a sort of hairy-chested colossus, who started dancing
around her, embarking with frenzied ardor on the curious love display I have
already described.




  As soon as I saw what this brute was up to, I forgot my good resolutions.
I lost my head and once again behaved like a madman. As a matter of fact,
I was literally mad with rage. I screamed and yelled like the men of Soror,
showing my fury as they did by hurling myself against the bars, biting
them, foaming at the mouth, grinding my teeth, behaving in short in a
thoroughly bestial fashion.






  And the most surprising thing about this outburst waits unexpected
  outcome. Seeing me behave like this, Zaius smiled. It was the first mark
  of benevolence he had bestowed on me. He had finally detected in me
  human behavior and found himself on familiar ground. His theory was
  vindicated. This put him in such a good mood that he even consented, at a
  remark from Zira, to cancel his orders and give me one last chance. The
  dreadful old matron was led away and Nova was restored to me before
  the hefty brute had touched her. The group of monkeys then stood back
  and all three watched me closely from a distance.






  What more can I say? These emotions had broken down my resistance. I
felt I would never be able to bear the sight of my nymph at the mercy of
another man. I resigned myself like a coward to the victory of the
orangutan, who was now smiling with pleasure at his astuteness. Hesitantly I
attempted a step of the dance.






  Yes, I, one of the kings of creation, started circling around my beauty—I,
the ultimate achievement of millennial evolution, in front of this collection
of apes eagerly watching me, in front of an old orangutan dictating notes to
his secretary, in front of a female chimpanzee smiling with self-satisfaction,
in front of a couple of chuckling gorillas —I, a man, excusing myself on the
grounds of exceptional cosmic circumstances, and persuading myself for the
moment that there are more things on the planets and in the heavens than
have ever been dreamed of in human philosophy, I, Ulysse Merou, embarked
like a peacock around the gorgeous Nova on the love display.




part two


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN


I must now admit that I adapted myself with remarkable ease to-the
conditions of life in my cage. From the material point of view, I was living in
perfect felicity: during the day the apes attended to my every need; at night
I shared my Utter with one of the loveliest girls in the cosmos. I even grew
so accustomed to this situation that for more than a month, without feeling
how outlandish or degrading it was, I made no attempt to put an end to it. I
learned hardly any new words of the simian language. I did not continue my
spiritual nature, had no doubt since yielded to Zaius' opinion and regarded
me as a man of her planet, that is, an animal: an intelligent animal, perhaps,
but by no means an intellectual one.


  My superiority over the other prisoners, which I no longer exercised to the
point of startling the warders, made me the most brilliant subject in the
establishment. This distinction, I am ashamed to admit, sufficed my present
ambitions and even filled me with pride. Zoram and Zanam were friendly
toward me, taking pleasure in seeing me smile, laugh, and pronounce a few
words. Having exhausted all the classic tests with me, they racked then*
brains to invent other, more subtle ones, and all three of us made merry
whenever I discovered the solution to a problem* They never forgot to
bring me some tidbit, which I always shared with Nova. We were a
privileged couple. I was fatuous enough to believe that my mate was aware
of all she owed to my talents, and I spent part of my time showing off in
front of her.




One day, however, after several weeks, I felt a sort of nausea. Was it the
gleam in Nova's eyes, which had seemed to me that night particularly
lacking in expression? Was it the lump of sugar that Zira came to give me
that suddenly acquired a bitter taste? The fact is that I was shamed by my
cowardly resignation. What would Professor Antelle think of me, if he
chanced to be still alive and found me in this state? This thought soon
became unbearable, and I forthwith made up my mind to behave like a
civilized man.






While' stroking Zira's arm by way of expressing my thanks, I snatched
away her notebook and fountain pen. I braved her gentle remonstrances, sat
down on the straw, and started a drawing of Nova. I am a fairly good
draftsman and, being inspired by the model, managed to turn out a
reasonable likeness, which I then handed to the she-ape.






  This promptly reawakened her emotion and uncertainty about me. Her
muzzle became red and she peered at me closely, trembling slightly. Since
she made no further move, I again calmly seized her notebook, which this
time she yielded to me without protest. Why had I not thought of this
simple solution before? Mustering my school-day memories, I drew the
geometrical figure illustrating the theorem of Pythagoras. It was not at
random that I chose this proposition: I remembered reading hi my youth a
prophetic book in which such a procedure had been used by an old scientist
to enter into communication with the spirits of another world. I had even
discussed this during the voyage with Professor Antelle, who approved of
the method. He had added, I distinctly remembered, that the Euclidean
rules, being completely false, were no doubt for that very reason universal.






  In any case, the effect it had on Zira was extraordinary. Her muzzle went
purple and she gave a sharp exclamation. She did not recover her
composure until Zoram and Zanam came up, intrigued by her attitude. Then
she reacted in a way that I found extremely odd—after darting a furtive
glance at me, she carefully hid the drawing I had just completed. She spoke
to the gorillas, who then left the hall, and I realized she had sent them off on
some pretext or other. Then she turned back to me and took my hand, the
pressure of her fingers having quite a different significance from when she
flattered me like a young animal after a successful trick. Finally she handed
me the notebook and fountain pen with an air of entreaty.






  Now it was she who appeared eager to establish contact. I gave thanks to
Pythagoras and embarked once more on my geometry. On one page of the
notebook I drew to the best of my ability the three conic sections with their
axes and centers: an ellipse, a parabola, and an hyperbola. Then, on the
opposite page, I drew a right circular cone. Let me remind the reader that
the intersection of such a body by a plane produces one of the three conic
sections, depending on the angle of the cut. In this case I drew the figure to
illustrate an ellipse, then, reverting to my first diagram, pointed out the
corresponding curve to my astonished she-ape.






  She snatched the notebook out of my hands and in turn drew another cone,
intersected at a different angle, and pointed out the hyperbola with her long
finger. I felt such intense emotion that tears came to my eyes and I clasped
her hands convulsively. Nova whimpered with rage at the far end of the
cage. Her instinct did not deceive her as to the meaning of these
demonstrations. It was a spiritual communion that had just been established
betw%en Zira and me through the medium of geometry. I derived an almost
sensual satisfaction from this and felt that the she-ape was also deeply
moved.






 She broke free with a sudden jerk and rushed from the hall. She was
absent only a few minutes, but during this time I remained lost in thought
without daring to look
at Nova, about whom I felt almost guilty and who turn her back on me with
a growl.






  When Zira came back she handed me a large sheet of paper fixed to a
drawing board. I thought for a second or two and made up my mind to
deliver a decisive blow. In one corner of the sheet I sketched the system of
Betelgeuse, as we had discovered it on our arrival, with the giant central
body, and its four planets. I marked Soror down in its exact position together
with its own little satellite; I indicated it to Zira, then pointed my forefinger
at her repeatedly. She signaled to me that she had understood completely.


  Then in another corner of the sheet I drew our dear old solar system with
its principal planets. I indicated the Earth and pointed my finger at my own
chest.




  This time Zira was slower to understand. She, too, indicated the Earth, then
pointed her finger upward. I gave an affirmative nod. She was flabbergasted
and her mental turmoil was plain to see. I did my best to help her by
drawing another dotted line between Earth and Soror and marking in our
vessel, on a different scale, on the trajectory. This made her see the light. I
was now certain that my true nature and origin were known to her. She was
about to draw closer to me but at that moment Zaius appeared at the end of
the corridor for his periodical inspection.






  A look of terror came into the she-ape's eyes. She quickly crumpled up the
paper, put her notebook back in her pocket, and, before the orangutan had
reached us, placed her forefinger on her mouth with an air of entreaty. She
was counseling me not to show myself in my true colors to Zaius. I obeyed
her without understanding the reason for these mysteries and, convinced
that I had an ally in her, promptly resumed my intelligent animal attitude.






CHAPTER N I N E T E E N


From then on, thanks to Zira, my knowledge of the simian world and
language increased rapidly. She contrived to see me alone almost every day
on the pretext of some test and undertook my education, instructing me in
the language and at the same time learning mine with a rapidity that amazed
me. In less than two months we were capable of holding a conversation on
a variety of subjects. Little by little I came to understand the planet Soror,
and it is the characteristics of this strange civilization that I am now going to try
to describe.






  As soon as we could converse together, Zira and I, I directed the
conversation toward the principal object of my curiosity: Were the apes the
only rational beings, the kings of creation on the planet?






  "What do you think?" she said. "Ape is of course the only rational
creature, the only one possessing a mind as well as a body. The most
materialistic of our scientists recognize the supernatural essence of the
simian mind."


Phrases like this always gave me a start in spite of myself.






 "Well then, Zira, what are men?"






  We were then speaking French, for, as I have said, she was quicker to
learn my language than I hers. At the outset there were some difficulties of
interpretation, the words "man" and "ape" not evoking the same creatures
for us; but this snag was quickly smoothed out. Each time she said "ape," I
mentally translated "superior being, the height of evolution." When she
spoke about men, I knew she meant bestial creatures endowed with a
certain sense of imitation and presenting a few anatomical similarities to
apes but of an embryonic psyche and devoid of the power of thought.






"It was only a century ago," she said dogmatically, "that we made some
remarkable progress in the science of origins. It used to be thought that
species were immutable, created with their present characteristics by an all-
powerful God. But a line of great thinkers, all of them chimpanzees, have
modified our ideas on this subject completely. Today we know that all
species are mutable and probably have a common source."






 "So that apes probably descend from men?"






  "Some of us thought so; but it is not exactly that. Apes and men are two
separate branches that have evolved from a point in common but in
different directions, the former gradually developing to the stage of
rational thought, the others stagnating in their animal state. Many
orangutans, however, still insist on denying this obvious fact."


"You were saying, Zira . . . a line of great thinkers, all of them chimpanzees?"






I am reporting these conversations as they occurred, in nonconsecutive
snatches, my eagerness to learn leading Zira into countless lengthy
digressions.
"Almost all the great discoveries," she stated vehemently, . "have been
made by chimpanzees."






 "Are there different classes among the apes?"






  "There are three distinct families, as you have noticed, each of which has
its own characteristics: chimpanzees,


gorillas, and orangutans. The racial barriers that used to exist have been
abolished and the disputes arising from them have been settled, thanks
mainly to the campaigns launched by the chimpanzees. Today, in principle,
there is no difference at all between us."






 "But most of the great discoveries," I persisted, "were made by the
chimpanzees."




"That is true."






"What about the gorillas?"






  "They are meat eaters," she said scornfully. "They were overlords and
many of them have preserved a lust for power. They enjoy organizing and
directing. They love hunting and life in the open air. The poorest of them are
engaged on work that requires physical strength."




"And the orangutans?"
Zira looked at me for a moment, then burst out laughing.






  "They are Official Science," she said. "You must have noticed this already
and you'll have plenty of opportunities to confirm it. They learn an
enormous amount from books. They are all decorated. Some of them are
looked upon as leading lights in a narrow specialized field that requires a
good memory. Apart from that . . ."


  She made a gesture of contempt. I did not pursue this subject, but made a
mental note to come back to it later. I led the conversation to more general
ideas. At my request she drew the genealogical tree of the ape, insofar as
the best specialists had determined it. This bore a close resemblance to the
diagrams that with us represent the evolutionary process. From a single
trunk, whose roots faded away at the base into the unknown, various limbs
branched out in succession: vegetables, unicellular organisms, then coelen-
terata and echinoderms; higher up one arrived at fish, reptiles, and finally
mammals. The tree was extended to include a class analogous to our
anthropoids, and at this point a new limb branched out: that of men. This
branch stopped short, whereas the central stem went on rising, giving birth to
different species of prehistoric apes with barbaric names, to culminate
eventually in Simius sapiens, forming the three extreme points of evolution:
the chimpanzee, the gorilla, and the orangutan. It was absolutely clear.






 "Ape's brain," Zira concluded, "has developed, is complex and organized,
whereas man's has hardly undergone any transformation."






 "And why, Zira, has the simian brain developed in this way?"
Language had undoubtedly been an essential factor. But why did apes talk
 and not men? Scientific opinion differed on this point. There were some
 who saw in it a mysterious divine intervention. Others maintained that
 ape's mind was primarily the result of the fact that he had four agile hands.






  "With only two hands, each with short, clumsy fingers," said Zira, "man is
probably handicapped at birth, incapable of progressing and acquiring a
precise knowledge of the universe. Because of this he has never been able
to use a tool with any success. Oh, it's possible that he once tried, clumsily.
. . . Some curious vestiges have been found. There are a number of research
projects going on at this moment into that particular subject. If you're
interested in these questions, I will introduce you someday to Cornelius. He
is much more qualified than I am to discuss them."




 "Cornelius?"






 "My fiance' said Zira, blushing. "A very great, a real scientist."




 "A chimpanzee?"






 "Of course. . . . Anyway," she concluded, "that's what I think, too: our
being equipped with four hands is one of the most important factors in our
spiritual evolution. It helped us in the first place to climb trees, and thereby
conceive the three dimensions of space, whereas man, pegged to the ground
by a physical malformation, slumbered On the flat. A taste for tools came to
us next because we had the potentiality of using them with dexterity.
Achievement followed, and it is thus we have raised ourselves to the level
of wisdom."
  On Earth I had frequently heard precisely the opposite argument used to
explain the superiority of man. After thinking it over, however, Zira's
reasoning struck me as being neither more nor less convincing than ours.


I should have liked to pursue this conversation, and I still had a thousand
questions to ask, when we were interrupted by Zoram and Zanam bringing
the evening meal. Zira bade me a hasty good night and went off.






  I remained in my cage with Nova as my only companion. We had finished
eating. The gorillas had left, after putting out the lights, except the one over
the entrance which gave a feeble gleam. I looked at Nova and thought
about what I had learned during the day. It was obvious that she did not
care for Zira and was vexed by these conversations. At first she had even
protested in her usual manner and tried to come between Zira and me,
leaping about the cage, tearing up handfuls of straw, and flinging them in
the in-
truder's face. I had had to resort to force to keep her quie After receiving a
few thundering slaps across her beautiful face, she had eventually calmed
down. I had allowed myself to indulge in this brutal behavior almost
without thinking; afterward I felt sorry, but she appeared not to hold it
against me.




  The intellectual effort I had made to assimilate the simian theories of
evolution left me worn out. I was happy when I saw Nova creep over to me
in the dark and in her usual fashion beg for the half-human, half-animal
caresses for which we had gradually worked out the code: a singular code,
the details of which are of little importance, composed of compromise and
reciprocal concessions to the manners of the civilized world and to the
customs of this outlandish human race that populated the planet Soror.




CHAPTER T W E N T Y


It was a red-letter day for me. Yielding to my entreaties, Zira had agreed to
take me out of the Institute for Advanced Biological Study—that was the
name of the establishment—and show me around the town.






  She had consented to this only after much hesitation. It had taken me
some time to convince her finally of my origin. Until then, though admitting
the evidence while in my company, she would later begin doubting again. I
tried to put myself in her place. She could only be profoundly shocked by my
description of the men and above all of the apes on our Earth. She
subsequently told me that for a long time she had preferred to regard me as
a sorcerer or a charlatan rather than accept my statements. Yet, confronted
with the facts and the evidence I accumulated, she eventually had complete
confidence in me and even began to work out a plan to enable me to recover
my liberty, which was not easy, as she explained to me that day. Meanwhile
she came to fetch me at the beginning of the afternoon to go on our outing.






  I felt my heart thumping at the thought of being in the open air again. My
enthusiasm was slightly curbed when I saw she was going to keep me on a
lead. The gorillas took me out of the cage, banged the door shut in Nova's
face, and put around my neck a leather collar to which a strong chain was
fixed. Zira took the other end and led me off, while a heart-rending whine
from Nova stirred my compassion. But when I showed her a little pity and
gave her a friendly wave, Zira looked angry and tugged me forward by the
neck. Since she was now convinced I had an ape's mind, my intimacy with
the young girl vexed and shocked her.






Her bad temper evaporated when we were alone together in the dark,
deserted corridor.






"I don't suppose," she laughed, "that men on Earth are used to being held on
a lead like this by apes?"






  I assured her they were not at all used to it. She apologized, explaining that
even though there were a few tame men who could be taken out like this
without causing a scene, it was more normal if I was tied up. Subsequently,
if I proved harmless, she might possibly be able to relieve me of my fetters.






And partly forgetting my true condition, as she still often did, she began
advising me about my behavior, which humiliated me deeply.
"Above all, do be careful not to turn on passers-by or bare your teeth or
scratch a trustful child who might come up and pet you. I didn't want to
muzzle you, but . . ."






She stopped short and burst out laughing.






  "Forgive me, forgive me!" she cried. "I keep forgetting you have a mind
like an ape."




She gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder by way of apology. Her high
spirits dissolved my mounting resentment. I liked to hear her laugh. Nova's
inability to manifest her joy in this way sometimes made me sigh. I shared
the she-ape's gaiety. In the half-light of the corridor I could no longer see her
face except for the tip of her white muzzle. She had put on a smart coat and
skirt to go out and a scarf that concealed her ears. For a moment I forgot her
simian condition and took her arm. She found my gesture quite natural and
did not object. We walked along for a bit like this, side by side. At the end
of the corridor, lit by a window in the side wall, she quickly withdrew her
arm and pushed me away. Reverting to a more serious mood, she tugged on
my chain.






"You mustn't behave like this," she said, looking slightly distressed. "In the
first place, I'm engaged and—"






"You're engaged!"
  The incongruity of her remark about my gesture of familiarity struck her
at the same time as it did me. She corrected herself, blushing at the muzzle.
"I mean, no one must suspect your nature for the moment. It's in your own
interests, I assure you."






  I took her advice and allowed myself to be led along quietly. We left the
building. The porter of the institute, a big gorilla clad in a uniform, let us
out, observing me with curiosity after having saluted Zira. On the sidewalk
I staggered slightly, giddy from the exercise and dazzled by the glare of
Betelgeuse after more than three months' captivity. I inhaled the warm air
deeply; at the same time, I felt embarrassed to be walking around naked. I
had grown used to this in my cage, but here I felt grotesque and indecent
under the eyes of the apes passing by, who kept staring at me. Zira had
categorically refused to let me wear clothes, maintaining that I would have
looked even more ridiculous dressed up, like one of those tame men who
are exhibited at fairs. She was no doubt right. In fact, if the passers-by
turned around to stare at me, it was not because I was naked but simply
because I was a man, a species that in the streets roused the same sort of
curiosity as would a chimpanzee in a French city. The adults merely
grinned and continued on their way, but some young apes began to gather
around me in great glee. Zira quickly led me off toward her car, motioned
me into the back seat, sat down herself behind the steering wheel, and drove
me slowly along the streets.






  The town—the capital of an important simian region—I had barely
glimpsed on my arrival, and I now had to resign myself to seeing it peopled
by ape pedestrians, ape motorists, ape shopkeepers, ape businessmen, and
apes in uniform whose job was to maintain law and order. Apart from this,
it did not make a great impression on me. The houses were similar to ours;
the roads, which were fairly dirty, looked like our roads. The traffic was less
heavy than at home. What struck me most of all was the way the
pedestrians crossed the street. There were no marked crossings, only
overhead passages consisting of a metal frame to which they clung with all
four hands. They all wore fine leather gloves that did not interfere with their
prehension.






  When she had driven around sufficiently to give me a general picture of
the town, Zira stopped her car in front of a tall gate through which I could
see .banks of flowers.




"The park," she said. "We can go for a little stroll. I should have liked to
show you some other things—our museums, for instance, which are
outstanding—but that's not possible yet."




 I assured her that I should be delighted to stretch my legs.




"And besides," she went on, "we'll be left in peace here.






There are not many people about and it's time for us to have a serious
conversation."




CHAPTER T W E N T Y - O N E


"I don't think you realize, do you, the danger you are in here on Soror?"




"I've already had some experience of it; but I feel that if I showed myself in
my true colors—and I can do so now by providing proof—the apes ought to
admit me as their spiritual brother."






"That's where you're wrong. Now listen . . ."
  We were strolling through the park. The paths were almost deserted and we
had passed no more than one or two courting couples who were roused to a
momentary curiosity by my presence. I, on the other hand, stared at them
shamelessly, being firmly resolved not to miss a single opportunity to learn about
simian customs.


  They walked along together holding each other around the waist, the length
of their arms making this embrace a tight and complex encirclement. They
would often stop at a corner of a path to exchange a kiss or two. From time
to time also, after darting a furtive glance all around, they would take hold of
the low branches of a tree and swing themselves off the ground. This they
accomplished without separating, each of them using one hand and one foot
with an ease that I envied, and they would then disappear into the foliage.


  "Now listen," said Zira. "Your launch"—I had told her in detail how we had
arrived on the planet—"your launch has been discovered; at least what's left of
it after being pillaged. It has aroused the curiosity of' our researchers.


 They realize it was not manufactured here."




"Do you build similar machines?"






  "Yes, but not so perfected. From what you've told me, we're a long way behind
you. We have, however, already launched artificial satellites around our planet,
the last one even being occupied by a living being: a man. We had to destroy it
in flight because we were unable to recover it."






"I see," I said, lost in thought. "So men also serve you for this sort of
experiment."
"It can't be helped. . . . Anyway, your rocket has been discovered."


 "What about our spaceship, which has been in orbit around Soror for the last
 few months?"




  "I haven't heard anything about it. It must have escaped the notice of our
astronomers . . . but do stop interrupting me. Some of our scientists have
put forward the theory that the machine comes from another planet and that
it was inhabited. They are unable to go a step further and imagine intelligent
beings in human form."






 "But you must tell them, Zira!" I cried. "I've had enough of living like a
prisoner, even in the most comfortable of cages, even looked after by you.
Why are you hiding me away? Why not reveal the truth to everyone?"




Zira stopped short, glanced all about her, and put her hand on my arm.






"Why? It's purely in your own interests that I'm doing this. You know
Zaius?"






"Of course. I wanted to talk to you about him. Well?"






 "Did you notice the effect your first attempts at rationality produced on
him? Do you know I've tried a hundred times to tell him about you and to
suggest—ever so carefully!—that perhaps you were not a beast in spite of
appearances?"
"I've seen you having long conversations together and noticed you didn't
agree."




   "He's as stubborn as a mule and as stupid as a man!" Zira burst out. "Alas!
it's the same with almost all the orangutans. He has decreed once and for all
that your talents are due to a highly developed animal instinct, and nothing
will make him change his opinion. The unfortunate thing is, he has already
prepared a long theses on you in which he asserts that you are a tame man,
in other words, a man who has been trained to perform certain tricks
without understanding them, probably during a former period of captivity."






"The stupid beast!"






  "Certainly. The only snag is, he represents official science and he's
powerful. He is one of the highest authorities in the institute, and all my
reports have to go through him. I'm almost certain he would accuse me of
scientific heresy if I tried to reveal the truth in your case, as you suggest. I
should be dismissed. That's unimportant, but do you realize what might then
happen to you?"




 "What fate could be worse than living in a cage?"






  "Be thankful for small mercies! Do you know how I've had to scheme and
plot to prevent him from having you transferred to the encephalic section?
Nothing could restrain him if you insisted on claiming to be a rational
creature."
 "What's the encephalic section?" I asked in alarm.
"That's where we perform certain extremely tricky operations on the brain:
grafting; observation and alteration of the nervous centers; partial and even
total ablation."






"And you carry out these experiments on men!"






  "Of course. Man's brain, like the rest of his anatomy, is the one that bears
the closest resemblance to ours. It's a lucky chance that nature has put at
our disposal an animal on whom we can study our own bodies. Man serves
us in many other fields of research, as you'll come to realize. . . . At this
very moment we are undertaking an extremely important series of
experiments."


 "For which you need a considerable amount of human material."


  "A very considerable amount—which explains those drives we carry out in
the jungle to renew our supplies. Unfortunately, it's the gorillas who
organize them, and we can't stop them indulging in their favorite pastime,
which is shooting. A large number of subjects have thus been lost to
science."




"What a terrible shame," I muttered, biting my lip. "But to get back to me . .
."






"Do you know why I've insisted on keeping our secret?"






 "Am I then condemned to spend the rest of my life in a cage?"
  "Not if the plan I have in mind succeeds. But you must not drop your
mask until the time is ripe and you hold all the cards. This is what I suggest:
in a month from now we're holding our annual biological conference. It's an
important event. A large public is admitted to it and the representatives of
all the leading papers attend. Now, for us public opinion is a more powerful
element than Zaius, more powerful than all the orangutans combined, more
powerful even than the gorillas. This will be your chance. It's when this
congress is in full session that you must lift the veil; for you're going to be
introduced by Zaius, who, as I've told you, is preparing a long report on you
and your famous instinct. The best thing then would be for you to speak up
yourself to explain your case. This would cause such a sensation that Zaius
wouldn't be able to stop you. It will be up to you to explain yourself clearly
to the assembly and convince the crowd and the journalists, as you have
already convinced me."






 "And if Zaius and the orangutans put their foot down?"






 "Once the gorillas are forced to bow before public opinion,
they'll soon make those idiot orangutans see reason. Many of them, after all,
are not so stupid as Zaius; and there are also, among the scientists, a few
chimpanzees whom the Academy has been obliged to admit because of
their sensational discoveries. One of these is Cornelius, my fiance. He's the
only one to whom I have spoken about you. He has promised to do all he
can for you. Naturally, he wants to see you beforehand so as to check the
incredible account I have given him. That's partly why I've brought you
here today. I've arranged to meet him and he shouldn't be long."






  Cornelius was waiting for us near a bank of giant ferns. He was a fine-
looking chimpanzee, older than Zira certainly, but extremely young for a
learned academician. As soon as I saw him I was struck by his
exceptionally keen and intense expression.






"What do you think of him?" Zira whispered to me hi French.






  I realized from her question that I had definitely won the confidence of
this she-ape. I muttered some complimentary remark and we went up to him.


  The engaged couple embraced in the manner of the lovers in the park. He
had opened his arms wide without glancing hi my direction. In spite of
what she had told him about me, it was clear that my presence counted no
more for him than that of a pet animal. Zira herself forgot me for a moment
and they exchanged long kisses on the muzzle. Then she stiffened, broke
free from him, and bashfully lowered her eyes.




 "Darling, we are not alone."
    "Yes, I am here," I said with dignity in my best simian language.


    "What's that?" Cornelius exclaimed with a start.


 "I said, I am here. I am sorry to have to remind you of the fact. Your
demonstrations do not embarrass me in the least, but you might hold it
against me later."


  "Well, I never!" exclaimed the learned chimpanzee. Zira burst out
laughing and introduced us.


  "Dr. Cornelius of the Academy," she said. "Ulysse Merou, an inhabitant of
the solar system or, to be more precise, the Earth."




"I am delighted to make your acquaintance," I said. "Zira has told me about
you. I congratulate you on having such a charming fiancee.


"


  And I held out my hand. He shied away as though a snake had just raised
its head in front of him.






    "So it's true?" he muttered, looking at Zira in utter bewilderment.




    "Darling, am I in the habit of telling you lies?"






 He pulled himself together. He was a man of science. After a moment's
hesitation he shook my hand.
"How do you do?"






  "How do you do?" I replied. "Once more I must apologize for appearing hi
this state of undress."


 "That's all he can think of," said Zira with a laugh. "It's a complex with
him. He does not realize the effect he would have if he were dressed."




"And you really come from . . . from?"






"From Earth, a planet of the Sun."






  He had evidently given little credit till now to Zira's confidences,
preferring to believe in some hoax. He started firing questions at me. We
were strolling along, the two of them a few paces ahead and arm in arm, I
following on the end of my chain so as not to attract the attention of the
passers-by we chanced to meet. But my replies roused his scientific
curiosity to such a pitch that he would often stop short, let go of his fiancee,
and we would embark on a discussion face to face with sweeping gestures,
tracing diagrams in the sand on the path. Zira did not mind. She appeared,
on the contrary, delighted with the impression I had made.






 Cornelius was particularly interested, of course, in the emergence of
Homo sapiens on Earth and made me tell him again and again everything I
knew about this subject. Then he pondered over it for some time. He told
me that my revelations undoubtedly constituted a document of capital
importance to science and particularly to him, as he was then engaged on
some extremely arduous research into the simian phenomenon. From what I
understood, this was still an unsolved problem to him and he did not agree
with the generally, accepted theories. But he became reticent on this subject
and did not let me know his views completely during this first encounter.




 However it might be, I was an object of great interest to him and he would
have given a fortune to have me in his laboratory. We then spoke about my
present situation and about Zaius, whose stupidity and blindness he fully
appreciated. He approved of Zira's plan. He would himself prepare the
ground by alluding to the mystery of my case in die presence of some of his
colleagues.






When he left us he held out his hand without a moment's hesitation, after
first making sure the path was deserted.






Then he kissed his fiance'e and went off, not without turning. around several
times to convince himself that I was not an hallucination.


 "A charming young ape," I said as we made our way back to the car.




"And a very great scientist. With his support I'm sure you will persuade the
congress."






 "Zira," I murmured in her ear when I was in the back seat, "I shall owe you
my liberty and my life."


  I was thinking of all she had done for me since my capture. Without her I
should never have been able to come into contact with the simian world.
Zaius would have been quite capable of having my brain removed to
demonstrate that I was not a rational being. Thanks to her, I now had some
allies and could face the future with a little more optimism.
"I did it out of love for science," she said, blushing. "You are a unique case
that must be preserved at all costs."






My heart overflowed with gratitude. I yielded to the soulfulness of her
expression, managing to overlook her physical appearance. I put my hand on
her long hairy paw. A shiver went down her spine and I discerned in her
eyes a gleam of affection. We were both deeply moved and remained silent
all the way back. When she returned me to my cage, I roughly rebuffed
Nova, who was indulging in some sort of childish demonstration to welcome
me back.






CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO


Zira has secretly lent me a flashlight and has slipped me some books that I
keep hidden under the straw. I now read and speak the apes' language
fluently. I spend several hours every night studying their civilization. Nova
protested at first. She came over and sniffed at one of the books, baring her
teeth as though it were a dangerous adversary. I only had to focus the beam
of my flash on her to see her dash back into her corner, trembling and
whimpering. I am the absolute master at home, now that I possess this
instrument, and no longer need any arguments more striking to keep her
quiet. I feel she looks upon me as a redoubtable being, and I notice from
many signs that the other captives also regard me as such. My prestige has
increased considerably, and I take unfair advantage of this. Sometimes I have
an unreasoning desire to terrified,-Jova by brandishing the flashlight, after
which she creeps back to pardon me for my cruelty.




I flatter myself that I now have a fairly clear idea of the simian world.






The apes are not divided into nations. The whole planet is administered by a
council of ministers, at the head of which is a triumvirate consisting of one
gorilla, one orangutan, and one chimpanzee. In conjunction with this
government, there is also a parliament composed of three chambers: the
Chamber of Gorillas, of Orangutans, and of Chimpanzees, each of which
attends to the interests of its respective members.






In fact, this division into three races is the only one that exists. In principle
they all have equal rights and are allowed to occupy any position. Yet, with
certain exceptions, each species confines itself to its own specialty.






  From far back in the past, when they used to reign by force, the gorillas
have preserved a taste for authority and still form the most powerful class.
They do not mingle with the herd, they are never seen at popular
demonstrations, but it is they who administer at very high level most of the
great enterprises. Rather ignorant as a rule, they know by instinct how to
make use of their skills. They excel in the art of drawing up general
directives and handling the other apes. When a technician makes an
interesting discovery—a luminous tube, for instance, or some new
combustible fuel—it is almost always a gorilla who undertakes to exploit it
and derive every possible benefit from it. Without being really intelligent,
they are much more cunning than the orangutans. They get whatever they
want out of the latter by playing on their pride. Thus, at the head of our
institute, above Zaius who is the scientific director, there is a gorilla
administrator who is rarely seen. He has come into our room only once. He
looked me up and down with his particular air of authority, and I almost
automatically rose to my feet and stood to attention. I noticed Zaius' servile
attitude, and Zira herself seemed impressed by his grand manner.






 The gorillas who do not occupy positions of authority are usually engaged
on lesser jobs requiring physical strength. Zoram and Zanam, for instance,
are there only for the rough work and especially for maintaining law and
order when necessary.
Or else the gorillas are hunters. This is a function more or less reserved for
them. They capture wild animals and, in particular, men. I have already
pointed out the enormous numbers of men required for the apes'
experiments. These experiments play a part in their lives that I find more
disconcerting as I discover their importance. A large section of the simian
population seems to be engaged on biological study, but I shall come back
to this oddity later. However it may be, the supplying of human material
necessitates an organized enterprise. A whole tribe of hunters, beaters,
porters, and tradesmen is devoted to this industry, at the head of which there
are always gorillas. I believe this is a prosperous business, for man fetches a
high price.






  By the side of the gorillas—I was going to say below them, although any
form of hierarchy is contested—are the orangutans and the chimpanzees.
The former, who are by far the least numerous, were described to me by
Zira in a single phrase: they are official science.




  This is partly true, but some of them occasionally indulge in politics, the
arts, and literature. They bring the same characteristics to all these
activities. Pompous, solemn, pedantic, devoid of originality and critical
sense, intent on preserving tradition, blind and deaf to all innovation, they
form the substratum of every academy. Endowed with a good memory, they
learn an enormous amount by heart and from books. Then they themselves
write other books, in which they repeat what they have read, thereby
earning the respect of their fellow orangutans. Perhaps I am slightly biased
in my attitude toward them by the opinion of Zira and her fianc6, who
detest them, as do all the chimpanzees. Moreover, they are equally despised
by the gorillas, who laugh at their lack of initiative but who exploit them for
the benefit of their own schemes. Almost every orangutan has behind him a
gorilla or a council of gorillas who support him and maintain him in an
honorable post, seeing to it that he is granted the titles and decorations that
are dear to his heart—until the day he ceases to give satisfaction. Then he is
dismissed without mercy and replaced by another ape of the same species.
  There remain the chimpanzees. These seem to represent the intellectual
element of the planet. It is not an idle boast that all the great discoveries
have been made by them, as Zira first told me. This is a slightly exaggerated
generalization, for there are a few exceptions. In any case, they write most
of the interesting books and on a great variety of subjects. They seem
animated by a powerful spirit of research.






 I have mentioned the sort of works the orangutans produce. The
unfortunate thing is, as Zira frequently deplores,


they thus write all the educational books, propagating grotesque errors
among simian youth. Not long ago, she assures me, these school textbooks
still stated that the planet Soror was the center of the world, although this
heresy had been rejected long before by every ape of even mediocre
intelligence; and the only reason for this was that there once existed on
Soror, thousands of years ago, an ape of considerable authority called
Haristas who held such beliefs and whose dogmas have been repeated by
the orangutans ever since. It is easier to understand Zira's attitude toward
me now that I have learned that this Haristas believed that apes alone can
have a soul. The chimpanzees, fortunately, have a far more critical mind. In
the last few years, it seems, they have embarked on a regular campaign to
disparage the old idol's axioms.






As for the gorillas, they write very few books, and these are noteworthy
more because of their appearance than their subject matter. I have glanced
through some of them, and remember their titles: The Need for Sound
Organization as the Basis of Research, The Benefits of Social Politics, or
The Organization of the Large Man Hunts on the Green Continent. These
works are always well documented, each chapter being written by a
specialized technician, and contain diagrams, tables, and sometimes attractive
photographs.
  The unification of the planet, the absence of war and military expenditures
—there is no army, only a police force—strike me as being factors that
would foster rapid progress in every realm of the simian world. This is not
the case. Although Soror is probably slightly older than the Earth, it is clear
that the apes lag behind us in any number of ways.




 They have electricity, industries, motor cars, and airplanes, but, as far as
the conquest of space is concerned, they have reached only the stage of
artificial satellites. In pure science I think their knowledge of the infinitely
great and the infinitely small is inferior to ours. This backwardness is
perhaps due to mere chance, and I have no doubt they will catch up with us
one day, when I consider their capacity for application and the spirit of
research shown by the chimpanzees. In fact, it seems to me they have been
through a dark period of stagnation that has lasted a very long time, far
longer than with us, and have only recently entered an age of considerable
achievement.






  This spirit of research, I must once again point out, is directed principally
in one direction: the biological sciences and in particular the study of ape,
man being the instrument they use to this end. The latter thus plays an
essential, albeit rather humiliating, part in their existence. It is lucky that
there is a considerable supply of men on their planet I have read a paper
proving there are more men here than apes. But the number of the latter is
on the increase, whereas the human population is falling off, and already
some scientists are anxious about future supplies for their laboratories.






All this does not explain the secret of simian evolution. On the other hand,
perhaps there is no mystery about it. Their emergence is no doubt as natural
as our own. Yet I cannot entirely accept this idea, and I now know that some
of their scientists also consider that the phenomenon of simian ascendency is
by no means clear. Cornelius belongs to this school, and I believe he is
seconded by the keenest brains. Unaware of where they come from, who
they are, or where they are going, they no doubt suffer from this lack of
knowledge. Might it not be this feeling that inspires them with a sort of frenzy
for biological research and that gives such a special slant to their scientific
pursuits? My nighttime meditation concludes with these questions.






CHAPTER T W E N T Y - T H R E E


Zira took me for outings in the park fairly often. Sometimes we would meet
Cornelius there, and together we would prepare the speech I was to give
before the congress. The date was fast approaching, which made me quite
nervous. Zira assured me that all would be well. Cornelius was eager for my
state to be recognized and my liberty restored so that he could study me
closely—collaborate with me, he corrected himself, at the gesture of
annoyance that escaped me when he spoke like this.




  One day her fiance was absent. Zira suggested going to the zoo adjoining
the park. I should have liked to go to a theater or a museum, but these
entertainments were still forbidden me. Only from books had I been able to
acquire a few ideas about simian art. I had admired some reproductions of
classical paintings, portraits of celebrated apes, country scenes with lascivious
she-apes around whom fluttered a little winged monkey representing Cupid,
military paintings dating from the time when there were still wars and
depicting terrifying gorillas wearing flamboyant uniforms. The apes had also had
their impressionists, and a few contemporaries indulged in abstract art. All this
I had discovered in my cage, by the light of my flashlight. I could decently
attend only open-air entertainments. Zira had taken me to see a game
resembling our football, a boxing match, which had made me shudder,
between two gorillas, and an athletic meet in which air-borne chimps
launched themselves to prodigious heights by means of a springboard.






I welcomed a visit to the zoo. At first I felt no surprise. The animals bore
many similarities to those on Earth. There were felines, pachyderms,
ruminants, reptiles, and birds. If I noticed a sort of camel with three humps
and a wild boar with horns like a stag, they could in no way astonish me
after what I had already seen on the planet Soror.






 My amazement began with the section devoted to man. Zira tried to
dissuade me from going there, regretting having brought me, I believe, but
my curiosity was too strong and I tugged on my lead until she yielded.


  The first cage at which we stopped contained at least fifty individuals,
men, women, and children, exhibited there to the great glee of the ape
spectators. They displayed a feverish and immoderate activity, leaping
about, jostling one another, making an exhibition of themselves, indulging
in all sorts of frolics.






  It was certainly a sight. They were all intent on winning favor with the
little apes surrounding their cage, who now and then threw them some fruit
or pieces of cake sold by an old she-ape at the entrance. It was the man,
either adult or child, who did the best trick—climbing up the bars, walking
on all fours or on his hands—who obtained the reward, and when this fell
in the middle of a group, there was a scuffle involving scratched faces and
torn-out hair, the whole punctuated by the shrill cries of animals in a temper.






  There were some men who were more composed and did not take part in
this fracas. They sat apart, near the bars, and when they saw an ape brat
plunge his fingers into a bag they would stretch out an imploring hand. The
ape, if he was very young, would often draw back in fright, but his parents
or his friends would tease him until he decided, still trembling, to pass the
reward from hand to hand.
  The appearance of a man outside the cage provoked some surprise, no less
among the captives than in. the simian audience. The former interrupted
their play for a moment to examine me with suspicion, but since I stood
quite still refusing with dignity the offerings that the youngster tried to hand
me, apes and men alike lost interest in m« and I was able to observe
everything in peace. The silliness of these creatures sickened me, and I felt
myself hot with shame when I once again noted how closely they
resembled me physically.


  The other cages provided the same degrading spectacle. I was about to let
myself be led off by Zira, with -a heavy heart, when suddenly, and with a
great effort, I stifled a cry of surprise. There in front of me, among the herd,
I saw none other than my traveling companion, the leader and mastermind
of our expedition, the famous Professor Antelle. Like me, he had been
captured and, no doubt less fortunate, had then been sold to the zoo.




  My joy at knowing he was alive and seeing him again was such that tears
came into my eyes; then I shuddered at the condition to which this learned
man had been reduced. My emotion gradually changed to a painful
numbness when I noticed that his behavior was identical to the other men's.
I could not doubt the evidence of my own eyes, hi spite of the improbability
of this behavior. He was among the group of quiet ones who did not take
part in the scuffles but stretched their hands through the bars with a begging
grimace. I watched him while he was doing this, and there was nothing in
his attitude to reveal his true nature. A little ape gave him some fruit. The
scientist took it, sat down, crossed his legs, and began to devour it greedily,
looking at his benefactor with an eager eye, as though he hoped for another
gesture of generosity. I wept anew at this sight. In a low voice I told Zira
the reason for my tears. I should have liked to go up and speak to him, but
she dissuaded me vigorously. I could do nothing for him at the moment,
and, in the emotion of meeting again, we risked causing a scene that would
prejudice our common interests and might well ruin my own plans.
"After the congress," she told me, "when you have been recognized and
accepted as a rational being, we will see about him."




  She was right and I regretfully let myself be dragged away. On the way
back to the Car I told her all about the professor and his reputation on Earth
in the scientific world. She pondered over this for some time and promised
to do her best to get him out of the zoo. I was therefore a little more
cheerful on my return to the institute, but that evening I refused the food the
gorillas brought me.








 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR


 During the week preceding the congress Zaius paid me several visits,
 multiplying the ridiculous tests, while his secretary filled several notebooks
 with observations and conclusions concerning me. I hypocritically did my
 best not to appear more intelligent than he wished.




  The long-awaited date finally arrived, but it was only on the third day of the
congress that they came to fetch me, the first two having been devoted to
theoretical debates. I was kept informed of the proceedings by Zira. Zaius
had already read a long report about me, presenting me as a man with
particularly sharp instincts but totally devoid of the capacity for thought.
Cornelius asked him a few leading questions to discover how, in that case, he
explained certain aspects of my behavior. This revived old disputes, and the
last discussion had been a stormy one. The scientists were divided into two
groups: those who refused to acknowledge that an animal had a soul of any
sort, and those who saw only a difference of degree between the mentality
of beasts and that of apes. No one of course suspected the real truth, except
Cornelius and Zira. Yet Zaius' report described such surprising
characteristics that, even though this imbecile was not aware of the fact, it
made a deep impression on certain impartial observers, if not on the
decorated scientists, and a rumor began to spread around the town that an
absolutely extraordinary man had been discovered.






Zira whispered in my ear as she took me out of the cage, "There'll be a vast
crowd and the whole of the press. They're all on tenterhooks and know there's
something unusual afoot. It's excellent for you. Take courage!"


I badly needed her moral support. I felt terribly nervous. I had rehearsed my
speech all night. I knew it by heart and it was bound to convince the most
limited minds; but I was haunted by the fear that I might not be allowed to
speak.






   The gorillas led me off to a caged-in truck and I found myself among
 several other human subjects, likewise considered worthy of being
 introduced to the learned assembly because of some peculiarity or other.
 We arrived outside an enormous building surmounted by a cupola. Our
 guards led us into a room furnished with cages, adjoining the assembly
 hall. There we waited at the scientists' pleasure. Every now and then a
 majestic gorilla, clothed hi a sort of black uniform, pushed open the door
 and shouted out a number. Then the guards would put one of the men on a
 lead and drag him off. My heart thundered at each appearance of the usher.
 Through the half-open door I could hear the hubbub in the hall, an
 occasional exclamation, and also bursts of applause.






  Since the subjects were driven away immediately after their introduction, I
eventually found myself alone in the room with the guards, feverishly going
over the main passages of my speech. They had kept me till the end, like a
star performer. The black gorilla appeared for the last time and called out
my number. I rose to my feet quickly, took from the hands of a
flabbergasted ape the^ lead he was about to fasten to my collar, and
adjusted it myself. Then, flanked by two bodyguards, I entered the
assembly hall with a firm tread. As soon as I had crossed the threshold I
halted, dazzled and abashed.






  I had seen many a strange sight since my arrival on Soror. I thought I was
so accustomed to the apes and their actions that I could no longer be
astonished by them. Yet confronted with the singularity and proportions of
the scene before my eyes, I was seized with giddiness and once again asked
myself if I was not dreaming.


  I was in a gigantic amphitheater (which put me strangely in mind of
Dante's conical inferno) of which every row of seats both around and
above me was swarming with apes. There were several thousands of them.
Never before had I seen so many apes gathered together; their multitude
transcended the wildest dreams of my poor terrestrial imagination; their
numbers overwhelmed me.


  I stumbled and tried to pull myself together by looking for some guiding
light in this crowd. The guards pushed me toward the center of a circle,
resembling a circus arena, where a platform had been erected. I slowly
glanced all around me. The tiers of apes rose as high as the ceiling, to a
height that seemed to me incredible. The seats nearest me were occupied by
the members of the congress, all of them learned scientists dressed in
striped trousers and dark frock coats, all of them wearing decorations,
almost all of a venerable age, and almost all orangutans. I made out,
however, among their group a small number of gorillas and chimpanzees. I
looked for Cornelius among the latter, but could not see him.


  Beyond the authorities and behind a balustrade were several rows reserved
for the junior colleagues of the scientists. A gallery at this level was for the
journalists and photographers. Finally, still higher up and behind another
barrier, surged the crowd, a simian public which, from the loud murmurs
that greeted my appearance, was evidently in a state of great excitement.


 I also tried to see Zira, who was bound to be sitting among the assistants. I
felt I needed the support of a glance from her. There again I was
disappointed and could not discern a single familiar face among the hellish
throng of apes surrounding me.


 I switched my gaze to the pontiffs. Each of them was seated in an armchair
draped in red, whereas the rest were entitled only to stools or benches. Their
appearance reminded me forcefully of Zaius. Their heads sunk almost to
the level of their shoulders, one immensely long arm half folded and placed
in front of them on a blotter, they scribbled down an occasional note or
perhaps a childish drawing. In contrast to the excitement prevailing on the
higher benches, they looked utterly listless. I had the feeling that my
entrance and the announcement about me that had been made over a loud-
speaker were only just sufficient to revive their flagging attention. In fact, I
distinctly remember seeing three of these orangutans give a start and
suddenly shake their heads, as though roused from a deep sleep.


  Yet they were now all wide awake. My introduction was no doubt the high
spot of the meeting, and I felt I was the cynosure of thousands of pairs of
simian eyes with a variety of expressions ranging from indifference to
enthusiasm.


  My guards made me mount the platform where an impressive-looking
gorilla was sitting. Zira had told me that the congress was presided over not
by a scientist, as had once been the case—in those days the apes -of
science, left to then- own devices, used to lose themselves in endless
discussions without ever coming to a conclusion— but by an organizer. To
the left of this important figure was his secretary, a chimpanzee, who was
making a verbatim report of the meeting. To her right was a seat occupied
in turn by each of the scientists who was to read a paper or introduce a
subject. Zaius had just taken this seat amidst some lukewarm applause.
Thanks to a system of loudspeakers in conjunction with some powerful
projectors, nothing happening on the platform was lost even at the
uppermost levels of the hall.






The president gorilla rang his -bell, obtained silence, and announced he was
giving the illustrious Zaius leave to speak for the purpose of introducing the
man about whom he had already addressed the assembly. The orangutan
then rose to his feet and began on his discourse. During this time I was
doing my best to assume as intelligent an attitude as possible. When he
spoke about me I bowed, putting my hand to my breast, which at first gave
rise to some laughter that was promptly stifled by the bell. I quickly realized
I was not advancing my cause by indulging in these tricks, which might be
interpreted as the mere result of good training. I stood still, waiting for the
end of his speech.




  He summarized the conclusions of his report and described the tricks he
was going to make me perform, the equipment for his damnable tests
having been set up on the platform. He ended by declaring that, like certain
birds, I was also capable of repeating a few words, and he hoped to be able
to make me do this in front of the assembly. Then he turned around to me,
picked up the box with its multiple fastenings, and handed it to me. But
instead of manipulating the locks, I embarked on another sort of exercise.


 My hour had come. I raised my hand, then, tugging gently on the lead
held by a guard, I approached the microphone and addressed the president.


  "Illustrious President," I said in my best simian language, "it is with the
greatest pleasure that I shall open this box; it is with the utmost willingness,
too, that I shall perform all the tricks in the program. Before beginning this
task, however, which is rather an easy one for me, I beg permission to make
an announcement that, I swear, will astonish this learned assembly."


  I had articulated very clearly and each of my words drove home. The
result was what I had anticipated. All the apes remained glued to their seats,
dumbfounded, holding their breath. The journalists even forgot to take
notes, and none of the photographers had the presence of mind to record
this historic moment.




The president gaped at me. As for Zaius, he seemed to be in a towering rage.
"Mr. President," he yelled, "I protest . . ."






 But he stopped short, overwhelmed by the ridiculousness of a discussion
with a man. I took advantage of this to go on with my speech.




  "Mr. President, I insist with the greatest respect, but also with the utmost
firmness, that this favor be granted me. Once I have explained myself, I
swear on my honor that I shall bow to the demands of the very illustrious
Zaius."


  After a moment's silence, a hurricane shook the assembly.






A raging storm swept the rows of seats, transforming all the apes into a
hysterical mass hi which were mingled exclamations, bursts of laughter,
sobs, and cheers, all this in me midst of a continuous flash of magnesium,
the photographers having at last recovered the use of then- limbs. The
tumult lasted a good five minutes, during which the president, who had
recovered some of his composure, never took his eyes off me. He
eventually came to a decision and rang his bell.






"I . . ." he stammered, "I really don't know how to address you."






 "Just call me monsieur," I said.






 "Yes, well, er . . . monsieur, I think that, in view of the exceptional nature
of the case, the scientific congress over which I have the honor to preside is
entitled to listen to your announcement."
  A fresh wave of applause greeted this decision. I did not ask for more. I
stood bolt upright hi the middle of the platform, adjusted the microphone to
my height, and started the following speech.




CHAPTER T W E N T Y - F I V E


"Illustrious President,


 "Noble Gorillas,


 "Learned Orangutans,


 "Wise Chimpanzees,


 "O Apes!


 "I, a man, beg leave to address you.






  "I know my appearance is grotesque, my figure repulsive, my features
bestial, my smell sickening, the color of my skin disgusting. I know the
sight of this ridiculous body of mine offends you, but I also know I am
addressing the wisest and most learned apes of all, those whose minds are
capable of rising above mere sensory impressions and of perceiving the
essential substance of a being apart from his wretched material exterior. . .
."


  The pompous humility of this opening had been suggested by Zira and
Cornelius, who knew it was liable to touch the orangutans. I went on in a
silence that was complete:




  "Listen to me, O Apes! For I can talk, and not, I assure you, like a
mechanical toy or a parrot. I can think, I can talk, I can understand what
you say just as well as what I myself say. Presently, if Your Lordships deign
to question me, I shall deem it an honor to reply to your questions to the best
of my ability.
"But first I should like to reveal this astounding truth to you: not only am I a
rational creature, not only does a mind paradoxically inhabit this human
body, but I come from a distant planet, from Earth, that Earth on which, by
a whim of nature that has still to be explained, it is men who are the
repositories of wisdom and reason. I beg permission to point out the place
of my Origin, not of course for the benefit of the illustrious doctors whom I
see all around me, but for those of my audience who perhaps are not so well
acquainted with the various stellar systems."


  I went up to a blackboard and by means of a few diagrams described the
solar system to the best of my ability and indicated its position in the
galaxy. My lecture was listened to hi profound silence. But when, having
finished my sketches, I clapped my hands together to get rid of the chalk
dust on them, this simple gesture provoked an enthusiastic murmur among
the crowd in the upper rows. I went pn, facing my public:




"Thus on Earth the intellect is embodied in the human race. This is a fact
and I can do nothing about it. Whereas the apes—and since discovering
your world I am deeply upset about this—whereas the apes have remained in
a state of savagery, it is the men who have evolved. It is in man's cranium
that the brain has developed and flourished. It is man who hi vented
language, discovered fire, 3 made use of tools. It is man who settled my
planet and 5 changed its face, man, in fact, who established a civilization so
refined that in many respects, O Apes, it resembles your own."






  At this point I quoted several examples of our finest achievements. I
described our cities, our industries, our means of communication, our
governments, our laws, our entertainments. Then I addressed myself more
specifically to the learned authorities and tried to give them an idea of our
conquests in the noble fields of the sciences and arts. My voice became
firmer the longer I spoke. I began to feel a sort of intoxication, like an
owner taking stock of his possessions.
  I then embarked on the account of my own adventures, j I described the
means by which I had reached the world of Betelgeuse and landed on the
planet Soror, how I had been captured and locked up in a cage, how I tried
to enter into contact with Zaius, and how, doubtless as a result of my lack of
ingenuity, all my efforts had been in vain. Lastly I mentioned Zira's
perspicacity, her valuable assistance and that of Dr. Cornelius. I
concluded with the following words:






"This is what I wanted to tell you, O Apes! It is up to you now to decide
whether I should be treated like an animal and end my days in a cage after
such astonishing adventures. It remains for me to say that I voyaged here
without any hostile intent, inspired solely by the spirit of discovery. Since I
have come to know you I find you extraordinarily congenial and I admire
you with all my heart. This, then, is the plan I suggest to the great minds of
this planet. I can certainly be useful to you by virtue of my earthly
knowledge; for my part, I have learned more things during a few months'
captivity among you than in all my previous existence. Let us unite our
efforts! Let us establish contacts with the Earth! Let us march forward hand
in hand, apes and men together, and no power, no secret of the cosmos will
be able to resist us!"






 I stopped speaking; exhausted, in • total silence. I turned automatically to
the president's table, picked up the glass of water standing there, and
drained it in a gulp. Like the act of clapping my hands together, this simple
gesture produced an amazing effect and was the signal for an absolute
uproar. The whole hall spontaneously gave vent to an enthusiastic outburst
that no pen could ever describe. I knew I had won over my audience, but I
would never have thought it possible for any assembly in the world to break
into such commotion. I was deafened by it, retaining just enough composure
to observe one of the reasons for this fantastic din: apes, who are exuberant
by nature, clap with all four hands when they are pleased. I was thus
surrounded by a seething mass of frantic1 creatures balancing on their rumps
and waving their four limbs in a frenzy of applause punctuated by wild
yells in which the gorillas' deep voices predominated. This was one of my
last glimpses of this memorable session. I felt unsteady on my feet. I looked
anxiously around me. Zaius had just risen from his seat in fury and was
striding up and down the platform with his hands behind his back, as he did
in front of my cage. As though hi a dream, I saw the vacant chair and
collapsed into it. A fresh burst of applause, which I barely heard before
fainting dead away, greeted this gesture.






CHAPTER                  TWENTY-SIX




It was some time before I recovered consciousness, so intense had been the strain of this session. I found myself lying on a bed in a room.
Zira and Cornelius were attending me, while some gorillas in uniform held back a crowd of journalists and curious onlookers who were
trying to approach me.








"Magnificent!" Zira whispered in my ear. "You've won."








"Ulysse," said Cornelius, "together we're going to do great things."








   He told me that the Grand Council of Soror had just held a special meeting and had decided on my immediate release.




   "There were some who opposed it," he added, "but public opinion demanded it and they had to yield."




   Having himself requested and obtained permission to take me on as his collaborator, he was rubbing bis hands at the thought of the
assistance I would provide in his research.




    "This is where you'll be living. I hope this apartment will suit you. It is quite close to mine, in a wing of the institute reserved for
the senior personnel."




   I looked around in bewilderment, thinking I was dreaming. The room was provided with every comfort; it was the beginning of a new
epoch. After hoping so long for this moment, I was suddenly overwhelmed by an odd feeling of nostalgia. My eyes met Zira's and I
saw that the clever she-ape had read my thoughts. A rather ambiguous smile came over her face.




    "Here, of course," she said, "you won't have Nova with you."
   I blushed, shrugged my shoulders, and sat up. I had recovered my strength and was eager to embark on my new life.








"Do you feel well enough to attend a little party?" Zira asked. "We've invited a few friends, all of them chimpanzees, to celebrate this
great day."








   I replied that nothing would give me greater pleasure, but I was no longer willing to appear stark naked. I then noticed I was
wearing some pajamas, Cornelius having lent me his. But though I was able, hi a pinch, to wear a chimpanzee's pajamas, I should
have looked grotesque in one of his suits




   .




    "We'll fit you out completely tomorrow and you'll have a decent suit for this evening. Here's the tailor."








A little chimpanzee came in and greeted me with great courtesy. I discovered that while I was still lying unconscious, the best tailors
had competed for the honor of dressing me. This one, the most famous of all, had the most noted • gorillas in the capital as clients.








       I admired his speed and dexterity. In less than two hours he had succeeded hi making me an acceptable suit. It felt quite strange
 to be wearing clothes again, and Zira looked at me as though she had never seen me before. While the artist was making the final
 adjustments Cornelius admitted the journalists who were hammering at the door. I was put through a catechism for over an hour,
 riddled with questions, under fire from the photographers, and required to furnish the most intriguing details about the Earth and
 the life men led on that planet. I lent myself willingly to this ceremony. A journalist myself, I realized the scoop I represented to
 these colleagues and knew what a powerful support the press could be.




    It was late by the tune they left. We were just on our way to join Cornelius' friends when we were detained by the arrival of
 Zanam. He was obviously acquainted with the latest developments, for he gave me an obsequious bow. He had come to tell Zira that
 things were not going too well in her department. Furious at my long absence, Nova was making a great racket. Her mood had
 infected all the other captives, and no amount of pike blows would calm them down.








       "I'll go and see," said Zira. "Wait for me here."
  I looked at her with a pleading expression. She hesitated, then shrugged her shoulders.




  "Come along if you like," she said. "After all, you're free and perhaps you'll be able to calm them down better than I can."








  Together we entered the room with the cages. The captives calmed down as soon as they saw me, and the uproar was followed by a
strange silence. They recognized me in spite of my clothes and seemed to understand that they were in the presence of something
miraculous.








  Trembling with emotion, I walked over to Nova's cage, my own cage. I went right up to her, I smiled at her, I spoke to her. For
a moment I had the impression that she was following my train of thought and was about to answer me. This was impossible, but
my mere presence had calmed her down like the others. She accepted a lump of sugar that I handed to her and ate it while I made
my
way out of the room with a heavy heart.






 Of that party, which took place in a smart night club— Cornelius had
decided to launch me forthwith into simian society, since in any case I was
now destined to live in it—I have only a confused and rather disturbing
memory.






The confusion was caused by the alcohol that I started swilling as soon as I
arrived, and to which my system was no longer accustomed. The disturbing
effect was an odd sensation that was to come over me later on many other
occasions. I can only describe it by saying that the nature of the figures
around me became progressively less simian, whereas then- function or the
position they held in society became dominant. The head waiter, for
instance, who came up obsequiously to show us our table, I saw only as the
head waiter, and the fact that he was a gorilla tended to be obscured. The
figure of an elderly she-ape with an outrageously painted face was replaced
by that of an old coquette, and when I danced with Zira I forgot her
condition completely, and my arm merely encircled the waist of a dancer.
The chimpanzee orchestra was nothing more than an orchestra, and the
elegant apes exchanging witticisms all around me were simply men about
town.






I shall not dwell on the sensation caused by my presence among them. I was
the focus of all eyes. I had to give my autograph to a number of fans, and
the two gorillas whom Cornelius had had the prudence to bring along were
hard-pressed to protect me from the swarm of she-apes of every age who
competed for the honor of having a drink or dancing with me.
It was getting late and I was already fairly tipsy when the thought of
Professor Antelle crossed my mind. I felt steeped in black remorse. I was
not far from shedding a tear or two over my own infamy as I reflected that
here I was making merry and drinking with a lot of apes while my
companion was shivering on some straw in a cage.






  Zira asked me why I was looking so sad. I told her. Cornelius then
informed me that he had made inquiries about the professor and that he was
hi good health. There would be no opposition now to his being released. I
insisted that I could not wait a minute longer before bringing him this good
news.




"After all," Cornelius agreed, after thinking it over, "one can't refuse you
anything on a day like this. Let's go. I know the director of the zoo."




 The three of us left the nightclub and drove to the garden. On being
 waked up, the director bestirred himself. He knew all about me. Cornelius
 told him the true identity of one of the men he held locked up in a cage.
 He could hardly believe his ears, but he, too, was eager to do all he could
 for me. We should have to wait, of course, until the next day and go
 through various formalities before he could release the professor, but
 meanwhile there was nothing against our having a talk with him at once.
 He offered to accompany us.




Day was breaking when we reached the cage In which the luckless scientist
lived like an animal in the midst of fifty men and women. These were still
asleep, huddled together in couples or in groups of four or five. They
opened their eyes as soon as the director switched on the lights.
It did not take me long to find my companion. He was stretched out on the
ground like the others, huddled against the" body of a girl who looked quite
young. I shuddered to see him like this, and at the same time was moved by
the debasement to which I, too, had been reduced for four months.






 I was so upset that I could not speak. The men, who were now awake,
showed no sign of surprise. They were tame and well trained; they began
performing their usual tricks in the hope of some reward. The director
threw them some pieces of cake. Immediately scuffles and disputes broke
out, as they did during the day, while the quietest of them assumed their
favorite position, squatting by the bars and stretching out an imploring hand.




Professor Antelle followed their example. He came up as close as possible
to the director and begged for a titbit. This humiliating behavior gave me a
sickening feeling that soon became an unbearable anguish. He was three
paces away; he was looking at me and appeared not to recognize me. In
fact, his eyes, which had once been so keen, had lost all their gleam and
suggested the same spiritual void as those of the other captives. I was
horrified to see in them no more emotion than that aroused among the other
captives by the presence of a man in clothes.






  I made a great effort and managed at last to speak in order to put an end to
this nightmare.




"Professor," I said, "Master, it is I, Ulysse Merou. We are saved. I came
here to tell you . . ."






I stopped hi sheer amazement. At the sound of my voice he had reacted in
the same way as the men of the planet Soror. He had suddenly lowered his
head and shrunk away.
"Professor, Professor Antelle," I beseeched him, "it's I, Ulysse Merou, your
traveling companion. I am free, and in a few hours you will be too. These apes you see here are our friends. They know who we are
and welcome us like brothers."








   There was no response. He showed not the slightest sign of comprehension but, with another frightened gesture like that of a startled
beast, recoiled still further.








I was in despair, and the apes seemed extremely puzzled. Cornelius wrinkled his brow, as he did when he was trying to find the
solution to a problem. It crossed my mind that the professor, frightened by their presence, might well be pretending to be witless. I
asked them to move away and leave me alone with him, to which they readily agreed. When they had disappeared, I walked around
the cage to reach the corner in which the scientist had taken refuge and again I spoke to him:








   "Master," I implored him, "I understand your caution. I know the danger to which men from Earth are exposed on this planet.
But we are alone, I give you my word of honor, and our ordeals are over. You must believe me, your companion, your disciple, your
friend, Ulysse Merou."








    He shrank back still further, darting furtive glances in my direction. Then, while I stood there trembling, not knowing what else to
say, he half opened his mouth.








   Had I succeeded at last in convincing him? I watched him, hoping against hope. But I remained speechless with horror at the
manner in which he expressed his emotion. I said that he had half opened his mouth, but this was not the spontaneous gesture of a
creature preparing to speak. He emitted from it a gurgling sound similar to those uttered by the strange men on this planet to express
satisfaction or fear. There in front of me, without moving his lips, while my heart went numb with horror, Professor Antelle gave
vent to a long-drawn-out howl.








part three
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
I woke early after a restless night. I turned over three or four times in my bed and rubbed my eyes before fully recovering
consciousness, still unaccustomed to the civilized I life I had been leading for a month, feeling anxious every morning at not hearing
the straw creak and not feeling Nova's warmth against me.








     I eventually came to my senses. I was living in one of the most comfortable apartments in the institute. The apes had proved
  extremely generous. I had a bedroom, a bathroom, clothes, books, a television set. I read all the papers, I was free, I could go out, walk
  about the streets, attend any entertainment. My presence in a public place still provoked considerable interest, but the emotion of the
  first few days had started to die down.








     Cornelius was now the scientific head of the institute. Zaius had been dismissed—he had been given another post, however, and a new
  decoration—and Zira's fianc6 installed in his place. This had resulted in a reorganization of the personnel, a general promotion of
  the chimpanzee element, and renewed activity in every department Zira had become the new director's assistant.




     As for me, I took part in the scientist's research work, no longer as a guinea pig but as a collaborator. However, it was only
  with great difficulty and after much hesitation on the part of the Grand Council that Cornelius had been granted this favor. The
  authorities still appeared reluctant to admit my nature and origin.


   I dressed quickly, left my room, and walked over to the wing of the institute where I had once been a prisoner: the department
 under Zira, who was still directing it in addition to her new duties. With Cornelius' permission ; I had embarked there on a systematic
 study of the men.




     Here I am in the room with the cages, walking along the corridor in front of the bars like one of the masters of this planet.
  Shall I admit that I come here frequently, more frequently than my duties demand? There are times when I feel burdened by
  constantly simian surroundings, and here I find a sort of refuge.




     The captives are well acquainted with me now and recognize my authority. Do they see any difference between me, Zira, and the
  warders who bring them their food? I should like to think so, but I doubt it. For the last month, despite my patience and efforts, I,
  too, have been unsuccessful in making them achieve any higher level of performance than that of well-trained animals. A secret
  intuition tells me, however, that their potentialities are enormous.




     I should like to teach them to talk. This is my great ambition. I have not succeeded, I admit. It is only with the utmost
  difficulty that some of them manage to repeat a monosyllabic sound or two, which certain chimpanzees on Earth can do. It is
  not much, but I am persevering. What encourages me is the new persistence with which their eyes try to meet mine, eyes which
  for some time have seemed to be gradually changing in expression. I fancy I can see in them a spark of curiosity, associated with a
  superior mentality, breaking through the animal mindlessness.
   I move slowly around the room, stopping in front of each of the captives. I speak to them; I speak to them gently, patiently. They
are now accustomed to this unusual behavior on my part. They seem to listen. I go on for several minutes, then stop speaking in whole
sentences and pronounce a few simple words, repeating them over and over again, hoping for an echo. One of them clumsily
articulates a syllable, but this is as far as he will go today. The subject soon gets tired, abandons the superhuman task, and lies
down on the floor as though after some exhausting effort. I sigh and pass on to the next one. I finally come to the cage in which
Nova is at present vegetating in solitary sadness. Sadness—this at least is what I, with my Earthman's conceit, wish to believe, and I
struggle to detect this emotion on her beautiful but inexpressive features. Zira has not given her another mate, and I am grateful for that








I often think of Nova. I cannot forget the hours I spent in her company. But I have never again entered her cage; human self-respect
forbids me. Is she not an animal? I now live in the highest scientific circles; how could I let myself indulge hi such a relationship? I
blush at the thought of our former intimacy. Since I have changed camps I have even forbidden myself to show her more affection than
I show to her fellows.








    Nevertheless I cannot help noting that she is an exceptional subject and I am glad of that. With her I obtain better results than with
the others. She presses up against the bars as soon as she sees me, and her mouth twists into a grimace that could almost pass as a
smile. Even before I have opened my mouth she tries to pronounce the three or four syllables she has learned. Her diligence is
evident. Is she naturally more gifted than the others? Or has contact with me polished her and given her a capacity to benefit more
from my lessons? I like to think, with a certain complacency, that this is the case.








    I say her name, then my own, pointing my finger alternately at her and myself. She imitates the gesture. But I see her expression
change suddenly and she bares her teeth as I hear a gentle chuckle behind me.








  It is Zira, who laughs not unkindly at my efforts; her presence always rouses the girl to anger. Zira is accompanied by Cornelius, who
is interested in my efforts and often comes to see the results for himself. Today he has come to see me for another reason. He looks rather
excited.








"Would you like to go on a little trip with me, Ulysse?"
"A trip?"








"Quite a long one; almost to the antipodes. Some archeolo-gists have discovered some extremely curious ruins out there, if the reports
reaching us are to be believed. An orangutan is directing the excavations and he can scarcely be relied upon to interpret the vestiges
correctly. There's something strange about them that fascinates me and that may afford decisive material for my research. The Academy is
sending me out there on an official mission and I think your presence would be most useful."








   I do not see how I can help him, but I welcome this opportunity to see further aspects of Soror. He takes me to his office to give me
more details.




  I am delighted by this diversion, which is an excuse for not completing my rounds; for there is one more prisoner for me to see—
Professor Antelle. He is still in the same state, which makes his release impossible. Thanks to me, however, he is now on his own,
isolated in a fairly comfortable cell. It is a painful duty for me to visit him. He replies to none of my earnest requests and still behaves like
a perfect animal.








CHAPTER T W E N T Y - E I G H T




We set off a week later. Zira came with us, but she was to return after a few days to look after the institute in Cornelius' absence.
The latter intended staying much longer on the site of the excavations, if these proved to be as interesting as he expected.








  A special plane had been put at our disposal, a jet machine rather like our first models of this type of aircraft, but very comfortable and
equipped with a small soundproof compartment in which we could talk easily. It was here we were sitting, Zira and I, shortly after
our departure. I was looking forward to the journey. By now I was completely accustomed to the simian world. I had been neither
surprised nor frightened at seeing this big aircraft being piloted by an ape. My only thought was to enjoy the view and the spectacular
                     to a height of about thirty thousand feet. The air was
sight of Betelgeuse rising. We had climbed
remarkably pure, and the giant star could be seen on the horizon like our
own sun observed through a telescope. Zira was enchanted by it.


 "Are there such beautiful dawns as this on Earth?" she asked. "Is your sun
as lovely as ours?"
  I told her it was neither as big nor as red, but it sufficed us. On the other
hand, our nocturnal heavenly body was bigger and shed a more intense pale
light than Soror's. We felt as happy as school children on a holiday, and I
laughed and joked with her as with a very close friend. When Cornelius
came and joined us after a moment I almost resented his intrusion on our
tete-a-tete. He was pensive. For some time, moreover, he had seemed rather
nervous. He worked prodigiously on his own research, which absorbed him
to the point of occasionally causing him to be totally absent-minded. He
still kept the subject of this research a secret, and I believe Zira knew as
little about it as I diS. I only knew it concerned the origin of ape and that
the learned chimpanzee tended more and more to reject the classical
theories. This morning, for the first time, he revealed certain aspects of it to
me, and it did not take me long to understand why my existence as a
civilized man was so important to him. He began by reverting to a subject
we had discussed together a thousand times.


 "You did say, didn't you, Ulysse, that on your Earth the apes are utter
animals? That man has risen to a degree of civilization equal to our own and
which, in certain respects, even . . . ? Don't be frightened of making me
angry; the scientific spirit ignores all self-esteem."


  "Which, in many respects, even surpasses it—yes, that's undeniable. One
of the best proofs is that I am here. It seems to me you have only reached
the stage . . ."




  "I know, I know," he broke in wearily. "We've discussed all that. We are
now penetrating the secrets you discovered centuries ago. . . . And it's not
only your statements that disturb me," he went on, nervously pacing up and
down the little cabin. "For some time I've been harassed by a feeling—a
feeling supported by certain concrete indications— that the key to these
secrets, even here on our planet, has been held by other brains in the distant
past."


 I might have replied that this impression of rediscovery had also affected
certain minds on Earth. Perhaps it even prevailed universally and possibly
served as the basis for our belief in God. But I was careful not to interrupt
him.






He was following a train of thought that was still confused, which he
expressed in an extremely reticent manner.
 "Other brains," he repeated pensively, "that maybe were not ..."


 He broke off abruptly. He looked miserable, as though tortured by the
perception of a truth his mind was unwilling to admit.


 "You did say, didn't you, that your apes possess a highly developed sense
of mimicry?"




"They mimic us in everything we do, I mean in every act that does not
demand a rational process of thought. So much so that with us the verb ape
is synonymous with imitate."






 "Zira," Cornelius murmured, as though depressed, "is it not this sense of
aping that characterizes us as well?"
 Without giving Zira time to protest, he went on excitedly, "It begins in
childhood. All our education is based on imitation."




 "It's the orangutans . . ."






  "That's it. They are of tremendous importance, since it is they who mold
our youth through their" books. They force every young monkey to repeat
all the errors of his ancestors. That explains the slowness of our progress. For
the last two thousand years we have remained similar to ourselves."
  This slow development among the apes deserves a few comments. I had
been struck by it while reading their history, noticing in it some important
differences from the soaring flight of the human mind. True, we also have
known a period of semi-stagnation. We, too, have had our orangutans, our
falsified education and ridiculous curricula, and this period lasted a long
time.






  Not so long, however, as in the apes' case, and above all not at the same
stage of evolution. The dark ages that the chimpanzee deplored had lasted
about ten thousand years. During this period no notable progress had been
achieved except, perhaps, during the last half century. But what I found
extremely curious was that their earliest legends, their earliest chronicles,
then- earliest memories bore witness to a civilization that was already well
advanced and in fact was more or less similar to that of the present day.
These documents, ten thousand years old, afforded proof of general skills
and achievements comparable to the skills and achievements of today; and,
before them, there was a total blank: no tradition either oral or written, not a
single clue. In essence, it seemed as though the simian civili
zation had made a miraculous appearance out of the bhu, ten thousand years
before and had since been preserved more or less without modification. The
ordinary ape had grown accustomed to finding this quite natural, never
imagining a different state of mental development, but a perceptive brain like
Cornelius' sensed an enigma there and was tormented by it.


"There are apes capable of original creation," Zira protested.






"Certainly," Cornelius agreed. "That's true, especially in recent years. In the long
run, mind is able to embody itself hi gesture. It has to, in fact; that's the
natural course of evolution. . . . But what I'm passionately seeking, Zira, what
I'm trying to find out, is how it all began. . . . At present it strikes me as not
impossible that it was through simple imitation at the beginning of our era."






  "Imitation of what, of whom?"






  He had reverted to his reticent manner and lowered his eyes as though
regretting he had said too much.
  "I can't answer that question yet," he finally said. "I need certain evidence.
Perhaps we shall find it in the ruins of the buried city. According to the
reports, it existed much earlier than ten thousand years ago, in a period about
which we know nothing."




CHAPTER T W E N T Y - N I N E
Cornelius has not told me anything more and I feel he is reluctant to do so,
but what I already detect in his theories gives me a strange elation.




  The archeologists have laid bare a whole city, buried in the sands of a
desert, a city of which nothing remains, alas, but ruins. But these ruins, I am
convinced, hold an extraordinary secret that I have vowed to solve. This
should be possible for anyone who can observe and deduce, which the
orangutan who is directing the excavations s'eems hardly capable of doing. He
welcomed Cornelius with the respect due his senior position but with barely
concealed contempt for his youth and the original ideas he sometimes expressed.






Digging among stones that crumble at every move and in sand that sinks
under every step is no easy job. It is now a month since we have been at it.
Zira left us some tune ago, but Cornelius insists on prolonging his stay. He is as
enthusiastic as I am and convinced that only here, among these relics of the
past, is to be found the solution to the great problems tormenting him.


  The extent of his knowledge is really remarkable. First of all, he insisted
on verifying personally the antiquity of the city. For this the apes have a
process similar to our own, involving deep-rooted principles of chemistry,
physics, and geology. On this point the chimpanzee is in agreement with
the official scientists: the city is very, very old indeed. It is much more than
ten thousand years old, and therefore constitutes a unique record, tending
to show that simian civilization did not burst forth miraculously out of the
void.




 Something existed before this present era. But what? After this month of
feverish investigation we are disappointed, for it seems that this prehistoric
city was not very different from those of the present day. We have
discovered remnants of houses, traces of factories, vestiges showing that
these forebears had motor cars and airplanes, just as apes of today do.
These remains indicate that the origins of mind can be traced far back into
the past. This is less than Cornelius was expecting, I feel; it is less than I
was hoping for.




This morning Cornelius has gone ahead of me to the spot where the
workmen have laid bare a house with thick walls made of a sort of
reinforced concrete, which seems better preserved than the rest. The inside
is filled with sand and debris that they have undertaken to sift. Until
yesterday they had found nothing more than in the other sections: fragments
of piping, household appliances, kitchen equipment. I am still idling outside
the tent that I share with the scientist. From here I can see the orangutan
giving his orders to the foreman, a chimpanzee with a crafty look in his eye.
I cannot see Cornelius. He is hi the trench with the workmen. He often
takes a hand in the digging, for fear they might do something stupid and
thereby lose an interesting item.






 Here he is emerging from the hole, and it does not take me long to realize
 he has made an exceptional discovery. He is holding in his hand a small
 object that I cannot make out. He thrusts aside the old orangutan who tries
 to take it from him and puts it down on the ground with infinite care. He
 looks in my direction and beckons me over. As I approach I am struck by
 the change in his expression. "Ulysse. Ulysse!"




  Never have I seen him in such a state. He can barely talk. The workmen,
 who have also climbed out of the trench, gather around the find and
 prevent me from seeing it. They point it out to one another but they seem
 merely amused. Some of them laugh out loud. They are almost all hefty gorillas. Cornelius tells them to keep their
 distance.








"Ulysse!"
   "Whatever is it?"








  I see the object lying in the sand at the same moment that he mutters in a strangled voice:








   "A doll, Ulysse, a doll!"








  It is a doll, an ordinary china doll. By a miracle it has been preserved almost intact, with vestiges of hair and eyes that still reveal
a few chips of color. It is such a familiar sight to me that at first I cannot understand Cornelius' emotion. It takes me several
seconds to realize . . . then I've got it! Its strangeness dawns on me and immediately I am overwhelmed. It is a human doll
representing a little girl, a little girl like one on Earth. But I refuse to let myself be taken in. Before proclaiming a miracle, every
possibility of a more commonplace cause must be examined. A scientist like Cornelius must have done so already. Let us seer
The- dolls of child apes do include a few—a very few, but nevertheless a few—that have an animal or even human form. So it
cannot be the mere presence of this one that moves my chimpanzee so deeply. . . . Let us go a step further: The toys of child apes
representing animals are not made of china; and above all they are not usually clothed; in any case, not clothed like rational
creatures. And this doll, I tell you, is clothed like a doll at home—the remnants of a frock, a blouse, a skirt and knickers can still
be clearly seen—dressed with the taste that a little girl on Earth might show in adorning her favorite doll, with the care that a little
she-ape on Soror would take to clothe her ape doll, a care that she would never, never show to dress up an animal figure like the
human figure. I realize, I realize more and more clearly, the reason for my clever chimpanzee's emotion.








   And this is not all. The toy presents another anomaly, another oddity that makes all the workmen laugh and even provokes a
smile from the solemn orangutan directing the excavations. The doll talks. It talks like a doll at home. In putting it down,
Cornelius happened to press the mechanism, which has been preserved intact, and it talked. Oh, it was not much of a speech! It
uttered one word, one simple word of two syllables: pa-pa. "Papa," the doll repeats as Cornelius picks it up again and turns it
round and round hi his nimble hands. The word is the same in French and in the simian language, and no doubt in many other
languages of this mysterious cosmos, and it has the same meaning.








"Papa," the little human doll repeats, and this, above all, is what makes my learned companion's muzzle turn red; this is what
affects me s'o deeply that I have to make an effort not to cry aloud as he leads me aside, bringing his precious discovery with him.
"The monstrous imbecile!" he mutters after a long silence.








  I know whom he means and I share his indignation. The old orangutan with all his decorations has seen nothing more in it than
a simple child ape's toy that an eccentric manufacturer living in the distant past has endowed with speech. It is useless to suggest
another explanation to him. Cornelius does not even try to do so. The one that comes naturally 'to his mind, however, seems so
disturbing that he keeps it to himself. He does not breathe a word of it even to me, but he knows that I have guessed it.




  He remains wrapped in thought and silent for the rest of the day. I have the impression he is now frightened of pursuing his
research and is regretting his semi-revelations. Now that his excitement has subsided, he is sorry I have witnessed his discovery.




  On the very next day I am given proof that he regrets having brought me here with him. After a night's reflection he informs
me, avoiding my eyes, that he has decided to send me back to the institute, where I shall be able to continue with more important
work than in these ruins. My seat on the aircraft is booked. I shall be leaving in twenty-four hours.








CHAPTER THIRTY




Suppose, I argue, that men once reigned as masters on this planet. Suppose that a human civilization similar to ours flourished on Soror
more than ten thousand years ago.




  This is no longer a senseless hypothesis—quite the contrary. No sooner do I formulate it than I feel the excitement produced by
picking up the right scent among so many false ones. It is on this track, I know, that the solution to the irritating simian mystery is
to be found, I realize my subconscious has always been dreaming of some explanation of this sort.




   I am in the aircraft taking me back to the capital, accompanied by Cornelius' secretary, a rather talkative chimpanzee. I don't
feel like chatting with him. I always tend to meditate when I'm hi an airplane. I shall find no better opportunity than this voyage to
put my thoughts in order.








  Suppose, then, the existence in the distant past of a civilization on the
planet Soror similar to our own. Is it possible that creatures devoid of
intelligence could have perpetuated it by a simple process of imitation? The
answer to this question seems risky, but after thinking it over, a host of
arguments occur to me that gradually lessen its aspect of unreasonableness.
That perfected machines may one day succeed us is, I remember, an
extremely commonplace notion on Earth. It prevails not only among poets
and romantics but in all classes of society. Perhaps it is because it is so
widespread, born spontaneously in popular imagination, that it irritates
scientific minds. Perhaps it is also for this very reason that it contains a
germ of truth. Only a germ: Machines will always be machines; the most
perfected robot, always a robot. But what of living creatures possessing a
certain degree of intelligence, like apes? And apes, precisely, are endowed
with a keen sense of imitation. . . .






  I close my eyes. I let myself be lulled by the drone of the engines. I feel
the need to commune with myself in order to justify my position.






What is it that characterizes a civilization? Is it the exceptional genius? No,
it is everyday life. . . . Hmm! Let us give intelligence its due. Let us
concede that it is principally the arts, and first and foremost, literature. Is the
latter really beyond the reach of our higher apes, if it is admitted-that they
are capable of stringing words together? Of what is our literature made?
Masterpieces? Again, no. But once an original book has been written—and
no more than one or two appear in a century—men of letters imitate it, in
other words, they copy it so that hundreds of thousands of books are
published on exactly the same theme, with slightly different titles and
modified phraseology. This should be able to be achieved by apes, who are
essentially imitators, provided, of course, that they are able to make use of
language.






In fact, language represents the only valid objection. But wait a moment! It is
not essential that apes should understand what they are copying hi order to
produce a hundred thousand volumes from a single original. It is clearly no
more necessary for them than it is for us. Like us, they merely need to be
able to repeat sentences after having heard them. All the rest of the literary
process is purely mechanical. It is at this point that the opinion of certain
learned biologists assumes its full value: There is nothing in the anatomy of
the ape, they maintain, that precludes the use of speech—nothing, that is,
except the necessary urge. It is not difficult to conceive that this urge
came to him one day as a result of some sudden mutation.






  The perpetuation of a literature like ours by talking apes does not,
therefore, conflict with common sense in any way. Subsequently, perhaps,
some apes of letters raised themselves a step or two higher on the
intellectual ladder. As my learned friend Cornelius said, mind embodies
itself in gesture—in this case, in the mechanism of speech—and a few
original ideas were able to appear in the new simian world at the rate of one
every century—as in our own case.


Cheerfully pursuing this train of thought, I soon succeeded in convincing
myself that well-trained animals might well have been able to produce the
paintings and sculptures I had admired in the museums of the capital and, in
general, become expert in all the human arts, including the art of
cinematography.




  Having first considered the highest manifestations of intelligence, it was
only too easy to extend my thesis to other areas. That of industry quickly
succumbed to my analysis. It seemed absolutely clear that industry did not
require the presence of a rational being to maintain itself. Basically,
industry consisted of manual laborers, always performing the selfsame
tasks, who could easily be replaced by apes; and, at a higher level, of
executives whose function was to draft certain reports and pronounce
certain words under given circumstances. All this was a question of
conditioned reflexes. At the still higher level of administration, it seemed
even easier to concede the quality of aping. To continue our system, the
gorillas would merely have to imitate certain attitudes and deliver a few
harangues, all based on the same model.


 I thus came to view the most diverse activities of our Earth with a new
eye and to imagine them performed by apes. I indulged with a certain
satisfaction in this game, which demanded no intellectual effort. I called to
mind a number of political meetings I had attended as a journalist. I
remembered the stock remarks made by the personalities I had had to
interview. I recalled with particular intensity a celebrated trial I had followed
several years before.




 The defense counsel was one of the masters of his profession. Why did he
appear to me now in the guise of a proud gorilla, as did also the advocate
general, another celebrity? Why did I compare then- gestures and actions to
conditioned reflexes resulting from intensive training? Why did the president
of the tribunal remind me of a solemn orangutan reciting sentences learned
by heart, the utterance of which was automatic and likewise inspired by
some statement from a witness or some murmur in the crowd?






  I thus spent the last part of the journey obsessed by comparisons that
seemed to me significant. When I came to the world of finance and
business, my final mental picture was a thoroughly simian vision, a recent
recollection of the planet Soror. It was during a visit to the stock exchange,
where my friend Cornelius had insisted on bringing me, for it was one of
the curiosities of the capital. This is what I saw—a picture I recalled with
extraordinary vividness during the last minutes of my flight.






The stock exchange was a large building, outwardly imbued with a strange
atmosphere created by a vague buzz of voices that grew progressively
louder as one approached, until it was a deafening roar. We went inside and
were forthwith caught up in the turmoil. I wedged myself against a pillar. I
was accustomed to individual apes but was always somewhat stupefied
when surrounded by a compact mob, as now. I found the sight even more
incongruous than that of the learned assembly during the famous congress.
Imagine a hall of vast proportions crammed full of apes, screaming,
gesticulating, and running hither and thither in a completely disorganized
manner, apes in hysteria, apes who not only rushed about and bumped into
one another on the floor but who formed a swarming mass right up to the
ceiling, which was at a giddy height from the ground. The place was
equipped with ladders, trapezes, and ropes that they used constantly hi order
to move from one spot to another. They thus filled the entire volume of the
building, which assumed the aspect of a cage specially designed for a
grotesque exhibition of four-handed creatures.






The apes literally flew to and fro across this space, always catching hold of
some piece of equipment just when I thought they were about to fall; all this
in a hubbub of infernal exclamations, shouts, cries, and even sounds that
recalled no civilized language. There were monkeys there who were
barking—yes, barking for no apparent reason— swinging themselves from
one end of the room to the other on long ropes.






"Have you ever seen anything like it?" my friend Cornelius asked me
proudly.






  I readily admitted I had not. It needed all my previous acquaintance with
the apes to convince me that these were rational creatures. No one in his
right mind who watched this circus could escape the conclusion that he was
witnessing the frolics of madmen or animals gone wild. Not a glimmer of
intelligence could be seen in their eyes, and they ali looked alike. I could
not tell one from another. All of them were dressed in the same way and
wore the same mask, which was the mask of madness.




  The most disturbing part of my present image was that contrary to the
phenomenon that shortly before had made me assign the form of gorillas or
orangutans to the figure? in the earthly scene, I now saw the members of this
insane-crowd in the guise of human beings. It was men I thus saw shrieking,
barking, and swinging about on ropes to reach their destination as fast as
possible. In excitement I recalled other aspects of this scene. I remembered
tha* after looking on for some time, I had begun to notice certain details
suggesting vaguely that this hubbub did nevertheless form part of a civilized
system. An articulate word could occasionally be heard above the bestial
shrieks. Perched on a scaffolding at a giddy height above us, a gorilla,
without interrupting the hysterical gestures of his hands, would pick up a
piece of chalk in his foot and write some probably significant figure on a
blackboard. To this gorilla, too, I assigned human features.






I managed to rid myself of this hallucination only by coming back to my
rough outline of a theory on the origins of the simian civilization, and in this
remembrance of the world of finance I found fresh arguments to support it.






The aircraft touched down. I was back in the capital. Zira had come to meet
me at the airport. From far off I saw her scarf pulled down over her ears,
and the sight of it filled me with joy. When I eventually joined her after the
customs formalities I had to restrain myself from flinging my arms around her.






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - O N E


I spent the month following my return in bed, suffering from an infection I
had probably picked up on the site and which assumed the form of violent
bouts of fever similar to malaria. I was not in pain, but my brain was on fire
and I could not stop mulling over the elements of the fearful truth I had
glimpsed. There was no longer any doubt in my mind that a human era had
preceded the simian age on the planet Soror, and this conviction gave me a
sort of intoxication.




On second thought, however, I am not sure if I ought to feel proud of this
discovery or profoundly humiliated by it. My self-respect notes with
satisfaction that apes have invented nothing, that they are mere imitators.
My humiliation derives from the fact that a human civilization could have
been so easily assimilated by apes.
How could this have happened? In my delirium I could not keep my mind
off the problem. True, we have long known that our civilizations are mortal,
but such a complete disappearance makes the senses reel. A sudden
disaster? A cataclysm? Or else the slow decline of the one and the
progressive ascent of the other? I am inclined to the latter hypothesis, and I
find extremely significant indications of this evolution in the apes' present-
day condition and preoccupations.




  The importance they attach to biological research, for instance—well, I
am fully aware of its origin. In the old days many apes must have served as
experimental subjects for men, as is the case in our own laboratories. These
were the ones who first hoisted the flag, who were the pioneers of the
revolution. They would naturally have begun by imitating the gestures and
attitudes observed in their masters, and these masters were researchers,
learned biologists, doctors, nurses, and warders. Hence this unusual imprint
on most of their enterprises, which still persists today.


  And what about the men all this time? Enough speculation about apes!


  It is now two months since I visited my former companions in captivity,
my fellow humans. Today I feel better. I have no more fever. Yesterday I
told Zira--»-Zira has looked after me like a sister during my illness—I told
her that I was planning to resume my work in her department. She did not
seem very pleased but she raised no objection. It is time for me to pay my
visit.


  Here I am again in the room with the cages. A strange emotion makes me
pause on the threshold. I now see these creatures in a new fight. It is with
anguish that I wonder, before making up my mind to enter, if they will
recognize me after my long absence. Well, they do recognize me. All their
eyes are fixed on me, as they always used to be, and even with a sort of
deference. Am I dreaming or do I really discern a new look in them, a look
reserved for me and different from the glances they bestow on their ape
warders? A gleam impossible to describe, but in which I fancy I see an
awakened curiosity, an unusual emotion, shades of ancestral memories
trying to emerge from bestiality, and perhaps . . . an uncertain glimmer of
hope.


  This hope, I believe, I have myself unconsciously nourished for some
time. Is it not the reason why I am overwhelmed by this feverish
excitement? Is it not I, I, Ulysse Merou, the man whom destiny has brought
to this planet to be the instrument of human regeneration?


  Here, distinctly stated at last, is the hazy notion that has been haunting me
for a month. The good Lord does not shoot dice, as a certain physicist once
said. Nothing happens by mere chance in the cosmos. My voyage to the
world of Betelgeuse was decreed by a superior consciousness. It is up to me
to show myself worthy of the choice and to be the new savior of this human
race in decline.


 As before, I go slowly around the cages. I force myself not to rush over to
Nova's cage at once. Is the envoy of destiny entitled to favorites? I speak to
each of my subjects. The moment has not yet come for them to talk. I do
not mind. I have my entire lifetime in which to accomplish my mission.


  I now approach my former cage with studied negligence. I look out of the
corner of my eye, but I do not see Nova's arms stretched through the bars, I
do not hear the cries of joy with which she always used to greet me. A
strange misgiving assails me. I cannot restrain myself. I dash forward. The
cage is empty.




I summon one of the warders in an authoritative voice that makes the
captives shiver. Zanam is the one who appears. He does not like receiving
orders from me, but Zira has instructed him to put himself at my disposal.






"Where is Nova?"
  He replies in a surly manner that he does not know. She was taken away
one day without any reason being given. I repeat my question but in vain.
At this moment, luckily, Zira turns up to carry out her tour of inspection.
She sees me in front of the empty cage and realizes why I am so upset. She
looks flustered and at once starts talking about something else.


  "Cornelius has just come back. He wants to see you."


  At the moment I don't give a damn about Cornelius or the chimpanzees or
the gorillas or any other creature hi heaven or in hell. I point at the cell with
my ringer.




  "Where's Nova?"






  "She's ill," says'Zira. "She's been transferred to a special wing."


  She beckons to me and leads me aside, out of earshot of the warder.






"The administrator made me promise to keep it secret. But I feel you ought to
know."






"She's ill?" ,






"Nothing serious; but it's important enough to put the authorities on their toes.
Nova is expecting."






"She's ..."
"I mean she's pregnant," the she-ape announces, observing me with a curious
expression.






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - T W O


I am stupefied without yet fully realizing what this news implies. At first I
am assailed by a mass of trivial details and above all tormented by the
disquieting question: why was I not notified of this? Zira does not give me
time to protest.


  "I noticed two months ago, on my return from the trip. The gorillas had
not seen a thing. I phoned Cornelius, who had a long conversation with the
administrator. They agreed that it would be better to keep it secret. No one
knows about it except them and me. She's in an isolated cage and I'm looking
after her personally."




I regard this concealment as an act of treachery on Cornelius' part and I can
see that Zira is embarrassed. It looks to me as though some plot is being
hatched in the background.


, "Don't worry. She is being well treated and there's nothing she needs. I'm
doing everything I can for her. No pregnancy of a female human has ever been
so carefully watched over."




  Under her mocking gaze I lower my eyes like a schoolboy guilty of some
misdemeanor. She makes an effort to assume an ironical tone, but I can see
she is perturbed. True, I realize my physical intimacy with Nova has vexed
her ever since she recognized my true nature, but there is more than
vexation in her expression. It is her affection for me that makes her anxious.
These mysteries concerning Nova presage nothing good. I imagine she has
not told me the whole truth: that the Grand Council is well aware of the
situation and there have been discussions at a very high level. –
"When is her confinement due?"






  "In three or four months."






  The tragi-comic side of the situation overwhelms me suddenly. I am about
to become a father in the system of Betelgeuse. I am going to have a child on
the planet Soror by a woman for whom I feel a great physical attraction and
sometimes even compassion but who has the mind of an animal. No other
being in the cosmos has found himself involved in such an adventure. I feel
like weeping and laughing at the same time.




 "Zira, I want to see her!"






 She gives a little pout of annoyance.






 "I knew you would ask me that. I've already discussed it with Cornelius
and I think he will agree to it. He's waiting for you in his office."






 "Cornelius is a traitor!"






 "You've no right to say that. He is divided between his passion for science
and his duty as an ape. It is only natural that he should feel extremely
apprehensive at this impending birth."
My anguish increases as I follow her down the corridors of the institute. I
can imagine the attitude of the learned apes and their fear of seeing a new
race arise that— Good heavens! I now see exactly how the mission with
which I have been entrusted can be accomplished.






 Cornelius greets me in a friendly manner, but a permanent awkwardness
has been created between us. At times he looks at me as though in terror. I
make an effort not to broach the subject on my mind at once. I ask him
about the voyage and the end of his stay among the ruins.




"Fascinating. I have a mass of irrefutable proof."






  His clever little eyes are sparkling. He cannot prevent himself from
exulting over his success. Zira is right; he is torn between his love of
science and his duty as an ape. At the moment it is the scientist speaking,
the enthusiastic scientist for whom only the triumph of his theories counts.


 "Skeletons," he says. "Not one, but a whole collection, discovered in such
order and circumstances as to make it incontestably clear that we had come
upon a graveyard. Enough evidence to convince the most obtuse mind. Our
orangutans, of course, insist on regarding it as a mere coincidence."


 "What about these skeletons?"




"They are not simian."






 "I see."
We look each other straight in the eye. With his enthusiasm somewhat
diminished, he slowly continues, "I can't hide it from you; you've already
guessed. They are the skeletons of men."


 Zira is certainly in the know, for she shows no surprise. Both of them
again observe me closely. Cornelius finally makes up his mind to discuss the
matter frankly.


   "I am now certain," he admits, "that there once existed on our planet a
 race of human beings endowed with a mind comparable to yours and to
 that of the men who populate your Earth, a race that has degenerated and
 reverted to an animal state. . . . Furthermore, since my return here I have
 been given additional evidence to support this hypothesis."




  "Additional evidence?"






  "Yes. It was discovered by the director of the encephalic section, a young
chimpanzee with a great future. He may even be a genius. . . . You would
be wrong to think," he continued with heavy sarcasm, "that apes have
always been imitators. We have made some remarkable innovations in
certain branches of science, especially hi connection with these
experiments on the brain. I'll show you the results some day, if I can. I'm
sure you'll be amazed by them."


  He seems anxious to convince himself and expresses himself with
unusual aggressiveness. I have never attacked him on this point. He was
the one who first mentioned the lack of creative faculty in apes, two
months ago. In a boastful tone he continues:


  "Believe me, the day will come when we shall surpass men in every
field. It is not just by accident, as you might imagine, that we have
managed to succeed them. This result was foreordained in the normal
course of evolution. Rational man having had his day, a superior being was
bound to succeed him, preserve the essential results of his conquests, and
assimilate them during a period of apparent stagnation before soaring up to
even greater heights."


  This is a new way of visualizing the outcome. I might well retort that
many men on Earth have had the presentiment of a superior being who
may one day succeed them but that no scientist, philosopher, or poet has
ever imagined this superhuman in the guise of an ape. But I do not feel
inclined to pursue the point. The essential, after all, is that the mind should
embody itself in some organism. The form of the latter is of little
importance. I have many other more pressing subjects. I bring the
conversation around to Nova and her condition. He makes no comment
and tries to console me.


"Don't worry. It will be all right, I hope. It will probably be a child like any
other human child on Soror." "I certainly hope not. I'm convinced it will
talk!" I cannot help protesting indignantly. Zira gives a frown to make me
keep quiet






"Don't be too hopeful," Cornelius solemnly says, "for her sake and for your
own."






  He adds in a friendlier tone, "If he talked, I don't know if I should be able
to go on protecting you as I do. Don't you realize that the Grand Council is
on tenterhooks and that I've been given the strictest orders to keep this birth
a secret? If the authorities discovered you knew all about it, I should be
dismissed, so would Zira, and you'd find yourself alone among . . ."






"Among enemies?"
  He turns his head away. That is exactly what I thought: I am regarded as a
danger to the simian race. Nevertheless, I am happy to feel I have an ally in
Cornelius, if not a friend. Zira must have pleaded my cause more fervently
than she gave me to understand, and he will do nothing that might
displease her. He gives me permission to go and see Nova—in secret, of
course.




Zira leads me to an isolated little building to which she alone holds the key.
The room into which she shows me is not very big. It "contains only three
cages, two of which are empty. Nova occupies the third. She has heard us
coming and her instinct has warned her of my presence, for she has risen to
her feet and stretched out her arms even before seeing me. I clasp her hands
and rub my face against hers. Zira gives a contemptuous shrug, but she hands
me the key of the cage and goes to keep watch outside in the corridor. What
a good soul this she-ape is! What woman would have been capable of such
tact? She knows we must have a lot of things to say to each other and
therefore leaves us to ourselves.






A lot of things to say? Alas! I have again forgotten Nova's miserable
condition. I rush into the cage and fling my arms around her. I speak to her
as though she is able to understand—as I might speak to Zira, for instance.


Does she not understand? Does she not have at least a vague intuition of the
mission for which both of us are responsible from now on, she as well as I?






  I lie down on the straw by her side. I stroke the incipient fruit of our
outlandish passion. It seems to me nonetheless that her present condition
has given her a personality and dignity she did not have before. She
trembles as I pass my fingers over her stomach. Her eyes have certainly
acquired a new intensity. Suddenly, with a great effort, she stammers out
the syllables of my name, which I have taught her to articulate. She has-not
forgotten her lessons. I am overwhelmed with joy. But her eye dulls again
and she turns aside to devour the fruit I have brought her.
  Zira comes back; it is time to say good-by. I leave with her. Sensing my
feeling of loss, she accompanies me back to my apartment where I burst into
tears like a child.






"Oh Zira, Zira!"






 While she cradles me in her arms like a mother, I begin to speak to her, to
speak to her with affection, without stopping, relieving myself at last of the
surfeit of emotions and thoughts that Nova is unable to appreciate.




C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - T H R E E


Admirable she-ape! Thanks to her, I was able to see Nova fairly often during
this period, without the authorities knowing. I spent hours on the lookout for
the intermittent gleam in her eye, and the weeks went by in impatient
expectancy of the birth.


  One day Cornelius decided to take me to the encephalic section, the
wonders of which he had described to me. He introduced me to the head of
the department, the young chimpanzee called Helius, whose genius he had
praised to the skies, and apologized for not being able to show me around
himself because of some urgent work.


 "I'll come back in an hour's time to show you the pearl of these experiments
myself," he said, "the one that affords the evidence I told you about.
Meanwhile I'm sure you'll be interested in the classic cases."




Helius showed me into a room similar to those in the institute, equipped
with two rows of cages. On entering, I was struck by a pharmaceutical smell
reminiscent of chloroform. It was indeed an anesthetic. All the surgical
operations, my guide informed me, were now performed on subjects who
had been put to sleep. He stressed this point, as though to show the high
degree attained by simian civilization, which was at pains to suppress all useless
suffering, even in men. I could thus be reassured.






  I was only half reassured. I was still less so when he ended by mentioning
an exception to this rule: the very experiments, in fact, whose aim is to
make a study of pain and localize the nerve centers from which it derives. But
I was not to see any of these today.




  This was not calculated to appease my human sensibility. I remembered that
Zira had tried to dissuade me from visiting this section, where she herself
came only when she had to. I felt like turning around and retracing my steps;
but Helius did not give me time to do so.






"If you would like to attend an operation, you will see for yourself -that the
patient suffers no pain at all. No? Well, let's go and see the results then.


  Passing by the closed cell from which the smell emanated, he led me
toward the cages. In the first I saw a young man of fairly handsome
appearance but extreme emaciation. He was propped up on a litter. In front
of him, almost under his nose, stood a bowl containing a mash of sweetened
cereals to which all the men were partial. He was gazing at it in
bewilderment without making the slightest gesture
  "You see," said the director. "This boy is famished, he has not eaten for
twenty-four hours. Yet he does not react when confronted with his favorite
food. This is the result of partial ablation of the frontal brain, which was
performed on him some months ago. Since then he has been continuously in
this state and has to be fed by force. You can see how thin he is.


 He signaled to a nurse, who went into the cage and plunged the young
man's face into the basin. The latter then began lapping up the mash.
"A fairly commonplace case. Here are some more interesting ones. On each
of these subjects we've performed an operation affecting various areas of the
cerebral tissue."


 We walked past a series of cages occupied by men and women of all ages.
At the door of each of these was a panel specifying the operation
performed, with a wealth of technical details.


 "Some of these areas are related to the natural reflexes; others to the
acquired reflexes. This one, for instance—"


  This one, according to the case history, had had a whole zone of the
occipital area removed. He could no longer distinguish the distance or
shape of objects, a disability he manifested by a series of disorganized
gestures whenever a nurse approached him. He was incapable of avoiding a
stick placed in his path. On the other hand, a piece of fruit held out to him
inspired him with alarm and he tried to draw away from it in terror. He
could not grasp the bars of his cage and made grotesque attempts to do so,
closing his fingers on empty air.




  "This other one here," said the director with a wink, "was once a
remarkable subject. We had succeeded in training him to an astonishing
degree. He answered to his name and, to a certain extent, obeyed simple
orders. He had solved fairly complicated problems and learned how to use
rudimentary tools. Today he has forgotten all his education. He does not
know his name. He cannot perform the slightest trick. He has become the
stupidest of all our men—as a result of a particularly difficult operation:
extraction of the temporal lobules."






 With my stomach heaving at this succession of horrors accompanied by
comments from a grinning chimpanzee, I saw men partially or totally
paralyzed, others artificially deprived of sight. I saw a young mother whose
maternal instinct—once highly developed, so Helius assured me—had
completely disappeared after interference with the cervical cortex. She kept
pushing away her young child whenever it attempted to approach her. This
was too much for me. I thought of Nova, of her impending motherhood,
and clenched my fists with rage. Luckily Helius showed me into another
room, which gave me time to recover my composure.






  "Here," he said with a mysterious ah", "we indulge in more. delicate
research. It's no longer the scalpel that is brought to bear, it's a far more
subtle medium—electrical stimulation of certain spots of the brain. We
have brought off some remarkable experiments. Do you practice this sort of
thing on Earth?"




"Yes, on apes!" I retorted in fury.






  The chimpanzee kept his temper and smiled.






  "Of course. However, I don't think you could ever have obtained such
perfect results as ours, comparable to those that Dr. Cornelius wishes to
show you himself. Meanwhile let's continue with our rounds of the
commonplace cases."




He again led me up to some cages where nurses were in the process of
operating. The subjects here were stretched out on a sort of table. An
incision in the skull laid bare a certain area of the brain. One ape was
applying the electrodes wfiile another was attending to the anesthetic.






 "You will note that here, too, we put the subjects to sleep: a mild
anesthetic, otherwise the results would be falsified, but the patient feels no
pain."
Depending on the point at which the electrodes were applied, the subject
made various movements, usually affecting only one side of his body. One
man jerked his leg up at each electric shock, then stretched it out again as
soon as the current was switched off. Another performed the same
movement with one arm. In the next case it was the whole shoulder that
began twitching spasmodically under the effect of the current. Farther on,
with a very young patient, it was the area commanding the jaw muscles that
was brought into play. The poor wretch started champing, endlessly
champing, with a ghastly grin on his face, while the rest of his adolescent
body remained motionless.






  "Now look what happens when the duration of the contact is increased,"
said Helius. "Here is an experiment carried to its utmost limit."






The creature on which this treatment was imposed was a lovely young girl
who in certain respects reminded me of Nova. Several nurses, male and
female apes in white smocks, were buzzing about her naked body. The
electrodes were fixed by a she-ape to the young girl's face. The girl at once
started moving the fingers of her left hand. The she-ape kept the current on
instead of switching it off after a few seconds, as in the other cases. Then
the movements of the fingers became frenzied and gradually the wrist started
twitching. A moment later and it was the forearm, then the upper arm and
shoulder. The twitching presently spread, on the one hand to the hip, the
thigh, and the leg all the way down to the toes, on the other to the muscles
of the face. After ten minutes the whole of the wretched girl's left side was
shaken by convulsive spasms, a dreadful sight, growing more and more
rapid and more and more violent.






"That's the phenomenon of extension," Helius calmly observed. "It's well
known and culminates in a state of convulsions presenting all the symptoms
of epilepsy—an extremely strange epilepsy, moreover, affecting only one
side of the body."






 "Stop it!"






  I had not been able to stifle the cry that rose to my lips. All the apes gave
a start and turned toward me with reproving glances. Cornelius, who had
just come in, gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder.


  "I admit these experiments are rather bloodcurdling when you're not used
to them. But you must bear in mind that thanks to them our medicine and
surgery have made enormous progress in the last quarter of a century."


  This argument did not convince me, any more than the memory I had of
the same treatment applied to chimpanzees in a laboratory on Earth.
Cornelius shrugged his shoulders and dragged me off toward a narrow
passage leading to a smaller room.




  "Here," he told me in a solemn tone, "you're going to see a marvelous
achievement, which is absolutely new. Only three of us ever go into this
room—Helius, who is personally in charge of this research and who has
made such a success of it; myself; and a carefully selected assistant.






He's a gorilla. He's dumb. He's devoted to me body and soul and, what is
more, he's an utter brute. So you see the importance I attach to this work.
I'm willing to show it to you because I know you'll be discreet. It's hi your
own interests."




C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - F O U R
I entered the room and at first could see nothing to justify this air of
mystery. The equipment was the same as in the previous room: generators,
transformers, electrodes. There were only two subjects, a man and a woman,
lying strapped down on two parallel divans. As soon as we arrived they started
observing us with a strange intensity.
  The gorilla assistant welcomed us with an inarticulate grunt. Helius and
he exchanged a few words in deaf-mute language. It was a far from
commonplace experience to see a gorilla and a chimpanzee moving then"
fingers like this. I do not know why, but it seemed to me the height of
absurdity and I almost burst out laughing.


  "All is well. They are quite calm. We can begin a test right away."




"What sort of test?" I implored.






  "I'd rather keep it as a surprise for you," Cornelius grinned.


  The gorilla anesthetized the two patients, who presently fell asleep, and
started up various machines. Helius went up to the man, carefully unrolled
the bandage that covered his skull, and, aiming at a certain spot, applied the
electrodes. The man remained absolutely still. I was questioning Cornelius
with my eyes when the miracle happened.


  The man began to talk. His voice echoed around the room with an
abruptness that made me start, rising above the buzz of the generator. It
was not an hallucination on my part. He was expressing himself in simian
language, with the voice of a man from Earth or that of an ape on this
planet.


 The faces of the two scientists were a study in triumph. They looked at me
with a mischievous glint in their eyes and reveled in my stupefaction. I was
about to utter an exclamation, but they motioned me to keep quiet and listen.
The man's words were incoherent and devoid of originality. He must have
been captive in the institute for a long time and kept repeating snatches of
sentences he had heard spoken by the nurses or the scientists. Cornelius
presently put a stop to the experiment.


 "We'll get nothing more out of this chap. But the main point is, he talks."




 "It's amazing," I stammered.






 "You haven't seen anything yet," said Helius. "He talks like a parrot or a
gramophone. But I've done much better with her."






He indicated the woman, who was sleeping peacefully.






 "Much better?"






  "A thousand times better," said Cornelius, who showed the same
excitement as his colleague. "Just listen. This woman also talks, as you'll
soon hear. But she doesn't merely repeat the words she has heard hi
captivity. Her talk has an exceptional significance. By a combination of
physico-chemical processes, of which I shall spare you the details, this
genius Helius has succeeded hi awakening hi her not only her own
individual memory but the memory of the species. Under electrical impulse
her recollections go back to an extremely distant line of ancestors: atavistic
memories reviving a past several thousands of years old. Do you realize
what that means, Ulysse?"


  I was so amazed by this extravagant claim that for a moment I really
believed the learned Cornelius had gone mad; for madness exists among
the apes, particularly among the intellectuals. But the other chimpanzee
was already handling his electrodes and applying them to the woman's
brain. The latter remained inert for some time, just like the man, then she
heaved a deep sigh and started talking. She likewise expressed herself in
simian language in a rather low but extremely distinct voice that changed
from time to time, as though it belonged to a number of different persons.
Every sentence she uttered has remained engraved on my memory.




  "For some time," said the voice in a slightly anxious tone, "these apes, all
these apes, have been ceaselessly multiplying, although it looked as though
then" species was bound to die out at a certain period. If this goes on, they
will almost outnumber us . . : and that's not all. They are becoming
arrogant. They look us straight in the eye. We have been wrong to tame
them and to grant those whom we use as servants a certain amount of
liberty. They are the most insolent of all. One day I was jostled hi the street
by a chimpanzee. As I raised my hand, he looked at me hi such a menacing
manner that I did not dare strike him.






 "Anna, who works at the laboratory, tells me there have been a great
many changes there as well. She dares not enter the cages alone any more.
She says that at night a sort of whispering and chuckling can be heard. One
of the gorillas makes fun of the boss behind his back and imitates his
nervous tics."






The woman paused, heaved several anguished sighs, then went on:




 "It's happened! One of them has succeeded in talking. It's certain; I read
about it in Woman's Journal. There's a photograph of him, too. He's a
chimpanzee."


  "A chimpanzee, the first! Just as I thought," Cornelius exclaimed.


 "There are several others. The papers report fresh cases every day.
Certain biologists regard this as a great scientific success. Don't they
realize where it may lead? It appears that one of these chimpanzees has
uttered some ugly threats. The first use they make of speech is to protest
when they are given an order."


 The woman fell silent again and resumed in a different voice, a somewhat
pedantic man's voice:


  "What is happening could have been foreseen. A cerebral laziness has
taken hold of us. No more books; even detective novels have now become
too great an intellectual effort. No more games; at the most a hand or two
of cards. Even the childish motion picture does not tempt us any more.
Meanwhile the apes are meditating in silence. Their brain is developing in
solitary reflection . . . and they are talking. Oh! not very much, and to us
hardly at all, apart from a few words of scornful refusal to the more
intrepid men who still dare to give them orders. But at night, when we are
not there, they exchange impressions and mutually instruct one another."


 After a long silence a woman's voice continued, in anguish:


 "I was too frightened. I could not go on living like this. I preferred to
hand the place over to my gorilla. I left my own house.




  "He1 had been with me for years and was a loyal servant. He started
going out in the evening to attend meetings. He learned to talk. He refused
to do any work. A month ago he ordered me to do the cooking and washing
up. He began to use my plates and knives and forks. Last week he chased
me out of my bedroom. I had to sleep in an armchair in the sitting room.
Not daring to scold him or punish him, I tried to win him over by kindness.
He laughed in my face and his demands increased. I was too miserable. I
abdicated.






"I have taken refuge in a camp with other women where they are in the
same plight. There are some men here as well; most of them have no more
courage than we have. It's a wretched life we lead outside the town. We feel
ashamed and scarcely speak to one another. During the first few days I
played a few games of patience. I haven't the energy any more."






The woman broke off again and a male voice took over:


"I had found, I believe, a cure for cancer. I wanted to put it to the test, like
all my previous discoveries. I was careful, but not careful enough. For some
time the apes have been reluctant to lend themselves to these experiments.
Before going into Georges', the chimpanzee's, cage I had him held down by
my two assistants. I got ready to give him the injection—the cancer-
producing one. I had to give it to him in order to be able to cure him.
Georges' eyes looked resigned. He did not move, but I saw his crafty eyes
glance over my shoulder. I realized too late. The gorillas, the six gorillas I
was holding in reserve for the infection, had escaped. A plot. They seized
us. Georges directed the operation. He copied my movements exactly. He
ordered us to be tied down on the table, and the gorillas promptly obeyed
him. Then he picked up the hypodermic and injected all three of us with the
deadly liquid. So now I have cancer. It's certain, for though there may be
doubt as to the efficacy of the cure, the fatal serum has long since been
tested and proved effective.






  "After emptying the hypodermic, Georges gave me a friendly pat on the
cheek, as I often did to my apes. I had always treated them well. From me
they received more caresses man blows. A few days later, in the cage in
which they had locked me up, I recognized the first symptoms of the
disease. So had Georges, and I heard him tell the others that he was going
to begin the cure. This gave me a new fright. What if it killed me off more
quickly! I know I am condemned, but now I lack confidence in this new
cure. During the night I succeeded hi forcing the bars of my cage and
escaping. I have taken refuge in the camp outside the town. I have two
months to live. I am spending them playing patience and dozing."
Another feminine voice succeeded his:






 "I was a lady animal tamer. I used to do an act with a dozen orangutans,
magnificent beasts. Today I'm inside the cage instead of them, together
with some other circus performers.




  'To give them their due, the apes treat us well and give us plenty to eat.
  They change the straw of our bedding when it becomes too dirty. They are
  not unkind; they punish only those of us who show reluctance and refuse
  to perform the tricks they have taken it into their heads to teach us. These
  are extremely advanced! I walk on all fours; I turn somersaults. So they are
  very good to me. I'm not unhappy. I have no more worries or
  responsibilities. Most of us are adapting ourselves to this regime."






  This time the woman fell silent for a long time, during which Cornelius
gazed at me with embarrassing insistence. I could read his thoughts only too
well. Had it not been high time for such a feeble race of men, who gave in
so easily, to make way for a nobler breed? I grew flushed and looked away.
The woman continued in a more and more anguished tone:






  "They now hold the whole town. There are only a few hundred of us left in
this redoubt and our situation is precarious. We form the last human nucleus in
the vicinity of the city, but the apes will not tolerate us at liberty so close to
them. In the other camps some of the men have fled far off, into the jungle;
the others have surrendered in order to get something to relieve their
hunger. Here we have stayed put, mainly from laziness. We sleep; we are
incapable of organizing ourselves for resistance. . . .
  "This is what I feared. I can hear a barbaric din, something like a parody of a
military band. . . . Help! It's them, it's the apes! They are surrounding us.
They are led by enormous gorillas. They have taken our bugles, our drums
and uniforms, our weapons, too, of course. . . . No, they haven't any weapons.
Oh, what bitter humiliation, the final insult! Their army is upon us and all they
are carrying are whips!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - F I V E


Some of the results obtained by Helius have leaked out to the public.
Probably it was the chimpanzee himself who could not keep his mouth shut in
the enthusiasm of success. In the town they are saying that a scientist has
succeeded in making men talk. Furthermore, the discoveries of the buried
city are being discussed in the press, and although their significance is usually
distorted, one or two journalists are close to suspecting the truth. As a result
there is an uneasy atmosphere abroad, which is manifested by the increased
wariness of the authorities about me, an attitude that is increasingly more
disturbing.






Cornelius has many enemies. He dares not proclaim his discovery frankly.
Even if he thought of doing so, his superiors would no doubt be against it.
The orangutan clan led by Zaius is in league against him. They talk about a
conspiracy against the simian race and point me out more or less openly as
one of the factioniste. The gorillas have not yet adopted an official stand,
but they are always against anything that tends to disturb law and order.


  Today I experienced a deep emotion. The long-awaited event has taken
place. First I was overwhelmed with joy but, on second thoughts, trembled
at the new danger it represents. Nova has given birth to a boy.


I have a child, I have a son on the planet Soror. I have seen him, but only
with the greatest difficulty. The security measures have become
increasingly strict and I was unable to visit Nova until the week after the
birth. It was Zira who brought me the news. She at least will remain a true
friend, whatever else may happen. She found me so perturbed that she took
the responsibility of arranging a meeting for me with my new family. It was
a few days after the event that she took me to see them, late at night, for the
newborn child is under close observation during the day.


I have seen him. He's a splendid baby. He was lying on the straw like a new
Christ, mizzling against his mother's breast. He looks like me, but he also
has Nova's beauty. The latter gave a menacing growl when I pushed open
the door. She, too, feels uneasy. She rose up, her nails extended like claws,
but calmed down when she recognized me. I am sure this birth has raised
her a few degrees higher on the human scale. The fleeting gleam in her eye
is now a permanent glow. I kiss my son with passion, without allowing
myself to think of the clouds gathering over our heads.






  He will be a man, a proper man, I'm sure. Intelligence sparkles in his
features and in his eyes. I have. revived the sacred flame. Thanks to me, a
new human race is rising and will bloom on this planet. When he grows up
he will be the first of the branch and then….




  When he grows up! I shudder at the thought of the conditions of his
childhood and of all the obstacles that will stand in his path. No matter!
Between the three of us, we shall triumph, of that I am sure. I say the three
of us, for Nova is now one of us. One need only see the way in which she
looks at her child. Though she still licks him, in the manner of the mothers
of this strange planet, her eyes radiate love.






 I put him. down again on the straw. I am reassured as to his nature. He
does not talk yet, but—I am out of my mind, he is only three days old!—he
will one day. Now he has started crying, crying like a human child and not
whining. Nova hears the difference and observes him with awe and ecstasy.
  It does not escape Zira's attention, either. She draws closer, her furry ears
prick up, and she watches the baby for a long time, in silence, with a
solemn expression. Then she signals me that it is time to go. It would be
dangerous for all of us if I were to be found here. She promises to look after
my son and I know she will keep her word. But I am also aware that she is
suspected of being attached to me, and the possibility of her dismissal
makes me tremble. I must not allow her to run this risk.


  I embrace my family warmly and leave. Looking around, I see the she-ape
likewise bend over this human body and gently put her muzzle to his brow
before closing the cage. And Nova does not protest! She permits this caress,
which must have become a daily occurrence. Remembering the antipathy
she used to show toward Zira, I cannot help regarding this as a miracle.




We go out. I am trembling from head to foot and I see that Zira is as deeply
moved as I am.


"Ulysse," she exclaims, wiping away a tear, "I sometimes feel this child is
also mine!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - S I X


The periodic visits that I force myself to pay Professor Antelle are a more and
more painful duty. He is still in the institute, but he has had to be moved from
the fairly comfortable cell where I had arranged for him to be kept. He was
pining away there and from time to time gave vent to outbursts of temper
that made him dangerous. He attempted to bite his warders. So Cornelius
then tried out another system. He had him put in an ordinary straw-lined cage
and gave him a mate: the girl with whom he used to sleep in the zoo. The
professor welcomed her noisily with an animal demonstration of joy, and
immediately his manner changed. He has now taken a new lease on life.
It is in her company that I now find him. He appears to be quite happy. He
has put on weight and looks younger. I have done all I can to enter into
communication with him. I try again today, but without success. He is
interested only in the cakes I offer him. When the bag is empty he goes back
and lies down beside his mate, who starts licking his face..






 "Now you can see how intelligence can melt away just as it can be
acquired," someone behind me mutters.


 It is Cornelius. He is looking for me, but not to talk about the professor.
There is something serious he wants to discuss. I follow him into his office,
where Zira is waiting. Her eyes are red, as though she has been weeping.
They seem to have bad news for me, but neither of them dares to speak.






"My son?"


 "He's very well," Zira says abruptly.


 "Too well," Cornelius mutters with a frown.






  I know he is a splendid baby, but it is a month since I have seen him. The
security measures have been tightened still more. Zira, who is suspect by
the authorities, is under close surveillance.




"Much too well," Cornelius repeats. "He smiles. He cries like a baby ape . . .
and he has begun to talk."






 "At three months of age!"
  "Baby words, but there's everything to indicate that he will talk properly
later. In fact, he is miraculously precocious."


 I am delighted. Zira is annoyed by my doting-father manner.


  "But don't you realize this is a disaster? The others will never leave him in
liberty."


  "I know from a reliable source that some extremely important decisions
are going to be taken about him by the Grand Council, which is to meet in
two weeks' time," Cornelius remarks quietly.




 "Important decisions?"






  "Very important. There's no question of doing away with him . . . not for
the moment, at least; but he'll be taken away from his mother."




"And I, wouldn't I be allowed to see him?"






  "You least of all . . . no, don't interrupt me," the chimpanzee continues
emphatically. "We didn't come here to feel sorry for ourselves but to work
out a plan of action. Well, now I have some definite information. Your son is
going to be placed in a sort of fortress under the surveillance of the
orangutans. Yes, Zaius has been plotting for some time and he is going to get
the better of us."






At this point Cornelius clenches his fists in rage and mutters some ugly
oaths. Then he continues:
  "Needless to say, the Council knows perfectly well how little that old fool's
scientific views can be trusted, but they are pretending to believe he is more
qualified than I am to study this exceptional subject, because the latter is
regarded as a danger to our race. They are counting on Zaius to make it
impossible for him to do any harm."






 I am dumbfounded. It is not possible to leave my son in the hands of that
dangerous imbecile. But Cornelius has not yet finished.




 "It's not only the child that is menaced."






 I remain speechless and look at Zira, who hangs her head.




  "The orangutans hate you because you are the living proof of their
scientific aberrations, and the gorillas consider you too dangerous to be
allowed at liberty much longer. They are frightened you might found a new
race on this planet. But apart from this eventuality, they are frightened that
your mere example might sow unrest among the men. Unusual nervousness
has been reported among the ones with whom you are dealing."






  This is true. In the course of my last visit to the room with the cages, I
noticed a marked change among the men. It was as though some mysterious
instinct had notified them of the miraculous birth. They had greeted my
appearance with a concert of howls.






   "To tell the truth," Cornelius abruptly concludes, "I'm very much afraid
that within the next two weeks the Council might decide to eliminate you
. . . or at least remove part of your brain on the pretext of some experiment.
As for Nova, I believe it will be decided to put her out of the way as well,
because she has been in such close contact with you."






It's not possible! I who believed' myself entrusted with a semi-divine
mission! I feel I am once again the most wretched creature living and give
way to the most dreadful despair. Zira puts her hand on my shoulder.






  "Cornelius is quite right not to have concealed anything from you. But
what he has not told you is that we will not abandon you. We have decided
to save all three of you, and we'll be helped by a small group of brave
chimpanzees."




 "What can I do, the only member of my species?"






  "You must get away. You must leave this planet, to which you should
never have come. You must go back where you belong, to Earth. Your son's
safety and your own demand it."






Her voice breaks as though she is on the verge of tears. She is even more
attached to me than I thought. I am also deeply upset, no less at her sorrow
than at the prospect of leaving her forever. But how to escape from this
planet? Cornelius has a plan.






   "It's true," he says. "I've promised Zira to help you escape, and so I shall,
 even if it means losing my job. I shall thus feel I have not evaded my duty
 as an ape. For if a danger threatens us, it will be averted by your return to
 Earth. . . . You once said, I believe, that your spacecraft was still intact and
 could take you home?"
"Without the slightest doubt. It contains enough fuel, oxygen, and supplies
to take us to the edge of the universe. But how am I to reach it?"






  "It's still orbiting around our planet. An astronomer friend of mine has
tracked it down and knows every detail of its trajectory. As to the means of
reaching it? Now listen. In exactly ten days' time we are going to launch an
artificial satellite, manned by humans, of course, on whom we want to test
the effect of certain rays. . . . No, don't interrupt! The number of passengers
will be limited to three: one man, one woman, and one child."






I grasp his scheme in a flash and appreciate his ingenuity —but what
obstacles!






"Some of the scientists responsible for this launching are friends of mine, and
I have won them over to your cause. The satellite will be placed on the
trajectory of your craft and will be navigable within certain limits. The
human couple have been trained to carry out certain motions through
conditioned reflexes. I think you'll be even more skillful than they are. . . .
For this is our plan: you three will take the place of the passengers. That
shouldn't be too difficult. As I said, I've already got the necessary
accomplices: chimpanzees regard assassination with repugnance. The others
won't even notice the trick that's played on them."






   This indeed is more than likely. To most of the apes, a man is a man and
 nothing more. The differences between one individual and another do not
 strike them.
  "I'll put you through an intensive course of training during these ten
 days. Do you think you'll be able to board your craft?"






   It ought to be possible. But it's not the difficulties and dangers I am
 thinking about at the moment. I cannot shake off the melancholy that
 assailed me just now at the thought of leaving the planet Soror, Zira, and
 my fellows, yes, my fellow humans. Toward them I feel I am something !
 of a deserter. Yet above all I must save my son and Nova. i But I shall
 come back. Yes, later, I swear it on the heads ' of the captives in the cages,
 I shall come back with trump cards in my hand.






I am so bewildered that I voice my thoughts out loud.






 Cornelius smiles.






  "In four or five years of your time, your traveling time, but in more
than a thousand years as far as we stay-at-homes are concerned. Don't
forget that we, too, have discovered relativity. In the meantime I've
discussed the risk with my chimpanzee friends and we have decided to take
it."


  We leave one another after making arrangements to meet on the
following day. Zira goes out first. Remaining behind with Cornelius for a
moment, I take the opportunity of thanking him with all my heart.
Inwardly I'm wondering why he is doing all this for me. He reads my
thoughts.


 "Zira's the one you ought to thank," he says. "It's to her you will owe
your life. On my own, I don't know if I should have gone to so much
trouble or taken so many risks. But she would never forgive me for being
a party to murder . . . and anyway . . ."


  He pauses. Zira is waiting for me in the corridor outside. He makes sure
she cannot hear and quickly whispers:
  "Anyway, for her as well as me, it is better that you should vanish from
this planet."


 He closes the door after me as I leave the room. I am alone with Zira
and we take a few steps along the corridor.


 "Zira!"






  I stop and take her in my arms. She is as upset as I am. I see a tear
coursing down her muzzle while we stand locked in a tight embrace. Ah,
what matter this horrid material exterior! It is her soul that communes
with mine. I shut my eyes so as not to see her grotesque face, made
uglier still by emotion. I feel her shapeless body tremble against mine. I
force myself to rub my cheek against hers. We are about to kiss like
lovers when she gives an instinctive start and thrusts me away violently.


  While I stand there speechless, not knowing what attitude to adopt, she
hides her head in her long hairy paws and this hideous she-ape bursts
into tears and announces in despair:


  "Oh, darling,, it's impossible. It's a shame, but I can't, I can't. You are
really too unattractive!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - S E V E N
We have brought it off. I am once again traveling through space aboard the
cosmic craft, rushing like a comet in the direction of the solar system at an ever-
increasing speed.
  I am not alone. With me are Nova and SMus, the fruit of our interplanetary
passion, who can say "papa," "mama" and many other words. Also on board
are a couple of chickens and rabbits, and various seeds that the scientists put
in the satellite to study the effects of radiation on organisms of very diverse
kinds. All this will not be wasted.






  Cornelius' plan was carried out to the letter. Our substitution for the selected trio
was made without difficulty. The woman took Nova's place in the institute;
the child will be handed over to Zaius. The latter will demonstrate that he
cannot talk and is nothing but an animal. Then perhaps I will no longer be
considered dangerous, and the man who has taken my place, who will also
not talk, will be spared his life. It is unlikely that they will ever suspect the
substitution. The orangutans, as I've said before, make no distinction between
one man and another. Zaius will triumph. Cornelius will have a few worries
perhaps, but all this will soon be forgotten. . . . What do I mean! It is
forgotten already, for aeons have elapsed out there during the few months I
have been shooting through space. As for me, my memories are rapidly receding,
like the material body of the super-giant Betelgeuse, as the space-time increases
between us: the monster has changed in size to a small balloon, then an
orange. It is now no more than a minute bright spot in the galaxy. So is it with
my Sororian thoughts.






  It would be unreasonable of me to fret. I have succeeded in saving the
beings who are dear to me. Whom do I miss over there? Zira? Yes, Zira.
But the emotions that came to life between us had no name on Earth or in
any other region of the cosmos. The separation was essential. She must have
recovered her peace of mind, bringing up her baby chimpanzees after
marrying Cornelius. Professor Antelle? To hell with the professor! I could no
longer do anything for him, and he has apparently found a satisfactory solution
to the problem of existence. Only I shudder occasionally when I think that had I
been placed in the same environment as he was, and without Zira's presence, I,
too, might have fallen equally low.
  The boarding of our craft took place without a hitch. I was able to draw
closer and closer to it by guiding the satellite, and to enter the compartment, which had been left wide
open for the eventual return of our launch. Then the robots went into action and closed all the exits. We were on board. The
equipment was intact and the electronic brain started carrying out all the operations for our departure. On the planet Soror our
accomplices pretended that the satellite had been destroyed in flight after failing to be placed in orbit.








  We have been traveling for more than a year and a half of our own time. We have reached almost the speed of light, crossed an
immense space in a very short time, and have already embarked on the deceleration period that is to last another year. In our little
universe I never get tired of admiring my new family.








Nova is bearing the voyage extremely well. She is becoming more and more rational. Her motherhood has transformed her. She
spends hours doting on her son, who is proving to be a better teacher for her than I was. She articulates almost correctly the words
he utters. She does not yet talk to me, but we have drawn up a code of gestures enabling us to understand each other. I feel as
though I had lived with her always. As for Sirius, he is truly the pearl of the cosmos. He is a year and a half old. He walks, despite
the heavy gravity, and babbles without stopping. I cannot wait to show him to the men on Earth.




   What intense emotion I felt this morning when I noticed the sun beginning to assume perceptible dimension! It appears to us
now like a billiard ball and is tinged with yellow. I point it out to Nova and Sirius. I explain the nature of this heavenly body,
which is new to them, and they understand. Today Sirius talks fluently and Nova almost as well. She has been learning at the same
time as he. Miracle of motherhood, miracle that I Ovulated! I was unable to raise all the men on Soror from their animal state, but
my success in Nova's case is complete.








   The sun is growing bigger every moment. I try to distinguish the planets through the telescope. I can find my bearings easily. I
can see Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and . . . the Earth, yes, here is the Earth!








   Tears come into my eyes. Only someone who has lived more than a year on the planet of the apes could appreciate my emotion.
. . . I know that after seven hundred years I shall find neither parents nor friends, but I can hardly wait to see proper men again.








   Glued to the portholes, we watch Earth approaching.
I no longer need the telescope to distinguish the continents. We are in orbit. We are revolving around my old planet. I can see
Australia, America, and then . . . yes, here is France. We all three embrace, sobbing.








   We embark in the vessel's second launch. All the calculations have been made with a view to landing in my native country: not far from
Paris, I hope.








We have entered the atmosphere. The retrorockets come into action. Nova looks at me and smiles. She has learned how to smile
and also how to weep. My son stretches his arms out and opens his eyes in wonder. Below us is Paris. The Eiffel Tower is still there.








   I have taken over the controls and am navigating very accurately. A miracle of technique! After seven hundred years' absence I
manage to land at Orly—it has not changed very much—at the end of the airfield fairly far from the airport buildings. They must have
noticed me, so all I need do is wait There seems to be no air traffic; could the airport be out of use? No, there goes a machine. It
resembles in every respect the aircraft of my day and age!








A vehicle moves off from the buildings, heading in our direction. I switch off my rockets, a prey to an increasingly feverish
excitement What a story I shall have to tell my fellow humans! Perhaps they won't believe me at first, but I have proof. I have Nova, I have my
son.








The vehicle approaches. It is a truck and a fairly old-fashioned model: four wheels and a combustion engine. I automatically register
these details. I should have thought such vehicles had been relegated to museums long ago.








I also expected a somewhat more official reception. There are very few people here to greet me. Only two men, as far as I can see.
But how stupid I am—of course they cannot know. But when they do know . . .!








   Yes, there are two of them. I cannot see them distinctly because of the setting sun reflected on the windshield, an extremely dirty
windshield. Just the driver and one passenger. The latter wears a uniform. He is an officer; I can see the glitter of his badges of rank.
The commander of the airport, probably. The others will follow.








The truck stops fifty yards from us. I pick my son up in my arms and leave the launch. Nova follows us after a moment's hesitation.
She looks frightened but she will soon get over it.








   The driver gets out of the vehicle. He has his back turned to me. He is half concealed by the long grass growing in the space
between us. He opens the door for the passenger
to alight I was not mistaken, he is an officer; a senior officer, as I now see from his badges of rank. He jumps down. He takes a few steps to
emerges from the grass, and at last appears in full view. Nova utters a scream, snatches my son from me, and rushes back with him to the launch
remain rooted to the spot, unable to move a muscle or utter a sound. He is a gorilla.








CHAPTER                  THIRTY-EIGHT




Phyllis and Jinn raised their heads from the manuscript over which they had been bending together and looked at each other for some time without saying






   "A likely story," said Jinn at last, forcing a smile to his lips.




   Phyllis remained wrapped in thought. Certain parts of the story had moved her and seemed to contain a germ of truth. She said so to her comp




   "It just shows there are poets everywhere, in every corner of the cosmos, and practical jokers, too."




   She pondered over this, but was not so easily convinced as he was. However, she reluctantly agreed.




   "You're right, Jinn. That's what I think. . . . Rational men? Men endowed with a mind? Men inspired by intelligence? No, that's not possib
the author has gone too far. But it's a pity!"




   "I quite agree," said Jinn. "Now it's time we started back."




   He let out the sail, exposing it to the combined rays of the three suns. Then he began to manipulate the driving levers, using his four agi
while Phyllis, after dismissing a last shred of doubt with an energetic shake of her velvety ears, took out her compact and, in view of their
port, touched up her dear little chimpanzee muzzle.








   THE END