15

SPEAKER FOR THE DEAD

The lake was still; there was no breeze. The two men sat together in chairs on the floating dock. A small wooden raft was tied up at the dock; Graff hooked his foot in the rope and pulled the raft in, then let it drift out, then pulled it in again.


“You’ve lost weight.”


“One kind of stress puts it on, another takes it off. I am a creature of chemicals.”


“It must have been hard.”


Graff shrugged. “Not really. I knew I’d be acquitted.”


“Some of us weren’t so sure. People were crazy for a while there. Mistreatment of children, negligent homicide—those videos of Bonzo’s and Stilson’s deaths were pretty gruesome. To watch one child do that to another.”


“As much as anything, I think the videos saved me. The prosecution edited them, but we showed the whole thing. It was plain that Ender was not the provocateur. After that, it was just a second-guessing game. I said I did what I believed was necessary for the preservation of the human race, and it worked; we got the judges to agree that the prosecution had to prove beyond doubt that Ender would have won the war without the training we gave him. After that, it was simple. The exigencies of war.”


“Anyway, Graff, it was a great relief to us. I know we quarreled, and I know the prosecution used tapes of our conversations against you. But by then I knew that you were right, and I offered to testify for you.”


“I know, Anderson. My lawyers told me.”


“So what will you do now?”


“I don’t know. I’m still relaxing. I have a few years of leave accrued. Enough to take me to retirement, and I have plenty of salary that I never used, sitting around in banks. I could live on the interest. Maybe I’ll do nothing.”


“It sounds nice. But I couldn’t stand it. I’ve been offered the presidency of three different universities, on the theory that I’m an educator. They don’t believe me when I say that all I ever cared about at the Battle School was the game. I think I’ll go with the other offer.”


“Commissioner?”


“Now that the wars are over, it’s time to play games again. It’ll be almost like vacation, anyway. Only twenty-eight teams in the league. Though after years of watching those children flying, football is like watching slugs bash into each other.”


They laughed. Graff sighed and pushed the raft with his foot.


“That raft. Surely you can’t float on it.”


Graff shook his head. “Ender built it.”


“That’s right. This is where you took him.”


“It’s even been deeded over to him. I saw to it that he was amply rewarded. He’ll have all the money he ever needs.”


“If they ever let him come back to use it.”


“They never will.”


“With Demosthenes agitating for him to come home?”


“Demosthenes isn’t on the nets anymore.”


Anderson raised an eyebrow. “What does that mean?”


“Demosthenes has retired. Permanently.”


“You know something, you old farteater. You know who Demosthenes is.”


“Was.”


“Well, tell me!”


“No.”


“You’re no fun anymore, Graff.”


“I never was.”


“At least you can tell me why. There were a lot of us who thought Demosthenes would be Hegemon someday.”


“There was never a chance of that. No, even Demosthenes’ mob of political cretins couldn’t persuade the Hegemon to bring Ender back to Earth. Ender is far too dangerous.”


“He’s only eleven. Twelve, now.”


“All the more dangerous because he could so easily be controlled. In all the world, the name of Ender is one to conjure with. The child-god, the miracle worker, with life and death in his hands. Every petty tyrant-to-be would like to have the boy, to set him in front of an army and watch the world either flock to join or cower in fear. If Ender came to Earth, he’d want to come here, to rest, to salvage what he can of his childhood. But they’d never let him rest.”


“I see. Someone explained that to Demosthenes?”


Graff smiled. “Demosthenes explained it to someone else. Someone who could have used Ender as no one else could have, to rule the world and make the world like it.”


“Who?”


“Locke.”


“Locke is the one who argued for Ender to stay on Eros.”


“All is not always as it seems.”


“It’s too deep for me, Graff. Give me the game. Nice, neat rules. Referees. Beginnings and endings. Winners and losers and then everybody goes home to their families.”


“Get me tickets to some games now and then, all right?”


“You won’t really stay here and retire, will you?”


“No.”


“You’re going into the Hegemony, aren’t you?”


“I’m the new Minister of Colonization.”


“So they’re doing it.”


“As soon as we get the reports back on the bugger colony worlds. I mean, there they are, already fertile, with housing and industry in place, and all the buggers dead. Very convenient. We’ll repeal the population limitation laws—”


“Which everybody hates—”


“And all those thirds and fourths and fifths will get on starships and head out for worlds known and unknown.”


“Will people really go?”


“People always go. Always. They always believe they can make a better life than in the old world.”


“What the hell, maybe they can.”


At first Ender believed that they would bring him back to Earth as soon as things quieted down. But things were quiet now, had been quiet for a year, and it was plain to him now that they would not bring him back at all, that he was much more useful as a name and a story than he would ever be as an inconvenient flesh-and-blood person.


And there was the matter of the court martial on the crimes of Colonel Graff. Admiral Chamrajnagar tried to keep Ender from watching it, but failed; Ender had been awarded the rank of admiral, too, and this was one of the few times he asserted the privileges the rank implied. So he watched the videos of the fights with Stilson and Bonzo, watched as the photographs of the corpses were displayed, listened as the psychologists and lawyers argued whether murder had been committed or the killing was in self-defense. Ender had his own opinion, but no one asked him. Throughout the trial, it was really Ender himself under attack. The prosecution was too clever to charge him directly, but there were attempts to make him look sick, perverted, criminally insane.


“Never mind,” said Mazer Rackham. “The politicians are afraid of you, but they can’t destroy your reputation yet. That won’t be done until the historians get at you in thirty years.”


Ender didn’t care about his reputation. He watched the videos impassively, but in fact he was amused. In battle I killed ten billion buggers, whose queens, at least, were as alive and wise as any man, who had not even launched a third attack against us, and no one thinks to call it a crime.


All his crimes weighed heavy on him, the deaths of Stilson and Bonzo no heavier and no lighter than the rest.


And so, with that burden, he waited through the empty months until the world that he had saved decided he could come home.


One by one, his friends reluctantly left him, called home to their families, to be received with heroes’ welcomes in hometowns they barely remembered. Ender watched the videos of their homecomings, and was touched when they spent much of their time praising Ender Wiggin, who taught them everything, they said, who taught them and led them into victory. But if they called for him to be brought home, the words were censored from the videos and no one heard the plea.


For a time, the only work in Eros was cleaning up after the bloody League War and receiving the reports of the starships, once warships, that were now exploring the bugger colony worlds.


But now Eros was busier than ever, more crowded than it had ever been during the war, as colonists were brought here to prepare for their voyages to the empty bugger worlds. Ender took part in the work, as much as they would let him; it did not occur to them that this twelve-year-old boy might be as gifted at peace as he was at war. But he was patient with their tendency to ignore him, and learned to make his proposals and suggest his plans through the few adults who listened to him, and let them present them as their own. He was concerned, not about getting credit, but about getting the job done.


The one thing he could not bear was the worship of the colonists. He learned to avoid the tunnels where they lived, because they would always recognize him—the world had memorized his face—and then they would scream and shout and embrace him and congratulate him and show him the children they had named after him and tell him how he was so young it broke their hearts and they didn’t blame him for any of his murders because it wasn’t his fault he was just a child—


He hid from them as best he could.


There was one colonist, though, he couldn’t hide from.


He wasn’t inside Eros that day. He had gone up with the shuttle to the new ISL, where he had been learning to do surface work on the starships; it was unbecoming to an officer to do mechanical labor, Chamrajnagar told him, but Ender answered that since the trade he had mastered wasn’t much called for now, it was about time he learned another skill.


They spoke to him through his helmet radio and told him that someone was waiting to see him as soon as he could come in. Ender couldn’t think of anyone he wanted to see, and so he didn’t hurry. He finished installing the shield for the ship’s ansible and then hooked his way across the face of the ship and pulled himself up into the airlock.


She was waiting for him outside the changing room. For a moment he was annoyed that they would let a colonist come to bother him here, where he came to be alone; then he looked again, and realized that if the young woman were a little girl, he would know her.


“Valentine,” he said.


“Hi, Ender.”


“What are you doing here?”


“Demosthenes retired. Now I’m going with the first colony.”


“It’s fifty years to get there—”


“Only two years if you’re aboard the ship.”


“But if you ever came back, everybody you knew on Earth would be dead—”


“That was what I had in mind. I was hoping, though, that someone I knew on Eros might come with me.”


“I don’t want to go to a world we stole from the buggers. I just want to go home.”


“Ender, you’re never going back to Earth. I saw to that before I left.”


He looked at her in silence.


“I tell you that now, so that if you want to hate me, you can hate me from the beginning.”


They went to Ender’s tiny compartment in the ISL and she explained. Peter wanted Ender back on Earth, under the protection of the Hegemon’s Council. “The way things are right now, Ender, that would put you effectively under Peter’s control, since half the council now does just what Peter wants. The ones that aren’t Locke’s lapdogs are under his thumb in other ways.”


“Do they know who he really is?”


“Yes. He isn’t publicly known, but people in high places know him. It doesn’t matter any more. He has too much power for them to worry about his age. He’s done incredible things, Ender.”


“I noticed the treaty a year ago was named for Locke.”


“That was his breakthrough. He proposed it through his friends from the public policy nets, and then Demosthenes got behind it, too. It was the moment he had been waiting for, to use Demosthenes’ influence with the mob and Locke’s influence with the intelligentsia to accomplish something noteworthy. It forestalled a really vicious war that could have lasted for decades.”


“He decided to be a statesman?”


“I think so. But in his cynical moments, of which there are many, he pointed out to me that if he had allowed the League to fall apart completely, he’d have had to conquer the world piece by piece. As long as the Hegemony existed, he could do it in one lump.”


Ender nodded. “That’s the Peter that I knew.”


“Funny, isn’t it? That Peter would save millions of lives.”


“While I killed billions.”


“I wasn’t going to say that.”


“So he wanted to use me?”


“He had plans for you, Ender. He would publicly reveal himself when you arrived, going to meet you in front of all the videos. Ender Wiggin’s older brother, who also happened to be the great Locke, the architect of peace. Standing next to you, he would look quite mature. And the physical resemblance between you is stronger than ever. It would be quite simple for him, then, to take over.”


“Why did you stop him?”


“Ender, you wouldn’t be happy spending the rest of your life as Peter’s pawn.”


“Why not? I’ve spent my life as someone’s pawn.”


“Me too. I showed Peter all the evidence that I had assembled, enough to prove in the eyes of the public that he was a psychotic killer. It included full-color pictures of tortured squirrels and some of the monitor videos of the way he treated you. It took some work to get it all together, but by the time he saw it, he was willing to give me what I wanted. What I wanted was your freedom and mine.”


“It’s not my idea of freedom to go live in the house of the people that I killed.”


“Ender, what’s done is done. Their worlds are empty now, and ours is full. And we can take with us what their worlds have never known—cities full of people who live private, individual lives, who love and hate each other for their own reasons. In all the bugger worlds, there was never more than a single story to be told; when we’re there, the world will be full of stories, and we’ll improvise their endings day by day. Ender, Earth belongs to Peter. And if you don’t go with me now, he’ll have you there, and use you up until you wish you’d never been born. Now is the only chance you’ll get to get away.”


Ender said nothing.


“I know what you’re thinking, Ender. You’re thinking that I’m trying to control you just as much as Peter or Graff or any of the others.”


“It crossed my mind.”


“Welcome to the human race. Nobody controls his own life, Ender. The best you can do is choose to fill the roles given you by good people, by people who love you. I didn’t come here because I wanted to be a colonist. I came because I’ve spent my whole life in the company of the brother that I hated. Now I want a chance to know the brother that I love, before it’s too late, before we’re not children anymore.”


“It’s already too late for that.”


“You’re wrong, Ender. You think you’re grown up and tired and jaded with everything, but in your heart you’re just as much a kid as I am. We can keep it secret from everybody else. While you’re governing the colony and I’m writing political philosophy, they’ll never guess that in the darkness of night we sneak into each other’s room and play checkers and have pillowfights.”


Ender laughed, but he had noticed some things she dropped too casually for them to be accidental. “Governing?”


“I’m Demosthenes, Ender. I went out with a bang. A public announcement that I believed so much in the colonization movement that I was going in the first ship myself. At the same time, the Minister of Colonization, a former colonel named Graff, announced that the pilot of the colony ship would be the great Mazer Rackham, and the governor of the first colony it established would be Ender Wiggin.”


“They might have asked me.”


“I wanted to ask you myself.”


“But it’s already announced.”


“No. They’ll be announcing it tomorrow, if you accept. Mazer accepted a few hours ago, back in Eros.”


“You’re telling everyone that you’re Demosthenes? A fourteen-year-old girl?”


“We’re only telling them that Demosthenes is going with the colony. Let them spend the next fifty years poring over the passenger list, trying to figure out which one of them is the great demagogue of the Age of Locke.”


Ender laughed and shook his head. “You’re actually having fun, Val.”


“I can’t think why I shouldn’t.”


“All right,” said Ender. “I’ll go. Maybe even as governor, as long as you and Mazer are there to help me. My abilities are a little underused at present.”


She squealed and hugged him, for all the world like a typical teenage girl who just got the present that she wanted from her little brother.


“Val,” he said. “I just want one thing clear. I’m not going for you. I’m not going in order to be governor, or because I’m bored here. I’m going because I know the buggers better than any other living soul, and maybe if I go there I can understand them better. I stole their future from them; I can only begin to repay by seeing what I can learn from their past.”


The voyage was long. By the end of it, Val had finished the first volume of her history of the bugger wars and transmitted it by ansible, under Demosthenes’ name, back to Earth, and Ender had won something better than the adulation of the passengers. They knew him now, and he had won their love and their respect.


He worked hard on the new world. He quickly understood the differences between military and civilian leadership, and governed by persuasion rather than fiat, and by working as hard as anyone at the tasks involved in setting up a self-sustaining economy. But his most important work, as everyone agreed, was exploring what the buggers had left behind, trying to find among structures, machinery, and fields long untended some things that human beings could use, could learn from. There were no books to read—the buggers never needed them. With all things present in their memories, all things spoken as they were thought, when the buggers died their knowledge died with them.


And yet. From the sturdiness of the roofs that covered their animal sheds and their food supplies, Ender learned that winter would be hard, with heavy snows. From fences with sharpened stakes that pointed outward he learned that there were marauding animals that were a danger to the crops or the herds. From the mill he learned that the long, foul-tasting fruits that grew in the overgrown orchards were dried and ground into meal. And from the slings that once were used to carry infants along with adults into the fields, he learned that even though the buggers were not much for individuality, they did care for their young.


Life settled down, and years passed. The colony lived in wooden houses and used the tunnels of the bugger city for storage and manufactories. They were governed by a council now, and administrators were elected, so that Ender, though they still called him governor, was in fact only a judge. There were crimes and quarrels, alongside kindness and cooperation; there were people who loved each other and people who did not; it was a human world. They did not wait so eagerly for each new transmission from the ansible; the names that were famous on Earth meant little to them now. The only name they knew was that of Peter Wiggin, the Hegemon of Earth; the only news that came was news of peace, of prosperity, of great ships leaving the littoral of Earth’s solar system, passing the comet shield and filling up the bugger worlds. Soon there would be other colonies on this world, Ender’s World; soon there would be neighbors; already they were halfway here; but no one cared. They would help the newcomers when they came, teach them what they had learned, but what mattered in life now was who would marry whom, and who was sick, and when was planting time, and why should I pay him when the calf died three weeks after I got it.


“They’ve become people of the land,” said Valentine. “No one cares now that Demosthenes is sending the seventh volume of his history today. No one here will read it.”


Ender pressed a button and his desk showed him the next page. “Very insightful, Valentine. How many more volumes until you’re through?”


“Just one. The story of Ender Wiggin.”


“What will you do, wait to write it until I’m dead?”


“No. Just write it, and when I’ve brought it up to the present day, I’ll stop.”


“I have a better idea. Take it up to the day we won the final battle. Stop it there. Nothing that I’ve done since then is worth writing down.”


“Maybe,” said Valentine. “And maybe not.”


The ansible had brought them word that the new colony ship was only a year away. They asked Ender to find a place for them to settle in, near enough to Ender’s colony that the two colonies could trade, but far enough apart that they could be governed separately. Ender used the helicopter and began to explore. He took one of the children along, an eleven-year-old boy named Abra; he had been only three when the colony was founded, and he remembered no other world than this. He and Ender flew as far away as Ender thought the new colony should be, then camped for the night and got a feel for the land on foot the next morning.


It was on the third morning that Ender suddenly began to feel an uneasy sense that he had been in this place before. He looked around; it was new land, he had never seen it. He called out to Abra.


“Ho, Ender!” Abra called. He was on top of a steep low hill. “Come up!”


Ender scrambled up, the turves coming away from his feet in the soft ground. Abra was pointing downward. “Can you believe this?” he asked.


The hill was hollow. A deep depression in the middle, partially filled with water, was ringed by concave slopes that cantilevered dangerously over the water. In one direction the hill gave way to two long ridges that made a V-shaped valley; in the other direction the hill rose to a piece of white rock, grinning like a skull with a tree growing out of its mouth.


“It’s like a giant died here,” said Abra, “and the Earth grew up to cover his carcass.”


Now Ender knew why it had looked familiar. The Giant’s corpse. He had played here too many times as a child not to know this place. But it was not possible. The computer in the Battle School could not possibly have seen this place. He looked through his binoculars in a direction he knew well, fearing and hoping that he would see what belonged in that place.


Swings and slides. Monkey bars. Now overgrown, but the shapes still unmistakable.


“Somebody had to have built this,” Abra said. “Look, this skull place, it’s not rock, look at it. This is concrete.”


“I know,” said Ender. “They built it for me.”


“What?”


“I know this place, Abra. The buggers built it for me.”


“The buggers were all dead fifty years before we got here.”


“You’re right, it’s impossible, but I know what I know. Abra, I shouldn’t take you with me. It might be dangerous. If they knew me well enough to build this place, they might be planning to—”


“To get even with you.”


“For killing them.”


“So don’t go, Ender. Don’t do what they want you to do.”


“If they want to get revenge, Abra, I don’t mind. But perhaps they don’t. Perhaps this is the closest they could come to talking. To writing me a note.”


“They didn’t know how to read and write.”


“Maybe they were learning when they died.”


“Well, I’m sure as hell not sticking around here if you’re taking off somewhere. I’m going with you.”


“No. You’re too young to take the risk of—”


“Come on! You’re Ender Wiggin. Don’t tell me what eleven-year-old kids can do!”


Together they flew in the copter, over the playground, over the woods, over the well in the forest clearing. Then out to where there was, indeed, a cliff, with a cave in the cliff wall and a ledge right where the End of the World should be. And there in the distance, just where it should be in the fantasy game, was the castle tower.


He left Abra with the copter. “Don’t come after me, and go home in an hour if I don’t come back.”


“Eat it, Ender, I’m coming with you.”


“Eat it yourself, Abra, or I’ll stuff you with mud.”


Abra could tell, despite Ender’s joking tone, that he meant it, and so he stayed.


The walls of the tower were notched and ledged for easy climbing. They meant him to get in.


The room was as it had always been. Ender remembered well enough to look for a snake on the floor, but there was only a rug with a carved snake’s head at one corner. Imitation, not duplication; for a people who made no art, they had done well. They must have dragged these images from Ender’s own mind, finding him and learning his darkest dreams across the lightyears. But why? To bring him to this room, of course. To leave a message for him. But where was the message, and how would he understand it?


The mirror was waiting for him on the wall. It was a dull sheet of metal, in which the rough shape of a human face had been scratched. They tried to draw the image I should see in the picture.


And looking at the mirror he could remember breaking it, pulling it from the wall, and snakes leaping out of the hidden place, attacking him, biting him wherever their poisonous fangs could find purchase.


How well do they know me, wondered Ender. Well enough to know how often I have thought of death, to know that I am not afraid of it. Well enough to know that even if I feared death, it would not stop me from taking that mirror from the wall.


He walked to the mirror, lifted, pulled away. Nothing jumped from the space behind it. Instead, in a hollowed-out place, there was a white ball of silk with a few frayed strands sticking out here and there. An egg? No. The pupa of a queen bugger, already fertilized by the larval males, ready, out of her own body, to hatch a hundred thousand buggers, including a few queens and males. Ender could see in his mind the slug-like males clinging to the walls of a dark tunnel, and the large adults carrying the infant queen to the mating room; each male in turn penetrated the larval queen, shuddered in ecstasy, and died, dropping to the tunnel floor and shriveling. Then the new queen was laid before the old, a magnificent creature clad in soft and shimmering wings, which had long since lost the power of flight but still contained the power of majesty. The old queen kissed her to sleep with the gentle poison in her lips, then wrapped her in threads from her belly, and commanded her to become herself, to become a new city, a new world, to give birth to many queens and many worlds—


How do I know this, thought Ender. How can I see these things, like memories in my own mind.


As if in answer, he saw the first of all his battles with the bugger fleets. He had seen it before on the simulator; now he saw it as the hive-queen saw it, through many different eyes. The buggers formed their globe of ships, and then the terrible fighters came out of the darkness and the Little Doctor destroyed them in a blaze of light. He felt then what the hive-queen felt, watching through her workers’ eyes as death came to them too quickly to avoid, but not too quickly to be anticipated. There was no memory of pain or fear, though. What the hive-queen felt was sadness, a sense of resignation. She had not thought these words as she saw the humans coming to kill, but it was in words that Ender understood her: The humans did not forgive us, she thought. We will surely die.


“How can you live again?” he asked.


The queen in her silken cocoon had no words to give back; but when he closed his eyes and tried to remember, instead of memory came new images. Putting the cocoon in a cool place, a dark place, but with water, so she wasn’t dry, so that certain reactions could take place in the cocoon. Then time. Days and weeks, for the pupa inside to change. And then, when the cocoon had changed to a dusty brown color, Ender saw himself splitting open the cocoon, and helping the small and fragile queen emerge. He saw himself taking her by the forelimb and helping her walk from her birthwater to a nesting place, soft with dried leaves on sand. Then I am alive, came the thought in his mind. Then I am awake. Then I make my ten thousand children.


“No,” said Ender. “I can’t.”


Anguish.


“Your children are the monsters of our nightmares now. If I awoke you, we would only kill you again.”


There flashed through his mind a dozen images of human beings being killed by buggers, but with the image came a grief so powerful he could not bear it, and he wept their tears for them.


“If you could make them feel as you can make me feel, then perhaps they could forgive you.”


Only me, he realized. They found me through the ansible, followed it and dwelt in my mind. In the agony of my tortured dreams they came to know me, even as I spent my days destroying them; they found my fear of them, and found also that I had no knowledge I was killing them. In the few weeks they had, they built this place for me, and the Giant’s corpse and the playground and the ledge at the End of the World, so I would find this place by the evidence of my eyes. I am the only one they know, and so they can only talk to me, and through me. We are like you; the thought pressed into his mind. We did not mean to murder, and when we understood, we never came again. We thought we were the only thinking beings in the universe, until we met you, but never did we dream that thought could arise from the lonely animals who cannot dream each other’s dreams. How were we to know? We could live with you in peace. Believe us, believe us, believe us.


He reached into the cavity and took out the cocoon. It was astonishingly light, to hold all the hope and future of a great race within it.


“I’ll carry you,” said Ender, “I’ll go from world to world until I find a time and a place where you can come awake in safety. And I’ll tell your story to my people, so that perhaps in time they can forgive you, too. The way that you’ve forgiven me.”


He wrapped the queen’s cocoon in his jacket and carried her from the tower.


“What was in there?” asked Abra.


“The answer,” said Ender.


“To what?”


“My question.” And that was all he said of the matter; they searched for five more days and chose a site for the colony far to the east and south of the tower.


Weeks later he came to Valentine and told her to read something he had written; she pulled the file he named from the ship’s computer, and read it.


It was written as if the hive-queen spoke, telling all that they had meant to do, and all that they had done. Here are our failures, and here is our greatness; we did not mean to hurt you, and we forgive you for our death. From their earliest awareness to the great wars that swept across their home world, Ender told the story quickly, as if it were an ancient memory. When he came to the tale of the great mother, the queen of all, who first learned to keep and teach the new queen instead of killing her or driving her away, then he lingered, telling how many times she had finally to destroy the child of her body, the new self that was not herself, until she bore one who understood her quest for harmony. This was a new thing in the world, two queens that loved and helped each other instead of battling, and together they were stronger than any other hive. They prospered; they had more daughters who joined them in peace; it was the beginning of wisdom.


If only we could have talked to you, the hive-queen said in Ender’s words. But since it could not be, we ask only this: that you remember us, not as enemies, but as tragic sisters, changed into a foul shape by fate or God or evolution. If we had kissed, it would have been the miracle to make us human in each other’s eyes. Instead we killed each other. But still we welcome you now as guestfriends. Come into our home, daughters of Earth; dwell in our tunnels, harvest our fields; what we cannot do, you are now our hands to do for us. Blossom, trees; ripen, fields; be warm for them, suns; be fertile for them, planets: they are our adopted daughters, and they have come home.


The book that Ender wrote was not long, but in it was all the good and all the evil that the hive-queen knew. And he signed it, not with his name, but with a title:


SPEAKER FOR THE DEAD


On Earth, the book was published quietly, and quietly it was passed from hand to hand, until it was hard to believe that anyone on Earth might not have read it. Most who read it found it interesting; some who read it refused to set it aside. They began to live by it as best they could, and when their loved ones died, a believer would arise beside the grave to be the Speaker for the Dead, and say what the dead one would have said, but with full candor, hiding no faults and pretending no virtues. Those who came to such services sometimes found them painful and disturbing, but there were many who decided that their life was worthwhile enough, despite their errors, that when they died a Speaker should tell the truth for them.


On Earth it remained a religion among many religions. But for those who traveled the great cave of space and lived their lives in the hive-queen’s tunnels and harvested the hive-queen’s fields, it was the only religion. There was no colony without its Speaker for the Dead.


No one knew and no one really wanted to know who was the original Speaker. Ender was not inclined to tell them.


When Valentine was twenty-five years old, she finished the last volume of her history of the bugger wars. She included at the end the complete text of Ender’s little book, but did not say that Ender wrote it.


By ansible she got an answer from the ancient Hegemon, Peter Wiggin, seventy-seven years old with a failing heart.


“I know who wrote it,” he said. “If he can speak for the buggers, surely he can speak for me.”


Back and forth across the ansible Ender and Peter spoke, with Peter pouring out the story of his days and years, his crimes and his kindnesses. And when he died, Ender wrote a second volume, again signed by the Speaker for the Dead. Together, his two books were called the Hive-Queen and the Hegemon, and they were holy writ.


“Come on,” he said to Valentine one day. “Let’s fly away and live forever.”


“We can’t,” she said. “There are miracles even relativity can’t pull off, Ender.”


“We have to go. I’m almost happy here.”


“So stay.”


“I’ve lived too long with pain. I won’t know who I am without it.”


So they boarded a starship and went from world to world. Wherever they stopped, he was always Andrew Wiggin, itinerant speaker for the dead, and she was always Valentine, historian errant, writing down the stories of the living while Ender spoke the stories of the dead. And always Ender carried with him a dry white cocoon, looking for the world where the hive-queen could awaken and thrive in peace. He looked a long time.










ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




Portions of this book were recounted in my first published science fiction story, “Ender’s Game,” in the August 1977 Analog, edited by Ben Bova; his faith in me and this story are the foundation of my career.


Harriet McDougal of Tor is that rarest of editors—one who understands a story and can help the author make it exactly what he meant it to be. They don’t pay her enough. Harriet’s task was made more than a little easier, however, because of the excellent work of my resident editor, Kristine Card. I don’t pay her enough, either.


I am grateful also to Barbara Bova, who has been my friend and agent through thin and, sometimes, thick; and to Tom Doherty, my publisher, who let me talk him into doing this book at the ABA in Dallas, which shows either his superb judgment or how weary one can get at a convention.










Read on for an excerpt from Ender’s Shadow




1




POKE




“You think you’ve found somebody, so suddenly my program gets the axe?”


“It’s not about this kid that Graff found. It’s about the low quality of what you’ve been finding.”


“We knew it was long odds. But the kids I’m working with are actually fighting a war just to stay alive.”


“Your kids are so malnourished that they suffer serious mental degradation before you even begin testing them. Most of them haven’t formed any normal human bonds, they’re so messed up they can’t get through a day without finding something they can steal, break, or disrupt.”


“They also represent possibility, as all children do.”


“That’s just the kind of sentimentality that discredits your whole project in the eyes of the I.F.”






Poke kept her eyes open all the time. The younger children were supposed to be on watch, too, and sometimes they could be quite observant, but they just didn’t notice all the things they needed to notice, and that meant that Poke could only depend on herself to see danger.


There was plenty of danger to watch for. The cops, for instance. They didn’t show up often, but when they did, they seemed especially bent on clearing the streets of children. They would flail about them with their magnetic whips, landing cruel stinging blows on even the smallest children, haranguing them as vermin, thieves, pestilence, a plague on the fair city of Rotterdam. It was Poke’s job to notice when a disturbance in the distance suggested that the cops might be running a sweep. Then she would give the alarm whistle and the little ones would rush to their hiding places till the danger was past.


But the cops didn’t come by that often. The real danger was much more immediate—big kids. Poke, at age nine, was the matriarch of her little crew (not that any of them knew for sure that she was a girl), but that cut no ice with the eleven- and twelve- and thirteen-year-old boys and girls who bullied their way around the streets. The adult-size beggars and thieves and whores of the street paid no attention to the little kids except to kick them out of the way. But the older children, who were among the kicked, turned around and preyed on the younger ones. Any time Poke’s crew found something to eat—especially if they located a dependable source of garbage or an easy mark for a coin or a bit of food—they had to watch jealously and hide their winnings, for the bullies liked nothing better than to take away whatever scraps of food the little ones might have. Stealing from younger children was much safer than stealing from shops or passersby. And they enjoyed it, Poke could see that. They liked how the little kids cowered and obeyed and whimpered and gave them whatever they demanded.


So when the scrawny little two-year-old took up a perch on a garbage can across the street, Poke, being observant, saw him at once. The kid was on the edge of starvation. No, the kid was starving. Thin arms and legs, joints that looked ridiculously oversized, a distended belly. And if hunger didn’t kill him soon, the onset of autumn would, because his clothing was thin and there wasn’t much of it even at that.


Normally she wouldn’t have paid him more than passing attention. But this one had eyes. He was still looking around with intelligence. None of that stupor of the walking dead, no longer searching for food or even caring to find a comfortable place to lie while breathing their last taste of the stinking air of Rotterdam. After all, death would not be such a change for them. Everyone knew that Rotterdam was, if not the capital, then the main seaport of Hell. The only difference between Rotterdam and death was that with Rotterdam, the damnation wasn’t eternal.


This little boy—what was he doing? Not looking for food. He wasn’t eyeing the pedestrians. Which was just as well—there was no chance that anyone would leave anything for a child that small. Anything he might get would be taken away by any other child, so why should he bother? If he wanted to survive, he should be following older scavengers and licking food wrappers behind them, getting the last sheen of sugar or dusting of flour clinging to the packaging, whatever the first comer hadn’t licked off. There was nothing for this child out here on the street, not unless he got taken in by a crew, and Poke wouldn’t have him. He’d be nothing but a drain, and her kids were already having a hard enough time without adding another useless mouth.


He’s going to ask, she thought. He’s going to whine and beg. But that only works on the rich people. I’ve got my crew to think of. He’s not one of them, so I don’t care about him. Even if he is small. He’s nothing to me.


A couple of twelve-year-old hookers who didn’t usually work this strip rounded a corner, heading toward Poke’s base. She gave a low whistle. The kids immediately drifted apart, staying on the street but trying not to look like a crew.


It didn’t help. The hookers knew already that Poke was a crew boss, and sure enough, they caught her by the arms and slammed her against a wall and demanded their “permission” fee. Poke knew better than to claim she had nothing to share—she always tried to keep a reserve in order to placate hungry bullies. These hookers, Poke could see why they were hungry. They didn’t look like what the pedophiles wanted, when they came cruising through. They were too gaunt, too old-looking. So until they grew bodies and started attracting the slightly-less-perverted trade, they had to resort to scavenging. It made Poke’s blood boil, to have them steal from her and her crew, but it was smarter to pay them off. If they beat her up, she couldn’t look out for her crew now, could she? So she took them to one of her stashes and came up with a little bakery bag that still had half a pastry in it.


It was stale, since she’d been holding it for a couple of days for just such an occasion, but the two hookers grabbed it, tore open the bag, and one of them bit off more than half before offering the remainder to her friend. Or rather, her former friend, for of such predatory acts are feuds born. The two of them started fighting, screaming at each other, slapping, raking at each other with clawed hands. Poke watched closely, hoping that they’d drop the remaining fragment of pastry, but no such luck. It went into the mouth of the same girl who had already eaten the first bite—and it was that first girl who won the fight too, sending the other one running for refuge.


Poke turned around, and there was the little boy right behind her. She nearly tripped over him. Angry as she was at having had to give up food to those street-whores, she gave him a knee and knocked him to the ground. “Don’t stand behind people if you don’t want to land on your butt,” she snarled.


He simply got up and looked at her, expectant, demanding.


“No, you little bastard, you’re not getting nothing from me,” said Poke. “I’m not taking one bean out of the mouths of my crew, you aren’t worth a bean.”


Her crew was starting to reassemble, now that the bullies had passed.


“Why you give your food to them?” said the boy. “You need that food.”


“Oh, excuse me!” said Poke. She raised her voice, so her crew could hear her. “I guess you ought to be the crew boss here, is that it? You being so big, you got no trouble keeping the food.”


“Not me,” said the boy. “I’m not worth a bean, remember?”


“Yeah, I remember. Maybe you ought to remember and shut up.”


Her crew laughed.


But the little boy didn’t. “You got to get your own bully,” he said.


“I don’t get bullies, I get rid of them,” Poke answered. She didn’t like the way he kept talking, standing up to her. In a minute she was going to have to hurt him.


“You give food to bullies every day. Give that to one bully and get him to keep the others away from you.”


“You think I never thought of that, stupid?” she said. “Only once he’s bought, how I keep him? He won’t fight for us.”


“If he won’t, then kill him,” said the boy.


That made Poke mad, the stupid impossibility of it, the power of the idea that she knew she could never lay hands on. She gave him a knee again, and this time kicked him when he went down. “Maybe I start by killing you.”


“I’m not worth a bean, remember?” said the boy. “You kill one bully, get another to fight for you, he want your food, he scared of you too.”


She didn’t know what to say to such a preposterous idea.


“They eating you up,” said the boy. “Eating you up. So you got to kill one. Get him down, everybody as small as me. Stones crack any size head.”


“You make me sick,” she said.


“’Cause you didn’t think of it,” he said.


He was flirting with death, talking to her that way. If she injured him at all, he’d be finished, he must know that.


But then, he had death living with him inside his flimsy little shirt already. Hard to see how it would matter if death came any closer.


Poke looked around at her crew. She couldn’t read their faces.


“I don’t need no baby telling me to kill what we can’t kill.”


“Little kid come up behind him, you shove, he fall over,” said the boy. “Already got you some big stones, bricks. Hit him in the head. When you see brains you done.”


“He no good to me dead,” she said. “I want my own bully, he keep us safe, I don’t want no dead one.”


The boy grinned. “So now you like my idea,” he said.


“Can’t trust no bully,” she answered.


“He watch out for you at the charity kitchen,” said the boy. “You get in at the kitchen.” He kept looking her in the eye, but he was talking for the others to hear. “He get you all in at the kitchen.”


“Little kid get into the kitchen, the big kids, they beat him,” said Sergeant. He was eight, and mostly acted like he thought he was Poke’s second-in-command, though truth was she didn’t have a second.


“You get you a bully, he make them go away.”


“How he stop two bullies? Three bullies?” asked Sergeant.


“Like I said,” the boy answered. “You push him down, he not so big. You get your rocks. You be ready. Ben’t you a soldier? Don’t they call you Sergeant?”


“Stop talking to him, Sarge,” said Poke. “I don’t know why any of us is talking to some two-year-old.”


“I’m four,” said the boy.


“What your name?” asked Poke.


“Nobody ever said no name for me,” he said.


“You mean you so stupid you can’t remember your own name?”


“Nobody ever said no name,” he said again. Still he looked her in the eye, lying there on the ground, the crew around him.


“Ain’t worth a bean,” she said.


“Am so,” he said.


“Yeah,” said Sergeant. “One damn bean.”


“So now you got a name,” said Poke. “You go back and sit on that garbage can, I think about what you said.”


“I need something to eat,” said Bean.


“If I get me a bully, if what you said works, then maybe I give you something.”


“I need something now,” said Bean.


She knew it was true.


She reached into her pocket and took out six peanuts she had been saving. He sat up and took just one from her hand, put it in his mouth and slowly chewed.


“Take them all,” she said impatiently.


He held out his little hand. It was weak. He couldn’t make a fist. “Can’t hold them all,” he said. “Don’t hold so good.”


Damn. She was wasting perfectly good peanuts on a kid who was going to die anyway.


But she was going to try his idea. It was audacious, but it was the first plan she’d ever heard that offered any hope of making things better, of changing something about their miserable life without her having to put on girl clothes and go into business. And since it was his idea, the crew had to see that she treated him fair. That’s how you stay crew boss, they always see you be fair.


So she kept holding her hand out while he ate all six peanuts, one at a time.


After he swallowed the last one, he looked her in the eye for another long moment, and then said, “You better be ready to kill him.”


“I want him alive.”


“Be ready to kill him if he ain’t the right one.” With that, Bean toddled back across the street to his garbage can and laboriously climbed on top again to watch.


“You ain’t no four years old!” Sergeant shouted over to him.


“I’m four but I’m just little,” he shouted back.


Poke hushed Sergeant up and they went looking for stones and bricks and cinderblocks. If they were going to have a little war, they’d best be armed.


Bean didn’t like his new name, but it was a name, and having a name meant that somebody else knew who he was and needed something to call him, and that was a good thing. So were the six peanuts. His mouth hardly knew what to do with them. Chewing hurt.


So did watching as Poke screwed up the plan he gave her. Bean didn’t choose her because she was the smartest crew boss in Rotterdam. Quite the opposite. Her crew barely survived because her judgment wasn’t that good. And she was too compassionate. Didn’t have the brains to make sure she got enough food herself to look well fed, so while her own crew knew she was nice and liked her, to strangers she didn’t look prosperous. Didn’t look good at her job.


But if she really was good at her job, she would never have listened to him. He never would have got close. Or if she did listen, and did like his idea, she would have got rid of him. That’s the way it worked on the street. Nice kids died. Poke was almost too nice to stay alive. That’s what Bean was counting on. But that’s what he now feared.


All this time he invested in watching people while his body ate itself up, it would be wasted if she couldn’t bring it off. Not that Bean hadn’t wasted a lot of time himself. At first when he watched the way kids did things on the street, the way they were stealing from each other, at each other’s throats, in each other’s pockets, selling every part of themselves that they could sell, he saw how things could be better if somebody had any brains, but he didn’t trust his own insight. He was sure there must be something else that he just didn’t get. He struggled to learn more—of everything. To learn to read so he’d know what the signs said on trucks and stores and wagons and bins. To learn enough Dutch and enough I.F. Common to understand everything that was said around him. It didn’t help that hunger constantly distracted him. He probably could have found more to eat if he hadn’t spent so much time studying the people. But finally he realized: He already understood it. He had understood it from the start. There was no secret that Bean just didn’t get yet because he was only little. The reason all these kids handled everything so stupidly was because they were stupid.


They were stupid and he was smart. So why was he starving to death while these kids were still alive? That was when he decided to act. That was when he picked Poke as his crew boss. And now he sat on a garbage can watching her blow it.


She chose the wrong bully, that’s the first thing she did. She needed a guy who made it on size alone, intimidating people. She needed somebody big and dumb, brutal but controllable. Instead, she thinks she needs somebody small. No, stupid! Stupid! Bean wanted to scream at her as she saw her target coming, a bully who called himself Achilles after the comics hero. He was little and mean and smart and quick, but he had a gimp leg. So she thought she could take him down more easily. Stupid! The idea isn’t just to take him down—you can take anybody down the first time because they won’t expect it. You need somebody who will stay down.


But he said nothing. Couldn’t get her mad at him. See what happens. See what Achilles is like when he’s beat. She’ll see—it won’t work and she’ll have to kill him and hide the body and try again with another bully before word gets out that there’s a crew of little kids taking down bullies.


So up comes Achilles, swaggering—or maybe that was just the rolling gait that his bent leg forced on him—and Poke makes an exaggerated show of cowering and trying to get away. Bad job, thought Bean. Achilles gets it already. Something’s wrong. You were supposed to act like you normally do! Stupid! So Achilles looks around a lot more. Wary. She tells him she’s got something stashed—that part’s normal—and she leads him into the trap in the alley. But look, he’s holding back. Being careful. It isn’t going to work.


But it does work, because of the gimp leg. Achilles can see the trap being sprung but he can’t get away, a couple of little kids pile into the backs of his legs while Poke and Sergeant push him from the front and down he goes. Then there’s a couple of bricks hitting his body and his bad leg and they’re thrown hard—the little kids get it, they do their job, even if Poke is stupid—and yeah, that’s good, Achilles is scared, he thinks he’s going to die.


Bean was off his perch by now. Down the alley, watching, closer. Hard to see past the crowd. He pushes his way in, and the little kids—who are all bigger than he is—recognize him, they know he earned a view of this, they let him in. He stands right at Achilles’ head. Poke stands above him, holding a big cinderblock, and she’s talking.


“You get us into the food line at the shelter.”


“Sure, right, I will, I promise.”


Don’t believe him. Look at his eyes, checking for weakness.


“You get more food this way, too, Achilles. You get my crew. We get enough to eat, we have more strength, we bring more to you. You need a crew. The other bullies shove you out of the way—we’ve seen them!—but with us, you don’t got to take no shit. See how we do it? An army, that’s what we are.”


OK, now he was getting it. It was a good idea, and he wasn’t stupid, so it made sense to him.


“If this is so smart, Poke, how come you didn’t do this before now?”


She had nothing to say to that. Instead, she glanced at Bean.


Just a momentary glance, but Achilles saw it. And Bean knew what he was thinking. It was so obvious.


“Kill him,” said Bean.


“Don’t be stupid,” said Poke. “He’s in.”


“That’s right,” said Achilles. “I’m in. It’s a good idea.”


“Kill him,” said Bean. “If you don’t kill him now, he’s going to kill you.”


“You let this little walking turd get away with talking shit like this?” said Achilles.


“It’s your life or his,” said Bean. “Kill him and take the next guy.”


“The next guy won’t have my bad leg,” said Achilles. “The next guy won’t think he needs you. I know I do. I’m in. I’m the one you want. It makes sense.”


Maybe Bean’s warning made her more cautious. She didn’t cave in quite yet. “You won’t decide later that you’re embarrassed to have a bunch of little kids in your crew?”


“It’s your crew, not mine,” said Achilles.


Liar, thought Bean. Don’t you see that he’s lying to you?


“What this is to me,” said Achilles, “this is my family. These are my kid brothers and sisters. I got to look after my family, don’t I?”


Bean saw at once that Achilles had won. Powerful bully, and he had called these kids his sisters, his brothers. Bean could see the hunger in their eyes. Not the regular hunger, for food, but the real hunger, the deep hunger, for family, for love, for belonging. They got a little of that by being in Poke’s crew. But Achilles was promising more. He had just beaten Poke’s best offer. Now it was too late to kill him.


Too late, but for a moment it looked as if Poke was so stupid she was going to go ahead and kill him after all. She raised the cinderblock higher, to crash it down.


“No,” said Bean. “You can’t. He’s family now.”


She lowered the cinderblock to her waist. Slowly she turned to look at Bean. “You get the hell out of here,” she said. “You no part of my crew. You get nothing here.”


“No,” said Achilles. “You better go ahead and kill me, you plan to treat him that way.”


Oh, that sounded brave. But Bean knew Achilles wasn’t brave. Just smart. He had already won. It meant nothing that he was lying there on the ground and Poke still had the cinderblock. It was his crew now. Poke was finished. It would be a while before anybody but Bean and Achilles understood that, but the test of authority was here and now, and Achilles was going to win it.


“This little kid,” said Achilles, “he may not be part of your crew, but he’s part of my family. You don’t go telling my brother to get lost.”


Poke hesitated. A moment. A moment longer.


Long enough.


Achilles sat up. He rubbed his bruises, he checked out his contusions. He looked in joking admiration to the little kids who had bricked him. “Damn, you bad!” They laughed—nervously, at first. Would he hurt them because they hurt him? “Don’t worry,” he said. “You showed me what you can do. We have to do this to more than a couple of bullies, you’ll see. I had to know you could do it right. Good job. What’s your name?”


One by one he learned their names. Learned them and remembered them, or when he missed one he’d make a big deal about it, apologize, visibly work at remembering. Fifteen minutes later, they loved him.


If he could do this, thought Bean, if he’s this good at making people love him, why didn’t he do it before?


Because these fools always look up for power. People above you, they never want to share power with you. Why you look to them? They give you nothing. People below you, you give them hope, you give them respect, they give you power, cause they don’t think they have any, so they don’t mind giving it up.


Achilles got to his feet, a little shaky, his bad leg more sore than usual. Everybody stood back, gave him some space. He could leave now, if he wanted. Get away, never come back. Or go get some more bullies, come back and punish the crew. But he stood there, then smiled, reached into his pocket, took out the most incredible thing. A bunch of raisins. A whole handful of them. They looked at his hand as if it bore the mark of a nail in the palm.


“Little brothers and sisters first,” he said. “Littlest first.” He looked at Bean. “You.”


“Not him!” said the next littlest. “We don’t even know him.”


“Bean was the one wanted us to kill you,” said another.


“Bean,” said Achilles. “Bean, you were just looking out for my family, weren’t you?”


“Yes,” said Bean.


“You want a raisin?”


Bean nodded.


“You first. You the one brought us all together, OK?”


Either Achilles would kill him or he wouldn’t. At this moment, all that mattered was the raisin. Bean took it. Put it in his mouth. Did not even bite down on it. Just let his saliva soak it, bringing out the flavor of it.


“You know,” said Achilles, “no matter how long you hold it in your mouth, it never turns back into a grape.”


“What’s a grape?”


Achilles laughed at him, still not chewing. Then he gave out raisins to the other kids. Poke had never shared out so many raisins, because she had never had so many to share. But the little kids wouldn’t understand that. They’d think, Poke gave us garbage, and Achilles gave us raisins. That’s because they were stupid.










Tor Books by Orson Scott Card


Note: Within series, books are best read in listed order.


—–


ENDER UNIVERSE


Ender Series


Ender Wiggin: The finest general the world could hope to find or breed.


Ender’s Game


Ender in Exile


Speaker for the Dead


Xenocide


Children of the Mind


Ender’s Shadow Series


Parallel storylines to Ender’s Game from Bean: Ender’s right hand, his strategist, and his friend.


Ender’s Shadow


Shadow of the Hegemon


Shadow Puppets


Shadow of the Giant


Shadows in Flight


The First Formic War Series (with Aaron Johnston)


One hundred years before Ender's Game, the aliens arrived on Earth with fire and death. These are the stories of the First Formic War.


Earth Unaware


Earth Afire


Earth Awakens


The Second Formic War Series (with Aaron Johnston)


The first invasion of Earth has been beaten back, but that was just a scout ship and the mothership is almost here.


The Swarm


Stand-alone Novels


Children of the Fleet: Orson Scott Card makes a powerful return to the universe of Ender's Game with a new stand-alone novel


Ender Novellas


A War of Gifts


First Meetings


The Authorized Ender Companion by Jake Black


A complete and in-depth encyclopedia of all the persons, places, things, and events in Orson Scott Card’s Ender Universe.


THE MITHER MAGES SERIES


Danny North is different from his magical family. And when he discovers his gift, it is greater than he ever imagined—which could earn him a death sentence.


The Lost Gate


The Gate Thief


Gatefather


THE TALES OF ALVIN MAKER SERIES


Visit the magical America that might have been; marvel as the tale of Alvin Maker unfolds.


Seventh Son


Red Prophet


Prentice Alvin


Alvin Journeyman


Heartfire


The Crystal City


HOMECOMING SERIES


Earth has been rendered uninhabitable. But it is still vital.


The Memory of Earth


The Call of Earth


The Ships of Earth


Earthfall


Earthborn


WOMEN OF GENISIS SERIES


Fiction exploring the human side of Biblical women.


Sarah


Rebekah


Rachel & Leah


THE COLLECTED SHORT FICTION OF ORSON SCOTT CARD


Experience Card’s full versatility, from science fiction to fantasy, from traditional narrative poetry to modern experimental fiction.


Keeper of Dreams


The Changed Man


Cruel Miracles


Flux


Monkey Sonatas


STAND-ALONE FICTION


Hart’s Hope: dark and powerful fantasy


Lovelock (with Kathryn Kidd): a startling look at the ethics of bioengineering


Pastwatch: The Redemption of Christopher Columbus: In this novel of time travel, can the past be changed?


Saints: a novel of the early days of the Mormon Church


Songmaster: an SF classic and a haunting story of power and love


The Worthing Saga: the tale of a seed ship sent out to save the human race


Wyrms: the story of a young woman’s journey to confront her destiny, and her world’s


The Folk of the Fringe: when America is destroyed, it’s up to those on the fringes to rebuild


Zanna’s Gift: A Life in Christmases: a touching tale of love, loss, and the true meaning of Christmas


—–






www.tor-forge.com










About the Author








Bob Henderson, Henderson Photograpy, Inc.


Orson Scott Card is best known for his science fiction novel Ender’s Game and its many sequels that expand the Ender Universe into the far future and the near past. Those books are organized into the Ender Quintet, the five books that chronicle the life of Ender Wiggin; the Shadow Series, that follows on the novel Ender’s Shadow and are set on Earth; and the Formic Wars series, written with co-author Aaron Johnston, that tells of the terrible first contact between humans and the alien “Buggers.” Card has been a working writer since the 1970s. Beginning with dozens of plays and musical comedies produced in the 1960s and 70s, Card’s first published fiction appeared in 1977 -- the short story “Gert Fram” in the July issue of The Ensign, and the novelette version of “Ender’s Game” in the August issue of Analog. The novel-length version of Ender’s Game, published in 1984 and continuously in print since then, became the basis of the 2013 film, starring Asa Butterfield, Harrison Ford, Ben Kingsley, Hailee Steinfeld, Viola Davis, and Abigail Breslin. Card was born in Washington state, and grew up in California, Arizona, and Utah. He served a mission for the LDS Church in Brazil in the early 1970s. Besides his writing, he runs occasional writers’ workshops and directs plays. He frequently teaches writing and literature courses at Southern Virginia University.


He is the author many sf and fantasy novels, including the American frontier fantasy series “The Tales of Alvin Maker” (beginning with Seventh Son), There are also stand-alone science fiction and fantasy novels like Pastwatch and Hart’s Hope. He has collaborated with his daughter Emily Card on a manga series, Laddertop. He has also written contemporary thrillers like Empire and historical novels like the monumental Saints and the religious novels Sarah and Rachel and Leah. Card’s recent work includes the Mithermages books (Lost Gate, Gate Thief), contemporary magical fantasy for readers both young and old. Card lives in Greensboro, North Carolina, with his wife, Kristine Allen Card, He and Kristine are the parents of five children and several grandchildren. You can sign up for author updates here.










Thank you for buying this


A Tom Doherty Associates Book ebook.






To receive special offers, bonus content,


and info on new releases and other great reads,


sign up for our newsletters.










Or visit us online at


us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup






For email updates on the author, click here.










CONTENTS




Title Page


Copyright Notice


Dedication


Introduction


1. Third


2. Peter


3. Graff


4. Launch


5. Games


6. The Giant’s Drink


7. Salamander


8. Rat


9. Locke and Demosthenes


10. Dragon


11. Veni Vidi Vici


12. Bonzo


13. Valentine


14. Ender’s Teacher


15. Speaker for the Dead


Acknowledgments


An Excerpt from Ender’s Shadow


Tor Books by Orson Scott Card


About the Author


Copyright










This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.


ENDER’S GAME


Copyright © 1977, 1985, 1991 by Orson Scott Card


Introduction © 1991 by Orson Scott Card. First published in Phoenix Rising.


Excerpt from Ender’s Shadow Copyright © 1999 by Orson Scott Card.


All rights reserved.


A Tor Teen Book


Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC


175 Fifth Avenue


New York, NY 10010


www.tor-forge.com


Tor® is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.


The Library of Congress has cataloged the hardcover edition as follows:


Card, Orson Scott.


Ender’s Game / Orson Scott Card.


p. cm.


“A Tom Doherty Associates book.”


I. Title.


[PS3553.A655E5 1985]


813′.54—dc20


91-9908


CIP


eISBN 978-1-4299-6393-0


Our eBooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension. 5442, or by e-mail at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.


Third Tor Teen Edition: March 2014