A CHANCE DISCOVERY






At dusk, Gusev, who had nothing better to do, made a tour of the rooms. The big house was built to withstand the winter frosts. It had many passages, stairways, halls and a gallery—all immersed in an untenanted silence. Gusev wandered through the house, looked into all the corners, and yawned:


"They're well off, the devils, but it's a dull life."


He heard voices and the clatter of kitchen knives and crockery in the back regions of the house. The house steward was scolding someone in a stream of chirpy words. Gusev made his way to the kitchen. It was a low-vaulted chamber, in the back of which an oily flame could be seen dancing over






78


some pots and pans. He stood in the doorway and sniffed. The steward and the cook fell silent, and backed away from him.


"It's smoky in here—smoky, understand?" Gusev said in Russian. "You ought to put a cowl over your stove. Barbarians —that's what you are, and you call yourselves Martians!"


Shrugging his shoulder, he went out on the back porch, sat down on the stone steps, pulled out his cigarette-case, and lit a fag.


At the far end of the meadow, where the copse began, a shepherd boy was running and shouting as he drove his lowing khashi into a brick shed. A woman with two pails of milk came up the grass-grown path leading from the shed. The wind ruffled her yellow blouse and the little tassle hanging from the funny cap on her bright-red hair. Midway up the path she put her pails down and waved away an insect, shielding her face with her elbow. The wind blew her skirt up. She squatted, laughing, then snatched up her pails and came running to the house. When she saw Gusev, she grinned, showing her small white teeth.


Gusev called her Ikhoshka, although she was really called Ikha. She was the steward's niece—a bouncing smoky-blue mischievous girl.


Dashing past Gusev, she crinkled her nose. He wanted to give her a playful spank, but restrained himself, puffed at his cigarette and waited.


He did not wait in vain, for Ikhoshka soon came back with a basket and a little knife. She sat down a little way from the Son of the Sky and pared her vegetables, blinking her thick eyelashes. He could see that she was a jolly girl.


"Why are you Martian girls blue?" he asked her in Russian. "Silly Ikhoshka, you don't know life at all, do you?"


Ikha replied, and, strangely enough, he understood what she said.


"At school we studied Sacred History and it said that the Sons of the Sky were very fierce. It looks like the books were wrong. You are not fierce at all."






79


"That's right, we're gentle as lambs," said Gusev, winking.


Ikha spluttered with laughter, and the peelings flew from under her knife.


"My uncle says you Sons of the Sky can slay a person with a glance. I haven't noticed it."


"Really? And what have you noticed?"


"Look here, answer me in our language," said Ikhoshka. "I don't understand yours."


"But I sound something awful when I speak yours."


"What was that?" Ikha put down her knife. She was convulsed with laughter. "I think you people on the Red Star are the same as us."


Gusev coughed and moved a little closer to her. Ikha picked up her basket and edged away. Gusev coughed and moved closer again.


"You'll wear your trousers thin if you keep sliding on the step."


Perhaps Ikha had put it some other way, but that was how Gusev understood it.


He was now sitting very close to her. Ikhoshka heaved a little sigh. She inclined her head and sighed again a little more deeply. Gusev looked round furtively and put his arm on her shoulders. She threw back her head and stared at him with wide-open eyes. Before she knew it, he had kissed her hard on the mouth. Ikha hugged her basket and knife to herself.


"So there, Ikhoshka!" said Gusev. She jumped to her feet and ran away.


Gusev plucked at his moustache and grinned. The sun had set and the stars were twinkling in the sky. A shaggy little animal crept up to the steps and gazed at Gusev with luminescent eyes. Gusev stirred— the animal hissed and disappeared like a shadow.


"We'll have to drop this nonsense," Gusev muttered. He pulled at his belt and entered the house. In the passage, Ikha suddenly appeared in front of him. He beckoned to her. Frowning from the effort, he told her in Martian:






80


"I'll marry you if needs be. You do what I tell you." Ikha turned away and pouted at the wall. He gripped her hand.) "Here, don't start pouting now—I haven't married you yet. I, the Son of the Sky, haven't come here for nothing. I have important business to do on your planet. But I'm new here and don't know your ways. You've got to help me. Only don't you dare lie to me. Tell me, who is your master?"


"Our master?" Ikha said, trying hard to understand what Gusev was saying. "He's the ruler of all the countries of Tuma."


"You don't say!" Gusev stood still. "You're not lying, are you?" (He scratched behind his ear.) "What's his title? Is he a king, eh? What's his job?"


"His name is Tuseoob. He's Aelita's father. He's the head of the Supreme Council."


"Oh, I see."


Gusev took a few steps in silence. "I saw a screen in that room over there. I'd like to have another look at it. Show me how it works."


They entered a narrow, semi-dark room furnished with low armchairs. A filmy mirror gleamed white on the wall. Gusev sank into an armchair near the screen. Ikha said: "What would the Son of the Sky like to see?"


"Show me the city."


"It's too late. The factories and shops are closed, and there's nobody in the squares. Perhaps you would like to see our entertainments?"


"Let's have the entertainments." Ikha inserted a plug into a socket in the switchboard, and, holding the end of a long cord, moved back to where the Son of the Sky was lolling in the chair, his legs outstretched.


"Here's a festival," she said, pulling the cord.


The hubbub of a thousand voices filled the room. The screen lit up and a view of arched glass roofs appeared on its surface. Great shafts of light were focussed on large banners, posters and clouds of fume of every colour. Below seethed an ocean of heads. Here and there, above and below, darted bat-






81


like winged figures. Then the glass arches, the intersecting shafts of light and the milling crowds receded and were lost in a dusty haze.


"What are they doing?" Gusev shouted above the din.


"They are inhaling the precious fumes. Those clouds of smoke—they are the fumes of the Miavra; they are very precious fumes —fumes of immortality, we call them. The khavra-smoker has wonderful dreams— dreams of living for ever. He sees and understands marvellous things. Many even hear the sounds of the ulla. Smoking khavra at home is punished by death. Permission to smoke it is issued by the Supreme Council.


In this house we are allowed to smoke tohavra just twelve times a year."


"And what are the others doing?"


"They are guessing numbers at the lottery drums. Today everybody can guess a number, and the one who guesses the right one will never have to work again. The Supreme Council will give him a fine house, a field, ten khashi and a winged boat. It's wonderful to guess the right number."


Explaining all this to Gusev, Ikha sat down on the arm-rest of his chair. He put his hand round her waist. Ikha tried to wriggle out of his embrace, then gave up and sat still. Gusev exclaimed with surprise at the things he saw on the screen. "Well, did you ever! Now look at that!" Finally he asked Ikha to show him something else.


Ikha jumped off the armchair and fumbled with the switchboard. She could not get the plugs to fit the holes. When she returned to Gusev and settled back on the arm-rest, playing with the button on her cord, her face was a little dazed. Gusev looked up at her and grinned. Ikha was terrified.


"It's high time you married, my girl." Ikhoshka looked away and sighed. Gusev stroked her back, as sensitive as a cat's.


"My sweet little girl, my pretty blue lass."






82


"Look at this, it's very interesting," she murmured weakly, pulling the cord.


A man's back blotted out half the screen. A frigid voice was heard speaking slowly. The back moved aside and Gusev saw part of a tall arch supported at the far end of the chamber by a square pillar. A section of the wall was covered with golden inscriptions and geometric figures. Below, sitting round a table with their heads bent low, were the Martians whom he had seen on his arrival on the steps of the gloomy building.


Aelita's father Tuscoob stood at the head of the brocade-covered table. As his thin lips moved his beard gently brushed the golden embroidery of his robe. He was otherwise rigid, as though wrought out of stone. His lack-lustre, sombre eyes were fixed straight in front of him, at the screen. Tuscoob was speaking, and though incomprehensible, his sharp words were terrifying. He repeated the word Taltsetl several times and struck the table with a scroll. A Martian sitting opposite him, with a broad pale face, suddenly sprang up. Flashing this white eyes at Tuscoob, he cried:


"Not they, but you!"


Ikhoshka started. She was facing the screen, but had neither seen nor heard anything while the large hand of the Son of the Sky had been stroking her back. But the shout of the Martian on the screen, and Gusev's repeated question: "What is it, what are they saying?" startled her and she stared open-mouthed at the screen. She gave a little gasp and pulled the cord.


The screen faded.


"I made a mistake. I connected the wrong.... No one dares to listen to the secrets of the Supreme Council." Ikhoshka's teeth were chattering. She clutched at her red hair and whispered in despair, "I made a mistake. It's not my fault. They'll send me to the caves—to the eternal snows."


"Now, now Ikhoshka, I won't tell anybody." Gusev drew her close and stroked her warm hair, as silken as an Angora cat's. Ikhoshka grew quiet and closed her eyes.






83


"Foolish little girl. What are you, a kitten? Silly little blue thing."


He scratched her gently behind the ear, certain that she was enjoying the sensation. Ikhoshka drew in her legs. Her eyes glowed like those of the animal he had seen at the back porch. Gusev felt a little frightened.


At that moment they heard Los and Aelita coming up the hall. Ikhoshka slid off the armchair and stumbled towards the door.


That night Gusev went to Los's bedroom.


"Something's brewing against us," he said. "I got a girl here to switch on the screen, and we listened in by accident to a session of the Supreme Council. I understood enough to know that we've got to be careful. They'll kill us, as sure as I stand here. It'll end badly for us."


Los did not hear him. He gazed dreamily at his companion, his arms folded behind his head.


"Witchcraft, Alexei Ivanovich. It's all witchcraft. Turn off the light." Gusev stood still for a moment. "All right," he muttered gloomily. Then he went to bed.