BEYOND THE MOUNTAINS








The flying-ship headed north-east, flying low over Mars. Los and the bald-headed Martian remained on deck. Gusev joined the soldiers below.


He entered a brightly-lit straw-coloured cabin, dropped into a wicker arm-chair and contemplated the sharp-nosed short soldiers, who blinked their reddish eyes like birds. Then he pulled out his precious tin cigarette-case (he had never parted with it in all his seven years of fighting), tapped its lid, so much as if to say, "How about a smoke, comrades," and offered the soldiers cigarettes.


The Martians shook their heads in fright. One of them risked taking a cigarette. He examined it, sniffed it and put it away in his trouser pocket. When Gusev lit his, they backed away from him, whispering timidly:


"Sbokho tao tavra, shokho-om."


Horror was written over their pointed reddish faces as they watched the "shokho" swallow smoke. But soon they clustered round him again.


Unabashed by his ignorance of the Martian tongue, Gusev told his new friends about Russia, the war, the Revolution and his own exploits.


"Gusev—that's me. It's from goose—a kind of big bird that we have on Earth. You've never seen anything like them, I suppose. My name is Alexei. I was in command of more than a regiment—a complete cavalry squadron, as a matter of fact. A hero, I am—one hell of a brave chap. What I do is pull out my sabre—machine-gun or no machine-gun — and chop 'em to bits. 'Hands up and surrender, you bastards!' is what I say. I'm chopped up a bit myself, but never give it a thought. Our military academy has a special course called 'Gusev's Sabre Tactics.' Believe it or not! I was offered command of a corps," Gusev tilted his cap back and scratched his head, "but I refused.






51


Fed up. Seven years of fighting is enough to make any man sick. Well, then Mstislav Sergeyevich here came along and begged me to fly with him. 'Alexei Ivanovich,' he says, 'please come with me—I can't possibly fly without you.' So here I am."


The Martians listened to him in amazement. One of them produced a flask with a brown liquid smelling of musk. Gusev dug into his sack and pulled out a pint of vodka. The Martians drank it and broke into an excited chatter. Gusev slapped them on the back and made a great deal of noise. Then he emptied his pockets of all sorts of odds and ends and offered to exchange them. Delighted, the Martians gave him articles of gold for his penknife, his pencil stub and curious cigarette-lighter made out of a blank cartridge.


Meanwhile, Los was leaning over the net railing of the flying-ship and gazing down at the desolate undulating plain receding below.


He recognized the house they had explored the day before. Wherever he turned his eyes were ruins, copses and the ribbons of dry canals.


Pointing to the desert below, Los conveyed his surprise at so much barren land. The Martian's bulging eyes suddenly grew angry. At a sign from him the flying-ship climbed higher, described an arc, and headed for the summits of the craggy mountains.


The sun rose high and the clouds disappeared. The propellers roared, the pliant wings creaked and shifted as the machine turned and climbed, and the vertical screws whirred. Los observed that there were no other sounds besides the whirring of the propellers and the whistling of the wind. The motors operated noiselessly. For that matter, there were no motors in sight. All Los could see were round boxes, resembling dynamo cases, revolving on the hub of each propeller, and two sparkling elliptical baskets of silvery wire topping the front and rear masts.


Los asked the Martian to name various Objects, and wrote them down. Then he produced the book of technical drawings






52


and asked his companion to pronounce the geometrical letters. The Martian looked at the book with surprise. His eyes froze again and his thin lips curled disdainfully. Deliberately, he took the book from Los's hands and dropped it overboard.


The rarefied air made breathing hard. Los's eyes watered. Noticing this, the Martian gave a sign to descend to a lower altitude. The ship was now flying over the blood-red crags. Their broad ridge zigzagged from south-east to north-west. The ship's shadow skimmed over the rocky precipices glittering with veins of ores and metals, the steep inclines overgrown with lichen, the misty abysses, and icy peaks and glaciers. The land was wild and desolate.


"Liziazira," said the Martian, indicating the mountains. He showed his small teeth, glinting with metal.


As he gazed down at the cliffs, which reminded him of the funereal landscape he had seen on the piece of dead planet, Los espied the overturned skeleton of a ship marooned on the rocks at the bottom of an abyss, and silvery metal debris scattered round it. Farther beyond the rocky ridge jutted the broken wing of another ship. On the right was a third wreck, speared by a granite peak. Everywhere were the remains of large wings, broken frames and jutting blades. It was obviously a battle-field; the demons themselves, it seemed, had been vanquished on these barren rocks.


Los stole a glance at his neighbour. The Martian was sitting beside him, clutching at his collar, and calmly surveying the sky. Flying towards them in formation were long-winged birds. They suddenly soared high, flashed their yellow wings in the deep blue of the sky and turned back. Following their descent, Los saw the black surface of a round lake cradled deep amid the rocks. Leafy bushes grew on its shores. The yellow birds alighted at the water's edge.


The lake suddenly began to ripple and boil, a fountain of water spurted up from its centre and dropped.


"Soam," said the Martian solemnly. They were nearing the end of the mountain range. A canary-yellow plain with large






53


sparkling lakes loomed in the north-west through the eddying translucent heat waves. The Martian pointed to the enchanting misty distance and said with a dreamy smile: "Azora."


The flying-ship climbed again. The moist air caressed Los's face and hummed in his ears. Azora stretched in a broad shining plain below. Criss-crossed by rippling canals and carpeted with orange-coloured copses and jolly canary meadows, Azora, or Joy, was like the little spring meadows one dreams of as a child.


Wide metal barges plied up and down the canals. Little white houses with pretty garden paths were ranged along the banks. Los saw innumerable tiny figures of Martians. Some were taking off from their flat roofs and darting like bats across the canal to the copses beyond. Pools and sparkling streams glistened among the meadows. Azora was a lovely land indeed.


At the far end of the plain shimmered a vast expanse of water, into which emptied the winding canals. The air-ship flew in its direction, and at last Los made out a broad and straight canal. Its far bank was lost in mist, and its muddy yellow waters flowed indolently past a rocky incline.


They flew on for a long time. Finally, the end of the canal hove in sight. The smooth side of a wall rose out of the water, stretching both ways to the horizon. The wall loomed larger. Los could now discern huge slabs of stone, with shrubs and trees sprouting from their crevices. They were approaching a giant reservoir brimming with water. Here and there little foam-capped fountains played on its surface.


"Ro," said the Martian, raising his finger significantly.


Los pulled his notebook out of his pocket and found the sketch of lines and dots on the Martian disc he had made the day before. He showed the drawing to his neighbour and pointed to the reservoir below. The Martian scrutinized the drawing with a frown, then nodded excitedly and indicated one of the dots with the nail of his little finger.


Leaning over the rail, Los saw one curved and two straight canals stemming from the reservoir. So that was the secret: the






54


round spots on the Martian disc were reservoirs, and the triangles and semi-circles were canals. But who had built these cyclopic walls? Los glanced at his companion. The Martian stuck out his iunderlip and raised his hands to the sky:


"Tao hatskha ro khamagatsitl."


The ship was now passing over a scorched plain. A fourth, very broad dry canal cut a pink-red gash in it; its bed was planted with neat rows of vegetation. This was obviously one of the lines in the second network of canals that showed in a blurred pattern on the Martian disc.


The plain gradually terminated in undulating hills beyond which rose the bluish outlines of latticed towers. Wire antennas sprouted over their central mast again and began to spark. More and more latticed towers and buildings appeared behind the hills. A gigaintic city emerged at last out of the sunny haze in a pattern of silvery shadows.


The Martian said:


"Soatsera."






55