BLACK SKY






Los screwed the lid over the porthole, sat down, and looked into Gusev's eyes, which were as sharp and clawing as a captured bird's. "Well, Alexei Ivanovich?"


"Let her go."


Los grasped the lever of the rheostat, and gave it a gentle tug. There was a dull detonation—the first crash that had startled the crowd on the lot. Then he pulled a second rheostat. A dull thudding started underfoot and the spaceship vibrated so violently that Gusev clutched at his seat and rolled his eyes wildly. Los switched on both rheostats. The spaceship shot up, the vibration subsided. Los yelled:


"We're up!"






27


Gusev mopped his face. It was getting hot. The speedometer indicated 50 metres per second. Its hand kept rising.


The spaceship was speeding at a tangent in a direction opposite to the rotation of the Earth. The centrifugal force was pulling it eastwards. According to Los's calculation, the ship would straighten out at an altitude of 100 kilometres and then move along a diagonal line.


The motor worked smoothly. Los and Gusev unbuttoned their fur-lined jackets and pushed back their helmets. They turned off the electric light and sat in the pale dusk filtering in through the peep-holes.


Fighting against a sensation of weakness and dizziness, Los got down on his knees and put his eye to the peep-hole. The Earth spread out below like a huge concave bowl of blue-grey. Here and there over it, like islands, lay cloudy ridges. He was looking at the Atlantic Ocean.


Gradually the bowl grew smaller and began to drop. Its right-hand edge took on a silvery sheen, and the other edge was lost in shadows. Now it looked like a ball hurtling into an abyss.


Gusev, whose eyes were glued to another peep-hole, said:


"So long, old thing. We've had a long spell together—time to part."


He tried to get up, lurched, and fell back into his seat.


"I'm choking, Mstislav Sergeyevich," he wheezed, tugging at his collar. "Can't breathe."


Los felt his heart beating faster and faster until it was pounding like mad. His head throbbed. Everything grew dark.


He crawled over to the speedometer. Its hand was moving rapidly, indicating an incredible velocity. The air was thinning. The gravitational pull declined. The compass showed that the Earth was directly beneath them. The ship was still picking up speed with each passing second, rocketing madly into icy space.






28


Los broke his finger-nails unbuttoning his collar. Then his heart stopped.


He had known that the ship's velocity would cause a pronounced change in the activity of the heart, in the blood circulation and the entire rhythm of the body. Knowing this, he had wired the speedometer of a gyroscope (of which there were two) to a tank which would eject a substantial dose of oxygen and ammonia at the crucial moment.


Los was the first to regain consciousness. His chest ached, his head reeled, and his heart hummed like a top. Thoughts came and went—unusual thoughts, quick and clear. His movements were light and precise.


He turned off the emergency oxygen taps and glanced at the speedometer. The spaceship was doing nearly 500 kilometres per second. A dazzling sunbeam came through one of the peep-holes and fell upon Gusev lying on his back, his teeth set in a horrible grin and his glassy eyes popping out of their sockets.


Los brought a pinch of smelling salts to his nose. Gusev took a deep breath. His eyelids fluttered. The engineer gripped him under the arm-pits and lifted him, but Gusev's body hung suspended in the air like a soap bubble. He released him, and Gusev sank slowly back to the floor. He landed with his legs outstretched and his elbows raised as if he were sitting in water. He looked about him in bewilderment.


"Am I drunk?" he gasped.


Los ordered him to climb to the top peephole and look out. Gusev struggled to his feet, staggered, then crawled like a fly up the sheer wall of the cabin, clutching at its stitched leather lining. He put his eye to the peep-hole.


"It's pitch dark," he reported. "I can't see a thing."


Los put a smoked eye-piece over the lens facing the sun. The sun hung suspended in space, a huge shaggy ball boldly outlined against the dark void around it. Two luminous veils of mist drifted on both sides of it like a pair of wings. A fountain spouted from the compact mass and shaped itself into a






29


mushroom. It was a period of sun spots. A little apart from the radiant ball were iridescent oceans of fire. Cast off by the sun and revolving round it, they were paler than the zodiacal wings.


Los tore himself away from the fascinating spectacle—the life-giving fire of the universe. He replaced the lid on the eyepiece. It was dark again. Then he moved to the peep-hole on the other side of the cabin. He adjusted the focus. The greenish ray of a star pricked his eye, Presently a lucid blue beam replaced it. It was Sirius, the celestial diamond, the first star of the Northern sky.


Los crawled over to the third peep-hole. He adjusted it, put his eye to it, then wiped it with his handkerchief and put his eye to it again. His heart contracted. He felt the roots of his hair twitching.


Blurred, misty spots were floating past them in the dark.


"Something's out there next to us," cried Gusev in alarm.


The spots drifted downward, growing distinct and bright as they receded. Los glimpsed broken silver lines and threads, and then the boldly-etched jagged edges of a rocky ridge. The spaceship had evidently come near a celestial body, entered its gravitational field, and now begun to rotate round it like a satellite.


Los groped for the rheostat levers with a trembling hand, and pulled them as far as they would go at the risk of blowing up the ship. The engine under them shook and roared. The spots and shining jagged cliffs swiftly receded. The gleaming surface loomed larger, approaching them, and they could clearly discern sharp long shadows cast by the cliffs stretching blackly across a bare, lifeless plain.


The spaceship was heading for the rocks. Sun-bathed on one side, they seemed to be a stone's throw away. Los thought (his mind was clear and collected), "The ship will crash in a moment, before it has time to turn neck foremost to the pull of gravity. This is the end."


But just then he glimpsed the ruins of stepped towers on the dead plain between the cliffs. The ship slid over the toothy






30


crags. Beyond lay an abyss, a black void, obscurity. Metal-bearing veins glinted on the jagged side of a steep cliff. Then the fragment of the smashed, unknown planet remained far behind, continuing its journey to eternity. The spaceship was again speeding through the deserted expanse of black sky. Suddenly Gusev started: "Is that the moon ahead of us?" He turned, parted from the wall, and hung in mid-air, arms and legs spread frogwise, cursing tinder his breath, and straining to swim back to the wall. Los lost his hold on the floor, and felt himself drifting. He hung on to the ocular tube, and gazed at the glittering silvery disc of Mars.