GUSEV'S ACTIVITIES






Having taken off from Tuscoob's estate equipped with an air map, a gun, some provisions and six hand-grenades, which he had brought with him from Petrograd unknown to Los, Gusev sighted Soatsera at noon. The central streets were empty. Military ships and troops were placed in three concentric semi-circles in the enormous star-shaped square fronting the Council of Engineers building.


As Gusev began his descent, he was noticed, and a shiny six-winged Ship took off from the square and zoomed into the air, flashing gaily in the sunshine. Silvery figures were ranged on its decks. Gusev described a circle over the ship and pulled a grenade carefully out of his sack.


Below him, the ship's coloured wheels were revolving and its mast-wires bristling.


Gusev bent over the side of his boat and shook his fist at the ship. There was a faint answering wail. The little silver figures aimed their short guns at him, and out of little yellow puffs came bullets ripping at the side of Gusev's boat. Gusev cursed lustily. He pulled a lever and swooped down on the ship. As he sped over them he threw his grenade. There was a deafening explosion. Straightening out his boat, he turned round to look. The ship, somersaulting giddily, was falling to pieces in mid-air. It crashed on to the roofs below.


That was when things began to happen.






127


Flying over the city, Gusev recognized the squares, the government buildings, the arsenal and the workers' quarters he had seen on the screen. Thousands of Martians seethed like a disturbed ant-hill in the vicinity of a factory wall. As Gusev landed, the crowd scattered in all directions. He touched ground on a cleared spot, and grinned.


The Martians recognized him. Thousands of hands were raised in greeting. The crowd chanted, "Magatsitl! Magatsitl!" They edged closer to him warily. He saw their trembling faces, their pleading eyes, their radish-red bald heads. These were the workers, the rabble, the poverty-stricken.


Gusev climbed out of his boat, swung his sack on his shoulder and waved his hand.


"Greetings, comrades!" The stillness that ensued seemed unreal. Gusev towered like a giant among the frail shapes of the Martians. "What did you come here for, comrades? To talk, or to fight? If it's talking you're after, I'm off. So long."


A sigh rose from the crowd. A few Martians yelled in despair and the Test chimed in:


"Help—help us, Son of the Sky!"


"You're going to fight, then?" Gusev asked, and added in a hoarse voice: "The fight's on.


A warship attacked me just now. I blew it to bits. To arms, men, follow me!"


Gor (Gusev recognized him at once) elbowed his way through the crowd. He was grey with agitation. His lips were trembling. He clawed at Gusev's chest.


"What are you talking about? Where do you want us to go? They will wipe us out. We have no arms. We must resort to other measures—"


Gusev tore Gor's hands from his chest.


"The chief measure's to act. The one who acts will seize power. I haven't come here all the way from the Earth to talk to you. I came to teach you to act. You're moss-grown, Comrades Martians. Those who aren't afraid to die—follow me! Where's your arsenal? To arms! Follow me to the arsenal!"






128


"Ai-yai!" shrieked the Martians.


The Martians pressed forward, jostling and crushing each other. Gor spread his hands in despair.


The uprising had begun. A leader had been found. Heads were whirling. The impossible seemed possible. Gor, who had been preparing the uprising slowly and methodically, but who had hesitated before making a decision even after the events of the day before, now suddenly came to life. He made twelve burning speeches, transmitted to the workers' quarters over the misty screens. Forty thousand Martians flocked to the arsenal. Gusev divided the rebels into small groups and stationed them under cover of the buildings, monuments and trees. He arranged for the women and children to be placed before all the control screens registering the events in town for the government's benefit, and told them to curse Tuscoob in a half-hearted manner. This Asiatic ruse fooled the government for a while.


Gusev feared an attack from the air. To divert attention and gain time, he sent five thousand unarmed Martians to the centre of the city to yell for warm clothes, bread and khavra. He told them:


"None of you will return alive. Remember that. And now, off you go."


Five thousand Martians wailed, "Ai-yai!" opened enormous umbrellas inscribed with slogans, and marched off to die, whining an old, forbidden song:


Under the glazed roofs,


Beneath the iron arches,


In a lug of stone


Rise the fumes of khavra.


We are very merry, oh!


Hand us the jug of stone!


Ai-yai! We shall not return


To the mines and quarries,


We shall not return






129


To the ghastly tomb-like passages,


To the machines, the machines.


We want to live! Ai-yai! To live!


Hand us the jug of stone!


Whirling their enormous umbrellas and wailing, they disappeared in the narrow streets.


The arsenal, a low square building in the old section of the city, was guarded by a small military detachment. The soldiers stood in a semi-circle on the square in front of a bronze gate. Behind them were two curious machines made of wire spirals, discs and spheres (Gusev had seen one like them in the deserted building). The rebels approached and surrounded the arsenal by way of crooked little by-streets. It sheer walls were strong.


Running from tree to tree and peering round corners, Gusev studied the location and found that the best way to attack the arsenal was from the gate in front. He had his men wrench one of the bronze entrance doors out and bind it with ropes. Then he told the rebels to swarm down to the building and scream "ai-yai" at the top of their voices.


The soldiers guarding the gate had been calmly watching the crowds milling in the by-streets, but now they pushed their machines a little forward. A purple light flickered from the spirals. Pointing to them, the Martians screwed up their eyes and piped, "Beware of them, Son of the Sky!" There was no time to lose. Planting his feet apart, Gusev gripped the ropes and lifted the bronze door. It was heavy, but he could carry it. He made his way under cover of the wall to the edge of the square. The gate was just a few dozen steps away. Whispering the command: "Make ready," he mopped his face with his sleeve, thinking, "If I could only get real angry," and held the door before him like a shield.


"Come on, laddies!" he yelled hoarsely, panting as he advanced across the square.






130


Several bullets struck his makeshift shield. Gusev staggered. Now he grew angry in earnest and increased his pace, cursing as he went. All around the Martians screamed and wailed as they came pouring from behind the corners, gateways and trees. A deafening explosion rent the air. But the avalanche of Martians passed on, crushing the soldiers and the dreaded machines.


Cursing vehemently, Gusev dashed up to the gate and rammed at the lock with the corner of his bronze door. The gate gave way. Gusev rushed into the square courtyard where four-winged ships were standing in rows.


The arsenal was captured. Forty thousand Martians received arms. Gusev contacted the Council of Engineers building by the screen telephone and demanded the surrender of Tuscoob.


The government dispatched a flight of airships to attack the arsenal. Gusev flew out to meet it with his fleet. The government airships turned back. Gusev and his fleet gave chase and shot them down over the ruins of ancient Soatsera. The ships crashed at the feet of the gigantic statue of Magatsitl smiling with closed eyes. The rays of the setting sun gleamed on his scaly helmet.


The sky was now controlled by the insurrectionists. The government centred its police force round the Council building. Machines which ejected round lightning were installed on its roof, and soon part of the insurrectionists' fleet was shot down by them. Towards nightfall, Gusev stormed the square of the Supreme Council and put up barricades in the streets radiating starwise from the square. "I'll teach you to make a revolution, you brick-red devils," he muttered, showing the Martians how to wrench stone blocks out of the pavements, fell trees, tear doors off their hinges and fill their shirts with sand.


They turned the two arsenal lightning machines round to face the Supreme Council building and pelted the government troops with flaming shells. The government charged the square with electricity by means of an electric magnet.






131


Then Gusev made his last speech of the day—very brief and expressive—from the top of a barricade, and hurled three hand-grenades in succession. The force of their explosion was terrifying: three shafts of flame shot up. The square was enveloped in clouds of dust and acrid smoke. Howling, the Martians rushed forward. (This was the scene Los had glimpsed on the screen in Tuscoob's house.)


The government removed the magnetic field, and now fiery round shells soared over the square, bursting into flashes of bluish flame. The dark pyramidal houses were shaken by the thunderous detonations.


The battle did not last long. Gusev dashed across the corpse-strewn square at the head of a picked detachment and burst into the Supreme Council building. It was empty. Tuseoob and the engineers had escaped.