KHAO






Son of the Sky," called a high-pitched voice.






146


As Gusev and Los approached the estate from the side of the copse, a little sharp-nosed face popped out from behind the blue foliage. It was Aelita's pilot, the little lad in the grey coat. He clapped his hands and danced, wrinkling his face until it looked like a tapir's. Pushing aside the branches, he pointed to a winged boat hidden among the ruins of the reservoir.


He told them that the night had passed quietly, that he had heard a distant explosion at daybreak, and had seen the smoke of a big fire. Thin-king the Sons of the Sky had perished, he had climbed back into his boat and flown to Aelita's retreat. She had also heard the explosion and watched the fire from the height of her cliff. She told him to go back to the estate and wait for the Son of the Sky. "If Tuscoob's servants seize you," she had said, "die in silence; if the Son of the Sky is dead, find his corpse, search his clothes for a little stone flask, and bring it to me."


Los listened to the youth's tale with clenched teeth. Then he went with Gusev to the lake to wash off the bloodstains and dust. Gusev carved a club almost the size of a horse's leg out of a branch of hard wood, after which they all got into the boat and climbed into the luminous blue.






Gusev and the pilot dragged the boat into the cave, lay down near its entrance and unfolded a map. At that moment Ikha came tripping down from the cliff above. She clapped her hands as she glimpsed Gusev, and tears welled up in her loving eyes. Gusev laughed happily.


Los hurried down the precipice leading to the Holy Threshold. He felt as if the wind were blowing him down the steep steps, through the narrow passages and across the little bridges. What was in store for Aelita and him? Would they escape with their lives or not? He could not think—his thoughts died before they had time to take shape. What was most important now was that he would again behold her, "born






147


of the light of the stars." His only wish was to gaze at the thin little blue face and forget himself in a flood-tide of joy. As he ran through the clouds of steam rising over the bridge spanning the lake in the cavern, Los glimpsed again the moonlit view of the mountains beyond the low columns. Cautiously he made his way to the broad ledge overhanging the abyss. The golden Holy Threshold glimmered dully. The air was hot and still. A wave of tenderness suffused his whole being—he wanted to kiss the copper moss, the footprints on this last retreat of love.


Deep below jutted the barren edges of the hills. The ice shone against the dark blue of the sky. His heart was gripped with yearning. Here were the ashes of the fire, the crushed grass where Aelita had sung the Song of the Ulla. A crested lizard scuttled by, hissing over the stones. It stopped and turned its head to look at him.


Los opened the triangular door in the rock and entered, stooping low.


Aelita was asleep among her white pillows in the light of the lamp hanging from the ceiling. She lay on her back, her bent arm above her head. Her thin little face was sad and sweet, and her closed eyelids trembled, disturbed by a dream.


Los went down on his knees at the head of her couch and gazed rapturously at the mate of his joy and sorrow. What torments would he not go through now to keep sadness away from this dear face, to save this young sweetness from destruction. As she breathed, a lock of as hen hair on her cheek rose and fell gently.


Los thought of the blood-curdling sight of those breathing, rustling, hissing creatures in the deep well of the labyrinth, biding their time. A groan of anguish burst from his lips. Aelita sighed and woke up. She stared blankly at Los for a moment, then her eyebrows lifted in amazement. Supporting herself with both hands, she sat up.


"Son of the Sky," she said tenderly and softly. "My son, my love."






148


She did not hide her nakedness; only a blush of girlish self-consciousness tinged her cheeks. Her bluish shoulders, budding breasts, and narrow hips seemed born of the light of the stars. Los remained on his knees before her, looking mutely at his love, filled with an overwhelming joy. Her bitter-sweet perfume wrapped him in a tempestuous haze.


"I dreamt of you," said Aelita. "You were carrying me in your arms up some glass steps, higher and higher. I heard your heart beating as the blood surged in and out. I was filled with languor. I waited for you to stop, for my yearning to cease. I want to learn to love. I know only the stress and anguish of languor. You have aroused me." Her eyebrows lifted still higher. "You look so strange. Oh, my giant!"


She moved back to the far corner of her couch. Her lips opened like those of a little animal at bay. Los said hoarsely:


"Come to me."


She shook her head.


"You look like the terrible Cha."


He covered his face with his hand, trembling from the fierce effort to restrain himself. The next moment he was all aflame. He took his hand away, and Aelita asked softly:


"What is it?"


"Don't be afraid."


She moved closer to him and whispered again:


"I am afraid of Khao. I shall die."


"Don't be afraid. Khao is fire—it is life. Don't be afraid of Khao. Come to me, my love!"


He reached his arms out to her. Aelita sighed inaudibly. Her eyelashes fell and her strained little face became drawn. Then she suddenly rose and blew out the lamp.


Her fingers buried themselves in Los's snowy hair.


There was a noise outside the cave, as of a swarm of bees droning. Neither Los nor Aelita heard it. The droning grew louder. Then a warship rose like a giant wasp from the abyss and grazed the rock with its prow.






149


The ship hung in the air level with the ledge. A step-ladder fell over its side. Tuscoob and a company of soldiers clad in armour and corrugated helmets disembarked.


The soldiers stationed themselves in a semicircle in front of the cave. Tuscoob went up to the triangular door and struck it with the end of his staff.


Los and Aelita were fast asleep. Tuscoob turned round and pointed to the cave with his staff. "Take them," he snapped.






150