LOS FLIES TO GUSEV'S AID






123


At midnight Los climbed out of the flying-boat into the courtyard of the Tuscoob estate. The windows in the house were dark. Gusev had obviously not returned yet. The slanting wall was bathed in starlight. The bluish reflections of the constellations glittered in the black window-panes. Behind the merlons of the roof loomed an angular shadow. Los peered at it —what could it be?


The young pilot leaned over anxiously and whispered:


"Don't go there."


Los pulled his Mauser out of its holster. His nostrils quivered as he inhaled the chilly air. His memory pictured the fire at the edge of the abyss, the smell of burning moss, and Aelita's glowing eyes.


"Will you come back?" she had asked, standing by the fire. "Do your duty—fight, conquer. But do not forget—it is all no more than a dream—shadows. Here, by the fire, you live, and will not die. Be sure to come back." She had moved close. Her eyes next to his seemed to open into the bottomless night filled with stardust. "Come back—come back to me, Son of the Sky."


The memory singed him, and flickered out —it had lasted no more than a second while he had unbuttoned the holster. Peering at the strange shadow looming over the roof on the other side of the (house, Los felt his muscles tighten, his hot blood pounding—fight, fight! He ran lightly towards the house, stopped to listen for a moment, then crept along the side wall and peeped round the corner. A smashed airship was lying on its side near the entrance to the house. One of its wings projected over the roof. Los made out several sack-like objects on the grass. They were corpses. The house was dark and mute. Was Gusev among them? Los examined the corpses.


No, they were Martians. One of them sprawled face down on the steps. Another lay among the debris of the ship. They had evidently been shot down by guns fired from the house.


Los ran up the steps. The door was slightly ajar. He went inside.






124


"Alexei Ivanovich!" he called.


There was no answer. He switched on the lights. The whole house came ablaze. Then he thought, "That's asking for trouble," but dismissed the thought the next moment. Under one of the arches he slipped over a sticky pool.


"Alexei Ivanovich!" he called again.


No answer. He entered the narrow room with the misty screen, sat down in an armchair and dug his finger-nails into his chin. Should he wait for Gusev there? Or fly to his aid? But where to fly? Whose ship had been shot down outside? The dead did not look like soldiers. They were more like workers. What had the fighting been about? Had Gusev been there? Or Tuscoob's men? Yes, he must hurry.


He picked up the switchboard and plugged in the "Square of the Supreme Council Building." He pulled the cord, and was thrown back by the roar that invaded the room. There were clouds of smoke, tongues of flame and sparks in the reddish gleam of the lanterns.


Somebody's body suddenly shot up with flapping arms and a blood-smeared face.


Los pulled the cord and turned away from the screen.


"He should at least let me know where to look for him in this mess."


Los clasped his hands behind his back and paced the low-ceilinged room. Suddenly he halted, swung round, and whipped out his Mauser. A head was showing in the door just above the floor—a red-haired, copper-skinned, wizened head.


Los leaped to the door. A Martian lay in a pool of blood in the passage. Los picked him up and put him in a chair. His stomach was ripped open.


Licking his lips, the Martian muttered: "Hurry, we are perishing, Son of the Sky, save us. Open my hand...."


Los pulled a note out of the dying Martian's fist. It was scarcely legible.






125


"Sending a ship and seven workers for you. Reliable chaps. Am storming the Supreme Council building. Land your ship on the square by the tower. Gusev."


Los bent over the wounded Martian. He asked him what had happened, but the Martian only wheezed and jerked.


Los took his head in his hands. The wretch stopped wheezing. His eyes bulged. An expression of horror in them gave place to one of bliss. "Help—" His eyes glazed over, and his mouth set in a grin.


Los buttoned his coat and wrapped his scarf round his neck. He went to the front door and opened it. Jets of blue flame hissed from behind the carcass of the wrecked ship. A bullet sent Los's helmet flying.


Gnashing his teeth, Los dashed towards the ship, and putting the weight of his body behind the heave, upset it on the men hiding behind it.


The mangled heap of metal crashed to the ground, and the Martians behind it squealed in terror. The huge wing swayed dangerously, then fell on top of the men crawling from under the debris. Bent figures scurried in zigzags across the misty green. Los took a leap forward and fired. The report was deafening. The nearest Martian dived into the grass. Another flung away Ms gun, squatted and covered his face with his hands.


Los gripped him by the collar of his silver coat and lifted him like a puppy. He was a soldier. Los said:


"Did Tuscoob send you?"


"Yes, Son of the Sky."


"I shall kill you."


"Do as you wish, Son of the Sky."


"Where is your ship?"


Dangling in front of Son of the Sky's terrible face, the Martian motioned with dilated . eyes in the direction of the trees; a small fighter stood in their shade.


"Did you see the Son of the Sky in town? Can you find him?"






126


"Yes,"


"Off we go."


Los jumped into the ship. The Martian took his seat behind the controls. The propeller whirred and the nocturnal wind lashed at their faces. The huge wild stars swayed in their black heights.