LOS LOOKS AT THE EARTH






The shadow cast by the airship disappeared. Los climbed on to the wet casing of the machine, lit his pipe and gazed up at the stars. He shivered a little in the chilly air. Inside, Gusev fussed about, muttering under his breath as he examined and stowed away his finds. Then he stuck his head through the porthole.


"Say what you like, Mstislav Sergeyevich, these things are made of gold. The stones are priceless. I can just see my fool of a girl dance for joy when I show them to her."


He withdrew his head, and was soon still, the lucky chap.


As for Los, sleep did not come to him. He blinked at the stars and sucked the stem of his pipe musingly. How the deuce had those gold masks with the third dragon-fly eye found their way to Mars? And the mosaic? The giants drowning in the sea and darting among the stars? The sign of the parabola? Did the ruby ball symbolize the Earth? And was the brick ball Mars? Were they badges of power over the two worlds? It was unfathomable. The singing book, too, and the strange city that had appeared in the milky mirror? And why—why was the land so desolate and deserted?






46


Los knocked his pipe out against his heel. Would day never come? The Martian flyer they had met earlier in the day must have notified some populated place of their arrival. Perhaps the Martians were looking for them, and the recent airship had been sent to find them?


Los scanned the sky. The light of the reddish star—the Earth—was growing dim as it approached the zenith. Its ray struck at his heart.


He recalled the sleepless night when he had stood in the door of his shed on Earth and gazed up at rising Mars with the same chill grief. That was just two nights ago. No more than a day lay between this hour and that—on Earth.


Ah, Earth, so green, now immersed in clouds and now emerging luxuriant, rich in water, cruel to its children, yet loved by them....


His brain chilled. That reddish globe of the Earth was so much like a flaming heart. And man, an ephemerid, coming to life for a moment; he—Los—all alone had, with his mad will, cut himself adrift from it, and was now sitting like some forlorn demon on this wretched patch of desert land. So this was solitude. Was it what he had wanted? Had he succeeded in escaping from himself? ...


Los shivered violently from the cold. He shoved his pipe in his pocket, climbed into the ship, and lay down beside the snoring Gusev. That simple soul had not betrayed his land.


Having flown across space and landed in ninth heaven, he was as much at home in it as he had been on Earth. He slept like a babe. His conscience was clear.


The warmth and fatigue lulled Los to sleep. Consolation finally came to him. He dreamt of the bank of a terrestrial river, birches rustling in the wind, clouds and sparkling sunbeams playing in the water, and a radiant white figure waving and calling to him from across the river.


Los and Gusev were roused by the loud whirr of propellers.






47