OBLIVION






Well, Mstislav Sergeyevich, are we still alive?" Something scalded Los's mouth. He felt a liquid fire pouring through his body—his veins and bones. He opened his eyes. A little dusty star was twinkling above—just within reach. The sky had a strange look about it. It was yellow and padded. Something was beating rhythmically, and the dusty star trembled above.


"What time is it?"


"Worse luck — the watch's stopped," a voice replied.


"Have we been flying long?"






155


"We have, Mstislav Sergeyevich."


"Where are we flying?"


"The devil knows. I can't make out a thing. There's nothing but the darkness and the stars. We're rocketing through: space."


Los closed his eyes, trying to probe the emptiness of his memory, but found nothing there and fell back into an impenetrable coma.


Gusev tucked the blankets round him and turned back to the observation tubes. Mars was already smaller than a saucer. Its dry sea bottoms and the dead deserts formed lunar spots on its surface. The disc of sand-swept Tuma diminished; the spaceship was flying farther and farther away from it into the pitch-black void. Now and then the ray of a star pricked Gusev's eye. But try as he did, he could see no red star anywhere.


Gusev yawned and snapped his jaws — he was tired of all this cosmic void. He checked the supplies of water, food and oxygen, wrapped himself in a blanket, and lay down on the vibrating floor next to Los.


When he woke up from a pressing feeling of hunger, he had no idea how much time had elapsed. Los was lying next to him with open eyes—his face haggard, sallow and old. He asked quietly:


"Where are we?"


"Same place as before—space."


"Alexei Ivanovich, have we been on Mars?"


"Seems your mind's gone blank."


"Yes, something's the matter with me. Just when things start coming back to me, my memory breaks off in the strangest way. I don't know what's happened—it's all like a dream. Give me a drink." Los shut his eyes and asked tremulously: "Was she —also a dream?"


"Who?"


Los did not reply. His head sank back and he closed his eyes.






156


Gusev looked through all the peep-holes in turn. There was nothing but darkness. Drawing the blanket over Ws shoulders, he sat hunched under it. He had no wish to think, remember, or dream. What was the use? The metal egg droned and vibrated drowsily as it sped through the bottomless void.


Time, infinite, not of the Earth, lagged interminably. Gusev sat hunched in a torpor. Los was asleep. The chill of eternity settled like invisible dust on his heart and mind.






Suddenly a blood-curdling scream rent the air. Gusev jumped to his feet, his eyes popping from his head. Los was standing among his scattered blankets, his gauze bandage hanging over his face, and shouting madly:


"She's alive!"


He lifted his bony hands and began to pound and claw at the leather-bound wall.


"She's alive! Let me out—I'm choking— she was, she was!"


He thrashed about and shouted for a long time, then fell back limply, spent, in Gusev's arms. Gradually he calmed down and dozed off again.


Gusev huddled under the blanket again. Every desire he had had turned into ashes; he felt numb. His ears had grown accustomed to the metallic pulsation of the spaceship and unconscious of any other sounds. Los muttered and moaned in his sleep; every now and then his face lit up with joy.


Gusev looked down at his sleeping companion and thought:


"You're doing the right thing, dear man. Don't bother to wake up, just go on sleeping. When you wake up, you'll sit hunched under your blanket like me, shivering like a crow on a frozen stump. Is this the end?"






157


He did not even bother to close his eyes. He just sat and looked at a gleaming nail in front of him. He was completely indifferent, sinking into oblivion.


More time, vast quantities of it, elapsed in this manner.


Suddenly he heard strange sounds of something knocking and scraping against the iron shell.


Gusev opened his eyes. He was coming out of his coma. He listened. It sounded as though they were driving through mounds of pebble and debris. Something fell on the ship and slipped down its side. There was more scrapping and scratching. Now something struck the other side, and the ship shook. Gusev roused Los. They crawled to the observation tubes and gasped.


All around them in the dark were fields of chipped fragments that glittered like diamonds. Stones, rocks and crystals sparkled with long pointed rays. And a long way off, the shaggy sun hung in the black night.


"We are passing through the head of a comet, I think," whispered Los. "Switch on the rheostats. We must get out of this field, or the comet will draw us to the sun."


Gusev climbed to the top peep-hole and Los stood by the rheostats. The scratching and grating increased. Gusev shouted from above:


"Easy now, there's a rock on our right. Put her on as far as she'll go. A mountain— there's a mountain coming at us. That'll do. We've passed it. Let her go, man, let her go!"