ON THE STAIRS






Seven days elapsed.






68


Recalling them later, Los visualized them as a blue twilight, a wonderful calm in which he lived through a succession of glorious daydreams.


Each morning, Los and Gusev rose early. After a bath and a light breakfast they went to the library where they were greeted by Aelita's serious, gentle glance. The meaning of her words was almost clear to them now. There was a sense of ineffable peace in the twilight stillness of that chamber, and in Aelita's soft-spoken speech. Her moist eyes shone. They seemed to draw the two of them into a land of dreams. Shadows crept across the screen, and words effortlessly sank into their consciousness.


These words—only sounds at first, and then conceptions looming in a fog—gradually acquired meaning. When Los uttered the word Aelita, it stirred him in two ways; the first two letters AE, or "seen for the last time." made him feel sad, and the letters LITA, or "starlight," diffused a silvery radiance. In this way, the language of the new world fused itself as the finest matter with his consciousness.


The lessons went on for seven days. They took place in the morning, and after sundown until midnight. Finally, Aelita grew weary. On the eighth day they were not awakened, and slept until evening.


When Los rose from his bed he saw the long shadows cast by the trees outside his window. A bird chirped on a crystal-clear monotonous note. Los dressed quickly and went to the library, without waking Gusev. He knocked on its door, but received no reply.


Then he went outdoors—for the first time in seven days.


The clearing sloped down to the low buildings on the fringe of the copse. A herd of ungainly, long-haired khashi— something like a cross between a bear and cow—moved in that direction, lowing dismally. The setting sun shed its golden rays over the curly grass. The meadow gleamed like wet gold. Emerald cranes flapped over the lake. A snowy pinnacle washed by the glow of sunset loomed in the distance. It was a






69


peaceful scene, tinged with the sadness of a day departing in golden tranquillity.


Los followed the path leading to the lake. He passed the same weeping azure trees on both sides, the same ruins beyond the spotted tree-trunks; he breathed the same cool air. But he felt he was seeing this lovely place for the first time. A shroud had fallen off his eyes and ears, for he now knew the names of things. The lake glowed in flaming shreds through the foliage. But when Los approached the water's edge the sun had set and the fiery feathers of the sunset, its tongues of flame, spread midway across the sky in a golden conflagration. The fire died rapidly, the sky cleared, grew dark, and soon was spangled with stars.


The strange stellar pattern was reflected in the water. In the curve of the lake, on the two sides of the stairway, loomed the black silhouettes of the stone giants—watchmen of the centuries, sitting with their faces uplifted to the stars.


Los groped his way to the steps, blinded by the swift descent of twilight. He leaned against the foot of one of the statues and filled his lungs with the damp air and the acrid aroma of marsh plants. The reflections of the stars were blurred. A thin mist had risen over the water. But up in the sky the constellations shone ever brighter, and as his eyes grew accustomed to the dusk he soon discerned the sleeping branches, the glinting pebbles and the smiling face of the seated Magatsitl.


Los stood gazing into the night until his hand, which rested on the stone, grew numb. Then, as he moved away from the statue, he saw Aelita on the steps below. She was sitting there motionless, looking at the stars reflected in the black water.


"Aieeoo tu ira khaskhe, Aelita," said Los, listening with surprise to the strange sounds his lips were shaping. He spoke them with difficulty, as though his lips were frozen. His desire —may I’ll be with you, Aelita?—had shaped itself of its own accord in these alien words.


She turned her head slowly and said:






70


"Yes."


Los sank on to the step beside her. Aelita's hair was gathered up under the black hood of her cape. He saw her face in the starlight, but not her eyes—only the deep shadows under them.


In a voice somewhat distant and contained she asked:


"Were you happy there—on Earth?"


Los took his time to reply. He scanned her face. It was motionless. Her mouth was set in a sad line.


"Yes." he replied. "Yes—I was happy."


"What is happiness like on your Earth?"


Los peered into her face again.


"Happiness on our Earth, I believe, is in escaping from one's self. He is happy who is imbued with fullness and accord, and with the desire to live for those who provide this fullness, accord and joy."


Aelita turned to look at him. He saw her large eyes gazing in surprise at him, the white-haired giant.


"It comes from loving a woman," he added.


Aelita turned away. The pointed hood on her head trembled. Was she laughing? No. Crying then? No. Los fidgeted on the mossy step. Aelita asked with a catch in her voice:


"Why did you leave the Earth?"


"The woman I loved had died," said Los. "I did not have the courage to stay with my despair. Life was torture. I'm a runaway—a coward."


Aelita's hand crept out of her cape, touched Los's, and slipped back under the cape.


"I knew this would happen to me," she said pensively. "I had strange dreams when I was a little girl. I dreamed of tall green mountains. And radiant rivers unlike ours. And clouds— large white clouds—and rain, downpours of rain. And giant men. I thought I was going mad. Later, my teacher told me I had ashkheh—second vision. We, the descendants of the Magatsitls, retain the memory of another life—within us there






71


is ashkheh, lying dormant like the seed that has failed to sprout. Ashkheh is a terrible force; it is wisdom incarnate. But I do not know what happiness is."


Aelita thrust both hands out of her cape and clapped them together like a child. Her hood trembled again.


"For many years now I have been coming to these steps to look at the stars. I know a great deal. I know things of which you must never know, nor need to know. But I was happy only as a child, when I dreamed of the clouds, the pouring rain, the green mountains, and the giants. My teacher told me I should perish." She turned again and smiled.


Aelita was so beautiful, so dangerous was the bitter-sweet aroma emanating from her cape and hood, her hands, face and breath, that Los was awed.


"My teacher said, 'Khao will destroy you! Khao is descent."


Aelita turned away and pulled her hood over her eyes.


After a moment's silence, Los said:


"Aelita, tell me what you know."


"It is a secret," she said solemnly, "but you are a man, and I shall have to tell you a great deal."


She lifted her face. The constellations on both sides of the Milky Way glittered with frightening brightness, as if burnished by the wind of eternity. Aelita sighed.


"Listen," she said, "listen to me with calm and attention,"