QUEEN MAGR'S LABYRINTH






Los and Gusev groped their way through the musty darkness.


"There's a turn here, Mstislav Sergeyevich."


"Is it a narrow tunnel?"


"No, it's wide."


"Here are some more columns. Hold on, there! Where are we?"


They had been in the labyrinth for no less than three hours. Their matches had run out. Gusev had dropped his searchlight in the fighting. They crept along in utter darkness.


The tunnels branched out endlessly, crossing and receding away into the depths. There was the clear and monotonous sound of dripping water. Their dilated eyes discerned some vague greyish outlines in the distance, but these hazy spots were only a hallucination.


"Stop!"


"What's the matter?"


"There's no bottom here."


They stood still and listened. A fragrant, dry breeze fanned their faces. There was the sound of breathing coming from somewhere very far, very deep below. They sensed, with vague alarm, that there was nothing before them Gusev groped for a pebble and threw it into the darkness. A few seconds later they heard the faint thud of the pebble as it struck the bottom.


"It's a well."


"But what's breathing down there?"


"Can't tell."


They turned and came up against a wall. Both to the right and left their hands fumbled at crumbling cracks and arches.






142


The edge of the invisible well was very close to the wall —to the right, to the left, and again to the right. They soon realized they were turning round and round and could not find the tunnel by which they had come to the narrow cornice.


They stood close to each other, shoulder to shoulder, their backs against the rough surface of the wall, listening to the hypnotizing sighs issuing from the depths of the well.


"Is this the end, Alexei Ivanovich?"


"Looks like it."


After a moment's silence Los asked in a strange voice, very softly:


"Look—do you see anything?"


"No."


"To the left, in the distance."


"No, no."


Los whispered something to himself and shifted from one foot to the other.


"Love life furiously and ardently—that's the way...."


"What are you talking about?"


"About them. And about us."


Now Gusev shifted his feet and sighed.


"There it is, breathing. Do you hear it?"


"What—death?"


"Who the devil knows what it is? I've thought a lot about it," Gusev went on, as though discoursing with himself. "When you're lying prone in a field with your gun, and it's dark and raining—no matter what you think about it always comes down to one thing— death. You picture yourself lying at the wayside like a dead horse, frozen, and grinning in death. I don't know what'll happen after I die—I just don't know. But I've got to know while I'm still alive: am I a man or a piece of rotting horseflesh? Or is it all the same? When the time comes to die and I roll my eyes up, shudder and give up the ghost, will the whole world—at that moment—everything I've seen with my eyes, turn upside down, eh? Will the thing lying dead and grinning be me—me, so alive and remembering all the way






143


back to when I was three years old— while the whole world goes rolling on just the same as before? That's what I'm afraid of. I can't understand it. We got so used to killing ever since nineteen fourteen that a man meant nothing to us—you put a bullet through him—and there he was. No, it's not as simple as all that. Once I lay wounded on a cart, looking up at the stars. I felt sick at heart. What's the difference, I wondered, whether I was a louse or a man? A louse has to eat and drink the same as me. It's just as hard for a louse to die as for me. The end's the same for both of us. But then I saw the stars twinkling like diamonds up there in the sky—it was the month of August. And my innards shuddered. I felt as though all those stars were Inside of me. No, I wasn't a louse. No. And I cried like a baby. Why was the world made like that? A man isn't a louse. It's a terrible thing to do, a great sin, to crack a man's skull. And people have invented poison gases too. I want to live, Mstislav Sergeyevich, I can't stand this damned darkness. What are we waiting for anyway?..."


"It is here," said Los in the same strange voice.


At that moment the endless tunnels reverberated with the sound of a crash in the distance. The cornice underfoot and the wall behind them shook. Stones came falling through the darkness. The rumble rolled on in waves and died in the distance. It was the seventh explosion. Tuscoob had kept his word. Judging from the remoteness of the detonation, they had left Soatsera far behind.


Stones kept tumbling around them for some time. Then it grew quiet. Gusev was the first to notice that the breathing in the depths had ceased. Now new strange noises were issuing from the bottom of the well—a kind of hissing and bubbling, as though a soft liquid were coming to a boil. Gusev could stand it no longer—spreading his arms along the wall, he moved away, shouting, cursing and kicking at the stones.


"The cornice goes around. Do you hear? There must be an exit here. Ooph, bumped my head against something!" For a while he groped in silence, then his agitated voice came from






144


somewhere ahead of Los who was still standing motionless against the wall: "Mstislav Sergeyevich—there's a handle here. It's a knife-switch—hurrah!—a knife-switch!"


There was a screeching sound, and a dusty light went on under the low brick cupola. The ribs of its flat vault were supported by the narrow ledge of the cornice hanging over a circular shaft some 10 metres in diameter.


Gusev was still clutching the handle of the knife-switch. Los hugged the wall on the other side of the shaft, under the arch of the cupola. He shielded his eyes from the glare with his hand, then removed it and peered down into the shaft. He bent low to see to its bottom. Gusev saw his hand shake, as though he were trying to throw something off his fingers. When he raised his head, his hair was standing on end and his eyes were dilated with horror.


Gusev shouted:


"What is it?" He looked down into the depths of the brick-walled shaft. There was a dark brown skin writhing at the bottom. It was making that hissing noise, a bubbling that was growing ever more ominous. The skin swelled and bulged. It was dotted all over with large horse eyes focussed on the light, and shaggy paws. . . .


"It's death!" screamed Los.


It was a crawling mass of spiders. They had probably been breeding in the warm recesses of the shaft, and the explosion had disturbed them and caused them to swarm up the shaft. They were making that hissing, rustling sound. One of the spiders came crawling out on to the cornice.


Los was standing near by. Gusev shouted:


"Run!" He jumped over the shaft, grazing his head against the vault of the cupola, landed on his haunches near Los, grabbed his hand and pulled him towards the tunnel entrance. They ran as fast as their legs would carry them.


There were dusty lamps burning under the ceiling of the tunnel at rare intervals. A thick layer of dust covered the floor. There were remnants of columns and statues, and narrow






145


doorways leading to other tunnels. Gusev and Los reached the end of the passage which brought them out to a hall with a flat vault and low columns. In its centre stood a broken statue of a woman with a fleshy, fiercely scowling face. Beyond were a number of dark niches. Dust lay everywhere, on the statue of Queen Magr and the shattered fragments of domestic utensils.


Los stood still with glassy, dilated eyes.


"There are millions of them there," he said, looking over his shoulder. "They are waiting —biding their time until the day comes for them to overrun and govern life on Mars...."


Gusev drew him away into the largest tunnel leading from the hall. Here the lamps also burned dimly at rare intervals. They moved along it for a long time, passing an arched bridge over a broad well, at the bottom of which lay the carcasses of gigantic machines. The dusty grey walls led on and on. They were gripped with despair, ready to drop with fatigue. Los kept repeating in a low voice:


"Let me go, I want to lie down."


His heart was pounding. He stumbled after Gusev in the dust, racked with anguish. Drops of cold sweat streamed down his face. Los had seen the yawning fangs of Death, and yet a greater force was making him hold on to life, and he staggered on through the endless empty passages.


Suddenly the tunnel swerved sharply and Gusev gasped. The indigo-blue, dazzling sky and the glittering ice-capped mountain peak which Los remembered so well opened before them, framed in the arch of the tunnel. They emerged from the labyrinth in the vicinity of Tuscoob's estate.