SOATSERA








The light-blue contours of Soatsera, its stepped line of flat roofs, latticed walls covered with green vines, the oval mirrors of its ponds, and the transparent towers rising beyond the hills spread over a large area all the way to the misty horizon. A multitude of black dots came swarming across the city to meet the flying-ship. The planted canal bed receded to the north. East of the city lay an empty gutted field strewn with mounds of rubble. At one end of this desert towered a giant statue, cracked and overgrown with lichen, casting a long dark shadow upon the ground.


It was the statue of a man standing with his feet planted together, and his arms pressed to his narrow hips. A stitched belt supported his mighty chest, and an ear-lapped helmet topped by a fish-tail comb glimmered on his head. The crescent mouth in his broad face was smiling, and his eyes were closed.


"Magatsitl," said the Martian, pointing to the sky.


In the distance behind the statue were the ruins of a big reservoir and the remains of an aqueduct. Looking down at them, Los realized that the mounds of rubble on the plain— the pits and hills—were all remains of an ancient town. The new city of Soatsera began beyond the sparkling lake, to the west of these ruins.


The black dots in the sky grew larger as they neared the ship. They were hundreds of Martians hurrying to meet the ship in their winged boats and saddles, canvas birds and parachute baskets.


The first to reach them was a shiny gold cigar of a ship with four dragon-fly wings. It swerved and hung over them.






56


Flowers and coloured strips of paper came floating down to their deck, and excited faces hung over the rails above.


Los stood up. Holding on to a rope, he doffed his helmet. The wind ruffled his white hair. Gusev climbed out of the cabin and took his place at his side. Flowers showered down upon them in bunches from the boats above. The bluish faces, some swarthier, others a brick-red hue, registered excitement, delight and awe.


The slowly-moving flying-ship was now surrounded on all sides by hundreds of aircraft. A fat man in a striped cap waved his arms to them as his parachute basket swooped down in front. A knobby face peering into a telescope flashed by. A worried-looking sharp-nosed Martian with flying hair circled their ship in his winged saddle, aiming a revolving case at Los. Then a flower-bedecked basket flew past, carrying three pale large-eyed women in blue bonnets, flapping blue sleeves and gold-embroidered scarves.


The whirr of propellers and hum of the wind in the wings, the thin whistles, the glitter of gold, and the bright costumes in the blue air, the foliage in the parks below—purple, silver and canary-yellow—and the sparkling window-panes of the buildings were all like a dream. Los and Gusev were stunned. Gusev kept looking round dazedly, and whispering:


"Look at that, will you! Did you ever see anything like it!"


The ship sailed over hanging gardens, and landed smoothly on a large round square. The next moment hundreds of little boats, baskets and winged saddles poured from the sky, plopping on to the white flagstones of the square. The streets radiating from it were filled with milling crowds of Martians who were running, scattering flowers and bits of paper, and waving handkerchiefs.


The ship had landed beside a tall forbidding building of red-black stone, as massive as a pyramid. On its broad steps, between square tapering pillars that rose to two-thirds of the height of the building, stood a group of Martians. They were clad in black robes and round caps. As Los learned afterwards,






57


they were the Council of Engineers—the supreme governing body of all the Martian countries.


Los's companion motioned to him to stay on board the flying-ship. The soldiers filed down the step-ladders and surrounded the ship, holding back the pressing crowds. Gusev gazed with delight at the eddying square, bright with gaily-coloured clothes, at the swarms of wings above, the piles of grey and black-red buildings, the transparent outlines of towers behind the roofs.


"What a city! Ah, what a city!" he kept repeating, stamping his feet in excitement.


The black-robed Martians on the steps made way for a tall, stoop-shouldered Martian, also dressed in black, with an elongated morose face, and a long narrow black beard. A gold comb, like the tail of a fish, trembled on the top of his round cap.


Half-way down the staircase he leaned on his stick and fixed his dark, sunken eyes on the newcomers from the Earth. Los also studied him appraisingly and guardedly.


"What's he staring at us for, the devil," Gusev whispered. He turned to the crowd and called out to them cheerfully:


"Hallo, Comrades Martians! We bring you greetings from the Soviet Republics. We've come to make friends with you!"


The crowd gasped in amazement, buzzed excitedly, and pressed forward. The grim-looking Martian clutched his beard and turned his lack-lustre eyes on the crowd milling in the square. The tumultuous ocean of heads gradually grew still under his gaze. He turned to his companions on the steps, said a few words to them, and pointed his staff at the flying-ship.


One of the Martians ran down to the ship and whispered a few rapid words to the bald-headed Martian leaning over the ship's side. The next moment whistles resounded in the ship, two soldiers climbed aboard, the propellers roared, and the flying-ship took off ponderously. Rising above the city, it set its course northward.






58