THE EARTH






The diamond fields were the trail of a comet speeding through space. For I a long time the ship, drawn into its gravitational field, pushed through the meteoritic cloud. Its speed increased and the absolute laws of mathematics followed






158


their course—gradually the paths of the ship and the meteorites changed direction, fanning out at am ever-widening angle. The golden haze —the head of the unknown comet—and its tail— the streams of meteorites—were shooting along a hyperbola, a hopeless curve, to skirt the sun and disappear for ever in space. The ship's curve of flight now approached an ellipsis.


The wild hope of returning to Earth resuscitated the two men. They kept their eyes glued to the peep-holes. The ship's side facing the sun was hot. They threw off their clothes.


The diamond fields were far beneath them now. A glittering mass at first, they soon faded into a grey-white veil and vanished. Then the opalescent Saturn appeared away in the distance, ringed by its satellites.


The egg, attracted by the comet, was returning to the solar system.


A little later the obscurity was pierced by a shining line, which soon dimmed and disappeared. It was a swarm of asteroids— little planets—spinning round the sun. The force of their gravity increased the curve of the egg's flight. Then Los saw a strange shiny narrow sickle through the top peep-hole. It was Venus. Almost simultaneously Gusev, at the other peep-hole, gasped and turned a perspiring red face to Los.


"It's her, honestly, it's her!..."


A silvery-blue globe was shining warmly in the murky blackness. On one side of it a tiny ball, no bigger than a currant, gleamed brightly. The ship was speeding somewhat off course, and Los decided upon a dangerous measure—turning the neck of the ship around to deflect the combustion axis from the trajectory of the flight. He was successful. The direction changed. The warm little ball gradually climbed to the zenith.


Space and time fled on and on. Los and Gusev clung to the observation tubes and reeled back on to their scattered fur rugs and blankets again and again. Their strength was giving out. They were dying of thirst, but the water supply had run out.


Suddenly, in a semi-coma, Los saw the furs, blankets and bags floating along the walls. Gusev's half-naked body hung in






159


the air. It was like a nightmare. Gusev was now lying next to a peep-pole. He picked himself up, mumbling to himself, clutching at his breast and shaking his curly head. Tears coursed down his face and drooping moustache.


"Our own, our very own dear Earth!"


Through the mist of his consciousness Los realized that the ship had turned neck fore-most, attracted by the Earth. He crawled to the rheostats and pulled at them—the egg began to vibrate and roar. He bent to look through a peep-hole.


There, hanging in the darkness, was the huge watery globe, bathed in sunshine. Its oceans were blue, and the contours of its islands green. Clouds spread over one of its continents. The moist globe was turning slowly. The tears welling up in their eyes prevented the men from seeing it. Singing with love, their hearts flew out to meet the bluish moist shaft of light. The land of humanity! The flesh of life! The heart of the world!


The globe of the Earth now covered half the sky. Los pulled the rheostats as far as they would go. The ship was still flying too fast— the casing was hot, the rubber lining inside and the leather upholstery were smouldering. Summoning all his remaining strength Gusev shifted the lid over the porthole. An icy gust swept in through the aperture. The Earth opened its arms to receive its prodigal sons.


The impact was shattering. The spaceship's shell cracked. The egg dived deep into a grassy mound.


It was noon of Sunday, June third. On the shore of Lake Michigan, a great distance from where the spaceship finally dropped, people who were out boating, lounging in open-air restaurants and cafes, playing tennis, golf and football, and flying kites in the cloudless sky—all these crowds of holiday-makers who had come to the lovely green lake shore to enjoy their weekend amid the rustling June foliage, heard a strange whining sound that lasted a full five minutes.


World war veterans scanned the sky and remarked that heavy shells made that sort of Whining sound. Then many saw an egg-shaped shadow flit rapidly over the ground.






160


Within an hour a great crowd had gathered round the damaged spaceship. People came flocking from all directions, climbing over fences, riding in cars, plying the blue lake in row boats. The egg, smeared with soot and grease, dented and cracked, stood listing to one side on a mound. Many conjectures were formed, one more absurd than the other. The people grew especially excited when they noticed the inscription on the half-open lid over the porthole, which read: "RSFSR. Took off from Petrograd, August 18, 192.. ." It was all the more surprising since it was now June 3, 19... In a word, the inscription had been made three and a half years before.


Suddenly the crowd heard faint moans issuing from the interior of the mysterious apparatus. They backed away in silence and consternation. A squad of policemen, a doctor and twelve newspapermen with cameras appeared on the scene. They opened the porthole and carefully lifted out two half-naked human bodies. One was emaciated, thin as a skeleton, old and white-haired—and unconscious. The other, with a bleeding face and broken arms, was moaning pitifully. Exclamations of sympathy and concern burst from the crowd. The celestial travellers were deposited in a car and driven to a hospital.






A bird outside the window was singing in a voice crystal with joy. It sang of sunbeams, and of the blue sky. Los lay back on his pillows listening. Tears streamed down his haggard face. He had heard that crystal voice somewhere. But where?


Beyond the curtains flapping gently in the morning breeze, sparkled dew-bedecked blades of grass. The wet leaves cast playful shadows on the curtains. The bird chirruped.


In the distance, a white cloud was rising from behind the forest.


Someone's heart was pining for this earth, for the clouds, the pattering rains and sparkling dew, the giants wandering






161


over the green hills. He remembered—it was a bird which had sung like this of Aelita's dreams on a sunny morning, far away from the Earth. Aelita.... But had she existed at all? Or was she only a dream? No. The bird was singing in its chirping language of the time when a woman, blue as dusk, with a thin little sad face, sat at a fire and sang an old old song of love.


That was why the tears were streaming down Los's sunken cheeks. The bird was singing of the one who had remained beyond the stars, and of the grey wizened old dreamer who had traversed the skies.


The curtain flapped gently in the wind. The aroma of honey, earth and moisture crept into the room.






On one such morning Skiles turned up at the hospital. He shook Los's hand vigorously—"Congratulations, old man"— then sat down on a stool beside the bed and pushed his hat to the back of his head.


"Doesn't look as though the trip's agreed with you, old man," he said. "I've just seen Gusev. He's a brick: arms in plaster casts, jaw broken, and cheerful as the day. Tickled pink to be back. I sent his wife a wire and five thousand dollars. I've also wired my newspaper about you—you've got a pot of money waiting for you for your Travel Notes.'


But you'll have to improve your machine—you made a bum landing! To think that almost four years have passed since that crazy evening in Petrograd! How about a glass of brandy, my boy —it'll pep you up."


Skiles went on chattering, casting cheerful and solicitous glances at the patient. His face was sun-tanned and genial and his eyes were full of avid curiosity. Los held out his hand.


"I'm glad to see you, Skiles."






162