THE SUNSET






Spreading its narrow wings of mist, the flaming sun sank lower and lower. The two men hastened back across the plain which now, in the waning light, looked even more desolate and wild than ever. The sun set rapidly behind the near edge of the fields, and disappeared, leaving a brilliant red halo in its wake. Its pointed rays lit up half the horizon, then turned ashen-grey, and died. The sky acquired an opaque quality.






44


A large red star loomed low over Mars in the glow of the ashen sunset. It gleamed like an angry eye. For a moment it filled the darkness with its smouldering rays.


Presently the lofty celestial dome came alight with stars— glittering constellations whose icy rays hurt the eye. The glowering red star burned brighter as it climbed.


When they came to the canal bank, Los stopped and said, pointing at it: "That's the Earth."


Gusev pulled off his cap and wiped the sweat from his brow. Throwing his head far back, he gazed at his native planet afloat among the constellations. His face was sad and drawn.


"The Earth," he echoed.


They stood for some time on the bank of the ancient canal overlooking the plain and the blurred contours of the cactuses in the starlight.


Now a silver crescent, smaller than the moon's, appeared above the stark line of the horizon and rose over the cactus field. The palmated plants cast long shadows on the ground.


Gusev prodded Los with his elbow. "See what's behind us."


Overhead, above the undulating plain, the thickets and ruins, shone Mars's second satellite. Its round yellowish globe, also smaller than the moon's, sank beyond the craggy mountain-tops. The metal discs on the mountain slopes shimmered in its light.


"What a night!" whispered Gusev. "Like a dream."


They made: their way cautiously down the bank to the cactus field. A shadow scurried underfoot. A shaggy ball rolled along the reflections cast on the ground by the two moons. They heard something rattle. Then something squealed. It was a thin, piercing, blood-curdling sound. The glimmering cactus leaves stirred. Cobwebs, as resilient as nets, stuck to their faces.


Suddenly, the night was rent by an eerie howl. It broke off abruptly, emphasizing the deep silence. Shuddering with horror and loathing, Gusev and Los dashed across the plain, leaping high over the quivering plants.






45


At last they saw the steel casing of their spaceship gleaming in the light of the rising crescent. They ran up to it and sank to the ground by its side, panting heavily.


"You won't find me out in these spidery places after dark," said Gusev. He unscrewed the lid over the porthole and climbed into the ship.


Los tarried a little, listening and peering into the darkness. Suddenly he saw the fantastic, winged outline of an airship sailing among the stars.