THE SONG OF LONG AGO








Aelita, Lkhoshka and Los took off in a four-winged boat for the Liziazira Mountains.


The electro-magnetic wave receiver—the mast with the wires—operated unceasingly. Aelita, bent over a tiny screen, listened and watched.


She found it difficult to make anything out in the medley of frantic telephone messages, calls, shouts, and worried inquiries that whirled in the magnetic fields of Mars. Still, Tuscoob's steely voice managed to cut through and dominate the chaos. The shapes of a disturbed world flitted across the mirror.


On several occasions Aelita heard a strange voice bellowing:


"Comrades, don't listen to the whisperers. We want no concessions. To arms, comrades, the hour has struck—all power to the Sov—Sov—Sov. . . ."


Aelita turned around to face Ikhoshka.


"Your friend is bold; he is a true Son of the Sky. Have no fears about him."


Ikhoshka stamped her feet like a goat and shook her red head. Aelita saw that their flight had remained undiscovered. She took the earphones off and wiped the misted pane of the porthole with the palm of her hand.


"Look," she said to Los, "the ikhi are following us."


The boat was flying high over Mars. Two animals with scabrous coats of brown hair and webbed wings flew in the glaring light on each side of the boat Their flat horny beaks faced the portholes. Catching sight of Los, one of them dived and struck its beak against the pane. Los jerked his head back. Aelita laughed.


They soon left Azora behind. Below were the sharp cliffs of the Liziazira Mountains. The boat lost height, flew over Lake Soam and landed on a broad ledge hanging over an abyss.






120


Los and the pilot dragged the boat into a cave, hoisted the luggage baskets on to their backs and followed the women down a barely perceptible time-worn stairway leading to the gorge. Aelita tripped along lightly in front. Holding on to projections in the rocks, she looked at him intently. Stones flew from under his large feet, echoing hollowly in the gorge. "This is where Magatsitl carried his staff with the skein of wool," said Aelita. "You'll now see the sacred ring of fire."


Midway down the precipice the steps turned into a narrow tunnel in the cliff. Its dark recesses had a dank smell. Scraping the rock with his shoulders and bending double, Los advanced laboriously between the polished walls. He groped for, and found Aelita's shoulder, and at once felt her breath on his lips. He whispered in Russian, "Sweetheart." The tunnel issued into a dimly-lit cave. Basalt columns glittered all around. Thin clouds of vapour ascended at its far end. Water gurgled somewhere, and there was the monotonous sound of drops falling from the dark vaults.


Aelita led the way. Her black cape and pointed hood floated over a lake, and kept disappearing behind the clouds of vapour. Her voice reached Los from the darkness. "Careful," she called, and then appeared on the narrow steep arch of an ancient bridge. Los felt the arch shake under his feet, but saw nothing but the cape floating through the semi-darkness.


It grew lighter. The crystals overhead glimmered faintly. The cave ended in a colonnade of low stone pillars beyond which opened a view of the rocky pinnacles and mountain reservoirs of Liziazira bathed in the rays of the evening sun.


The columns faced a broad terrace overgrown with rusty moss. Its edge hung over an abyss. Almost invisible steps and pathways led up to a town of caves. In the centre of the terrace stood the Holy Threshold, half submerged in soil and overgrown with moss. It was a large sarcophagus built of blocks of gold. Crude images of birds and beasts ornamented it on all sides, and on top of it lay the Sleeping Martian—one






121


hand under his head, the other pressing an ulla to his breast. The ruins of a colonnade encircled this curious sculpture.


Aelita sank to her knees before the Threshold and kissed the place over the Sleeping Martian's heart. When she rose to her feet, her face was pensive and gentle. Ikha also squatted at the feet of the Sleeping Martian, embracing and pressing here face to them.


On their left there was a golden triangular door wedged in between a rocky wall covered with half-obliterated inscriptions. Los pulled out the clumps of moss covering it and opened the door with difficulty. Inside was the ancient abode of the custodian of the Threshold —a dark cave with stone benches, a hearth and a couch carved of granite. They put their baskets in the cave. Ikha covered the floor with a mat, made Aelita's bed, poured some oil into a lamp hanging under the ceiling, and lit it. The young pilot went off to guard his winged boat.


Aelita and Los sat on the edge of the abyss. The sun was setting behind the craggy summits. Long black shadows stretched along the hills, broken by yawning clefts. It was a dismal place, barren and wild, these mountains where the ancient Aols once sought refuge from men.


"Long ago the mountains were covered with vegetation," said Aelita. "Herds of khashi used to graze here and waterfalls rumbled in the gorges. Tuma is dying. The cycle of the millenniums is closing. Perhaps we are the last Martians— when we're gone, Tuma will be lifeless."


Aelita fell silent. The sun disappeared behind the neighbouring dragon-backed cliffs. Its glowing crimson poured into the heavens, merging with the purple dusk.


"But my heart tells me otherwise." Aelita rose and walked along the edge of the precipice, picking up dry moss and sticks. Having gathered a pile in her cape, she returned to Los and built a fire. Then she fetched a lamp from the cave, got down on her knees, and lit the moss with its flame. Soon the fire was crackling merrily.






122


Now Aelita sat down, took a little ulla from under her cape, and propping her elbows on her raised knees, began to pluck at its strings. The instrument emitted a gentle droning sound. Aelita lifted her head to the stars twinkling in the nocturnal sky and sang in a low, sad voice:


Gather the dry grass, the dung of beasts and the broken branches. Pile them up neatly, Strike stone against stone—woman, leader of two souls. Strike a spark, and the fire will burn. Sit at the fire, hold thy hands to the warmth. Thy husband sits across the dancing flames. Through the smoke rising to the stars


The eyes of thy man gaze into the darkness of thy being, the depths of thy


soul. His eyes are brighter than the stars, hotter than the fire, bolder than the


luminous eyes of Cha. Know thee—the sun will be a cold ember,


the stars will Roll off the Sky, and wicked Taltsetl will no longer burn over the world— But thee, woman, will sit at the fire of


immortality, thy hands close to its


flames, And listen to the voice of those yet to come to life, The voice in the darkness of thy womb.






The fire was dying. Dropping the ulla on her knees, Aelita gazed at the coals—they illumined her face with their warm glow.


"It is our ancient custom," she said sternly, "for a woman who sings the song of the ulla to a man, to become his wife."