THE COUNTER-ATTACK






Los and Gor had just rushed out on to the front steps under the columns of the building when a second explosion rent the air. A blue fan of flame burst in the northern section of the city,






136


followed by clouds of smoke and ashes. Before the thunderous reverberations had died away a storm swept down upon them. A dark-red glow seeped over the sky.


Not a single shout came from the star-shaped square filled with troops. The Martians watched the fire in silence. Their houses and families were burning to ashes. Their last hopes went up in black smoke.


After a short conference with Los and Gor, Gusev made arrangements to get his air fleet in readiness. All the ships were in the arsenal. There were only five giant dragon-flies on the square. Gusev sent them up on a reconnaissance flight. The ships mounted into the sky, their wings glowing red in the light of the conflagration.


He received word from the arsenal that the troops were embarking on their ships. Meanwhile, the fires were spreading. It was ominously still in the city. Gusev sent his messengers to the screen telephone to hasten the embarkation, and ran back and forth across the square like a huge shadow, yelling hoarsely and forming the scattered troops into columns. Returning to the steps, he scowled and twitched his moustache.


"Will you tell those"—a strange expression followed which Gor could not understand—"at the arsenal to hurry up."


Gor returned to the telephone. Finally a telephone message came through that the embarkation had been completed and the ships were taking off. A few moments later the dragon-flies glided low over the city through the thick smoke. Standing with his feet planted apart and his head thrown back, Gusev viewed the V formations of the ships with pleasure. And then the city was shaken by a third explosion.


Tongues of blue flame licked through the lines of the ships. The dragon-flies shot up, spun and vanished, leaving nothing but a rain of ashes and clouds of smoke.


Gor came out on to the steps. His head had sunk into his shoulders and his face was twitching. When the noise died down, he said:


"The arsenal's blown up. The fleet's wiped out."






137


Gusev grunted and chewed his moustache. Los leaned against a column and stared at the conflagration. Gor stood up on his toes to peer into Los's glassy eyes.


"This is going to end badly for those who remain alive."


Los said nothing. Gusev shook his head obstinately and stalked down to the square. He gave a command, and soon column after column marched away along the streets towards the barricades.


In another moment Gusev's winged shadow was flying over the square and shouting from above, "Hustle, you half-baked devils, get a move on with you!"


The square was soon empty. The conflagration which had spread over a large section of the city now illumined formations of dragon-flies flying over the city from the opposite direction. These were Tuscoob's ships. Gor said:


"Run, Son of the Sky, you can still save yourself."


Los shrugged his shoulders. The ships were approaching and losing height. One fiery ball after another shot up out of the dark of the streets to intercept them. These were the round balls of lightning fired by the mutineers' machines. The lines of winged galleys described a circle over the square and split up to sail in different directions over the streets and roofs. The incessant bursts of fire illumined their sides. One galley turned over, dropped and caught its wings between the roofs of two buildings. Others landed on the square and spewed forth soldiers in silver jackets. The soldiers ran down the streets. They were fired at from the windows and from behind corners, and pelted with stones. More and more ships kept coming over, casting an unending line of fiery shadows on the square. Los saw Gusev's broad-shouldered figure climbing up on to the terrace of a house. Five or six ships immediately swerved towards him. He lifted a large stone over his head and hurled it at the nearest galley. Then the flashing wings covered him on all sides.


Los was shaken out of his torpor. He dashed across the square to the house. The ships circled above, spitting fire and






138


roaring. Los gritted his teeth, noting everything round him with a sharp eye.


He cleared the square in a few leaps and espied Gusev up on the terrace, crawling all over with Martians, heaving like a bear under their scrambling legs and arms, shaking them off and hammering at them with his fists. He wrenched one off his throat and threw him into the air, dragging the others with him as he moved along the terrace. Then he fell down.


Los cried out in alarm. Clinging to the ledges of the building he climbed on to the terrace. Gusev's bleeding mouth and bulging eyes appeared again from under the squealing writhing mass. Several soldiers sprang upon Los. He shook them off with loathing, and then began to pick the soldiers off Gusev and hurl them like so many sticks over the railing. The terrace soon emptied. Gusev tried to rise, but only rolled his head from side to side. Los picked him up, jumped into the open door and put him down on the carpet of the little room illumined by the red glow outside.


Gusev was breathing hoarsely. Los looked out of the door. The ships were gliding past the terrace—he saw the sharp-nosed faces peering out of them. He was certain they would attack again.


"Mstislav Sergeyevich," Gusev called. He was sitting up, feeling his head and spitting blood. "Our men have been wiped out—the whole lot of 'em.... Can you imagine it— swarming down on us and killing us like flies.... If anybody's alive, he's in hiding. Left me all alone. Oh, damn it!" He got to his feet, staggered across, the room and stood before a bronze statue of some eminent Martian. "You just wait!" He picked it up and made for the door.


"What on earth are you doing?"


"I can't stand it, see? Let me go!" He ran out on to the terrace. Spurts of fire jetted from under the wing of a ship floating past. Then there was a thud and a crash. "Aha!" shouted Gusev. Los dragged him back into the room and slammed the door shut.






139


"Alexei Ivanovich, can't you understand— we're beaten— it's all over. We must save Aelita."


"All you think about is your damned wench."


Gusev sat down abruptly, clutched his head, snorted and stamped his foot.


"All right," he snarled, bursting with impotent fury, "let them skin me! Nothing's right in the world. Nothing's right on this planet! 'Save us,' they said, 'please save us....' Hung on for dear life, they did.... 'We want to live,' they said. To live! But what could I do? I shed my blood, but they crushed us all the same. Damn it, I can't stand the sight of it. I'll tear those despots of theirs to pieces."


He snorted again and stamped to the door. Los gripped his shoulders, shook him and fixed him with a stern eye.


"This is a nightmare. Come. We may be able to get back. Home—back to Earth."


Gusev smeared the blood and dirt over his face.


"Let's go."


The room opened on to a circular landing hanging over a deep shaft. A spiral staircase wound to the bottom. The dim light of the conflagration outside filtered through the skylight down into the dizzy depths of the shaft.


Los started down the narrow stairs. It was quiet below. But above them the firing had grown louder and they heard the bottoms of the ships scraping against the roof of the building. It looked as though the Martians were attacking this last refuge of the Sons of the Sky.


Los and Gusev ran down the endless spiral stairs. It grew darker. Suddenly they saw a small figure below. It was crawling towards them laboriously. Then it stopped and cried weakly:


"They'll break in at any moment. Hurry. The entrance to the labyrinth is at the bottom."


It was Gor, wounded in the head. Licking his lips, he said:


"Keep to the big tunnels. Watch the signs on the walls. Good-bye. If you return to Earth, tell them about us. Perhaps you will be happy on Earth. But for us, there is nothing but ice






140


deserts, death and agony. Aye, we've let our chance slip by. We should have loved life furiously and ardently—ardently. . . ."


There was a noise above. Gusev rushed down the stairs. Los wanted to take Gor along, but the Martian clenched his teeth and gripped the bannister. "Go. I want to die."


Los hurried down after Gusev. At last they reached the circular landing (from which the steps led steeply to the bottom of the shaft. Here they found a large flagstone with a ring screwed into it. They lifted it with difficulty: a stream of dry air wafted up from the dark gap - Gusev slipped into it first. As he replaced the block of stone over his head, Los saw figures of soldiers appearing far above in the reddish dusk of the circular landing. They came running down the steps. Gor stretched his hands out to them and fell under their blows.






141