THE SPELL








Los eat behind Aelita. The pilot, a red-faced youth, sent the flying-boat up smoothly into the air. The cold wind tore at them. Aelita's white fur coat smelled of mountain gales and snow.


She turned to look at Los, her cheeks glowing.


"I saw Father. He ordered me to poison you and your companion." Her teeth gleamed. She unclenched her fist. A tiny stone flask dangled from a ring on her finger. "Father said, 'Let them die in peace. They deserve a tranquil death.' "


Aelita's grey eyes filled with tears. But she laughed and pulled the ring off her finger. Los grasped her hand.


"Don't throw it away," he said, taking the flask from her and putting it in his pocket. "It is your gift, Aelita; a dark drop —sleep, peace. Now you are both life and death to me." He put his face close to hers. "When the terrible hour of solitude comes, I shall feel you again in this drop."


Aelita closed her eyes and rested her back against him in her effort to understand. But it was no good—she could not understand. The roaring wind, Los's hot chest against her back, his hand resting on her shoulder under the fur—it seemed their blood was coursing through a single artery. And they experienced a single sense of delight, flying as a single body towards some sparkling primeval recollection. But no, it was no good—she could not understand.


A minute or more passed. The boat was approaching the Tuscoob estate. The pilot glanced over his shoulder: Aelita and the Son of the Sky looked so strange. Tiny sun-sparks glittered in the pupils of their eyes. The wind ruffled the snowy fur of Aelita's coat. Her eyes gazed ecstatically at the ocean of sky all round.






116


The young pilot poked his sharp nose into his collar and chuckled noiselessly. Banking the boat on her left wing and diving, he set her down beside the house.


Aelita came out of her spell. Her fingers fumbled with the bird-head buttons of her coat as she tried to get it unfastened. Los lifted her out of the boat, set her down on the grass and stood leaning over her. Aelita said to the boy-pilot:


"Bring out the closed boat."


She did not see Ikhoshka's red eyes or the scared pumpkin-yellow face of the house steward. Smiling and turning to Los absent-mindedly on the way, she led him to her rooms at the back of the house.


It was his first visit to Aelita's quarters. The chambers were vaulted, had golden arches, and their walls were covered with shadow pictures like the silhouettes on a Chinese parasol. The warm spicy air went to his head.


Aelita said softly:


"Sit down."


Los obeyed. She sank to the floor at his feet, put her head on his knees and sat very still.


He looked down at the ashen hair combed high on her head, and placed his hand over hers. Her throat trembled. Los bent over her. She said:


"Are you bored with me? Forgive me. I do not know how to love yet. It is all so vague. I told Ikha, 'Put more flowers in the dining room when he is alone, and let the ulla play for him.'"


Aelita rested her elbows on his knees. She had a dreamy look.


"Did you hear me? Did you understand? Did you think of me?"


"You must surely know," he said, "that when I do not see you I go mad with alarm. And when I do see you I am even more alarmed. It seems to me that it was my yearning for you that drove me across the stars."


Aelita sighed. She looked happy.






117


"Father told me to poison you, but I could see that he did not trust me. He said, 'I shall kill both of you.' We have not long to live, but don't you feel the minutes opening endlessly, blissfully?"


She relapsed into silence as she saw Los's eyes gleam with cold resolution, his mouth set in an obstinate line.


"All right," he said, "I shall flight."


Aelita moved closer and whispered:


"You are the giant of my youthful dreams. You are handsome. You are strong. You are brave and kind. Your hands are iron. Your knees are stone. Your glance is deadly. It makes women feel heavy under the heart."


Aelita's head rested lightly on his shoulder. Her murmuring became indistinct, barely audible. Los brushed the hair from her face.


"What is it?"


Impetuously, she wound her hands round his neck, like a child. Large tears welled up in her eyes and streamed down (her little pointed face.


"I do not know how to love," she said. "I have never known. Pity me. Do not shun me. I shall tell you stories. I shall tell you about the terrible comets, and the battle of the airships, and the end of the beautiful land beyond the mountains. You will never be bored. Nobody ever caressed me. When I saw you the first time, I thought, 'He is the giant of my childhood dreams.' I wanted you to lift me in your arms and take me away. It is gloomy here, hopeless. Like death itself. The sun gives little warmth. The snows on the pole do not thaw any longer. The seas are drying up. There is nothing but endless desert land. Tuma is covered with copper sands. The Earth, the Earth —dear giant, take me to the Earth. I want to see the green hills, the waterfalls, the clouds, the big animals and the giants. I do not want to die."


Aelita burst into tears. She was like a little girl—amusing and delightful when she clapped her hands as she spoke of the giants.






118


Los kissed her wet eyes. She grew quiet. She pouted her small mouth. She gazed up at the Son of the Sky with loving eyes, beholding her fairy giant.


Suddenly a low whistle pierced the semi-darkness of the room and the oval screen on Aelita's dressing table lit up softly. Tuscoob's head was peering at her.


"Are you there?" he asked.


Aelita jumped like a cat on to the carpet and ran to the screen.


"I am here, Father."


"Are the Sons of the Sky still alive?"


"No, Father. I gave them poison. They are dead."


Aelita spoke in a cold, sharp voice. She stood with her back to Los, hiding him from her father.


"What else do you want me to do, Father?"


Tuscoob did not reply. Aelita's shoulders heaved and her head rolled back. Her father snarled viciously:


"You lie! The Son of the Sky is in the city. He's leading the uprising!"


Aelita swayed. Her father's head disappeared.






119