THE TAKE-OFF






A little knot of gapers gathered on the lot outside Los's workshop. They I straggled in from the embankment and the Petrovsky Island, jostling and looking up every now and then at the low-hanging sun pushing its broad rays through the clouds.


"What's up? Anybody murdered?" somebody asked.


"They're flying to Mars."


"Good Lord, what are we coming to?"






24


"What are you talking about? Who's flying?"


"They're going to seal a couple of convicts in a steel ball and shoot it off to Mars. It's an experiment."


"You're pulling my leg."


"The beasts—a man's nothing to them."


"Who do you mean by 'them,' may I ask?"


"None of your damned business."


"Inhuman, I call it."


"My God, what a pack of idiots you are."


"Who's an idiot?"


"They ought to send you up."


"Drop it, comrades. You're about to witness a signal event. Cut out your nonsense."


"But what's the idea of flying to Mars?"


"Well, somebody said they're taking up 400 kilograms of propaganda leaflets."


"It's an expedition."


"What for?"


"For gold."


"That's right—to replenish our gold reserves."


"How much do they expect to bring back?"


"Any amount."


"Citizens, how much longer do we have to wait here?"


"They're taking off at sundown."


The talk rippled back and forth until dusk. The people argued and quarrelled, but did not leave.


The setting sun shed a ruddy glow over half the sky. Presently a large car of the Gubernia Executive Committee nosed its way slowly through the crowd. Lights went on in the windows of the workshop. The people fell silent and pushed forward.


Open on all sides, its rows of rivets glinting, the egg-shaped spaceship stood on a slightly inclined cement platform in the middle of the shed. Its brightly-lit interior of rhomb-stitched yellow leather was visible through the open porthole.






25


Los and Gusev were clad in sheepskin jackets, felt boots and leather helmets. The members of the Executive Committee, academicians, engineers, and newspapermen surrounded the spaceship. The speechmaking was over. The photographers had taken countless shots. Los said a few words of thanks. He was pale and glassy-eyed. He embraced Khokhlov and Kuzmin. Glancing at his watch, he said:


"Time we took off."


A hush fell over the crowd. Gusev frowned and crawled through the porthole. Inside, he sat on a leather seat, adjusted his helmet and straightened his jacket.


"Don't forget to see my wife!" he called out to Khokhlov, scowling hard.


Los tarried at the porthole, looking down at his feet. Suddenly he raised his head, and said in a hollow, tremulous voice:


"I think I shall make it. I'm certain that in a few years hundreds of spaceships will ply the cosmos. We shall always— always be driven by the spirit of quest. But I should not be the first to fly. I should not be the first to probe the secrets of the firmament. What will I find there? Oblivion. It is this that troubles me most as I take my leave of you. No, comrades, I'm not a genius, not a brave man, not a dreamer. I'm a coward—a fugitive."


Los broke off abruptly, and looked oddly at the people around him. They were bewildered. He pulled his helmet down over his eyes.


"But that's beside the point. My personal affairs—I'm leaving them behind, on that lonely cot in the shed. Good-bye, comrades. Stand away from the spaceship, please."


Now Gusev called out from inside the cabin:


"Comrades, I'll pass the Soviet Republic's warmest regards to those whatever-they are on Mars. Right?"


The crowd cheered.


Los turned, crawled through the porthole and slammed the lid shut behind him. Jostling and buzzing excitedly, the people






26


pushed their way out of the shed and mixed with the crowd on the vacant lot. A voice called out warningly:


"Move back and lie down."


Thousands of people stared at the lighted squares of the workshop windows. All was quiet inside, and out in the open. Several minutes elapsed. Many lay down on the ground. A horse neighed in the distance. Somebody snarled:


"Silence!"


That instant the shed was shaken by an ear-splitting roar followed by a series of violent detonations. The earth shook. Out of the opening in the roof, in a cloud of smoke and dust, rose the blunt metallic nose of the spaceship. The roar grew as the craft bobbed up into the air, and hung there, as though taking aim. Then, with a thunderous din, the eight-metre sphere rocketed westward over the crowd and streaked into the reddish clouds in the distance.


The crowd came to life, shouting, throwing caps into the air, and swarming round the shed.