TUSCOOB






The city was in a state of unrest. The screen telephones hummed and flickered. Groups of Martians stood whispering in the streets, squares and parks. They were obviously waiting for something to happen, and kept looking up at the sky. There was a rumour that the storehouses of dry cactus were aflame. The water taps were opened in the city at noon, and the supply ran out — but not for long. There was an explosion south-west of the city. People pasted strips of paper crosswise on their windows.


The unrest spread from the centre of the city, the building of the Supreme Council of Engineers.


People spoke about the impending fall of Tuscoob's power, and the approaching changes.


"The lights will go off tonight."


The excitement was fanned by rumours.


"They'll shut off the polar stations."


"The magnetic field will disappear."






104


"They're holding suspects in the cellars of the Supreme Council building."


The rumours had a different effect in the city outskirts, the factories, the workers' settlements and public stores. The people there seemed to know more about what was going on. With a mixed feeling of malicious pleasure and worry they said that the huge Eleventh Reservoir had been blown up by the subterranean workers, that government agents were searching for illicit caches of arms, and that Tuseoob was concentrating his troops in Soatsera.


By noon all work had stopped. Large crowds gathered in the streets waiting for things to happen. They cast wary glances at the conspicuous carelessly-dressed young Martians who popped up from nowhere and hung around with their hands in their pockets.


Early in the afternoon government boats circled over the city and a shower of white leaflets floated down to the streets.


The government called on the people to disregard the malefic rumours spread by their enemies, and added that its hold on the country and resolution to carry on had never been stronger.


The unrest subsided somewhat, but soon new rumours spread, one more terrifying than the other. One thing was known for certain. There was to be a head-on clash that evening in the Supreme Council between Tuscoob and Engineer Gar, the leader of Soatsera's workers.


After dusk, large crowds filled the vast square before the Supreme Council building. Soldiers guarded its stairs, entrances and roof. The cold wind had brought a fog, and the street lamps rocked in its moist clouds, diffusing a bleak red glimmer. The sombre walls of the building towered upwards into the darkness. All its windows were alight.






105


Seated under ponderous vaults on the benches of the amphitheatre in the round hall were the members of the Supreme Council. Their faces were alert and guarded. On a screen mounted high up on the wall they saw scenes snatched out of the teeming city— the interior of factories, street crossings with figures running to and fro in the fog, the contours of the reservoirs, the electro-magnetic towers, and the desolate rows of heavily-guarded storehouses. One by one, the screen contacted all the control mirrors in the city. The last to appear was the square outside the Supreme Council building— an ocean of heads shrouded in clouds of fog and the diffused light of the lanterns. The hall filled with the ominous rumbling noise of the crowd.


A shrill whistle called the council to order. The screen faded. Tuscoob stepped on the platform draped in black and gold brocade. He was pale, calm and resolute.


"There are disturbances in the city," he said. "They are aroused by the rumour that I shall be opposed today. This rumour was enough to shake the state. In my opinion this state of affairs is both cankerous and ominous. We must nip in the bud the reasons for all this excitement. I know that some of you will relay my words throughout the city tonight. I speak openly. The city is in the grip of anarchy. My agents say there are not enough muscles in the country to oppose it. We are approaching the end of the world."


The amphitheatre buzzed its protest. Tuscoob smiled scornfully.


'"Anarchy, the force which is destroying the world order, stems from the city. Spiritual calm, the natural will to live, and man's powers of emotion are frittered away in the city on questionable entertainments and vain pleasures. The fumes of khavra are the soul of the city. Bright streets, noise, luxurious golden boats are the envy of those who see them from below. Women who bare their backs and bellies and wear tantalizing perfume; gaudy lights flashing across the fronts of brothels; boat-restaurants sailing above the streets—that's what the city






106


is! Peace of mind goes up in smoke. The dissipated have just one wish—a thirst—a thirst for intoxication. But blood is the only thing that can intoxicate them."


Tuscoob jabbed the air before him with his finger. The men in the hall stirred again warily. He continued:


"The city is paving the way for the anarchist personality, whose sole aim and purpose in life will be destruction. People think anarchy is freedom. They are wrong. Anarchy thirsts for anarchy alone. It is the duty of the state to fight the disturbers of order—that is the law! We must oppose anarchy with our will for order. We must rally the sound elements of the country and send them out against anarchy with a minimum loss. We shall declare war on anarchy. The security measures taken so far are of a temporary nature, but the hour will come when the police reveals its most vulnerable spot. As we double the number of our police agents, the anarchists multiply fourfold. We must be the first to attack, and resort to a harsh but imperative measure: We must demolish the city."


Half the men in the amphitheatre howled and jumped to their feet. Their eyes burned. Their faces were pale. Tuscoob restored order with a single glance.


"The city will be destroyed—it is inevitable, one way or another. And it is best that we do it ourselves. I shall subsequently propose a plan of resettling the sound section of the city population in the countryside. We must use the rich land beyond the Liziazira Mountains, deserted since the civil war. Much will have to be done. But the cause is noble. We shall not manage to save civilization by destroying the city. We shall not even thereby postpone its end. But we shall help the Martian world to die with dignity and in peace."


"What does he say?" shouted the frightened men shrilly.


"Why must we die?"


"He's insane!"


"Down with Tuscoob!"


Tuscoob again restored order in the amphitheatre with a twitch of his brow.






107


"The history of Mars is drawing to a close. Life is waning on our planet. You know the birth and death rates. In a few more centuries the last of the Martians will watch the sun set for the last time. We are powerless to arrest the process of extinction. We must be wise and take firm action to grace the world's last days with luxury and joy. Our initial task is to destroy the city. It has done its duty to civilization. Now it is corrupting civilization and must perish."


Gor, the young broad-visaged young Martian Gusev had seen on the screen, rose from his place in the centre of the amphitheatre.


He had a low, rasping voice. His finger pointed at Tuscoob.


"He lies! He wants to destroy the city to keep his power. He condemns us to death to retain power. Pie knows that the only way he can retain power is to destroy millions of people. He knows how much he is hated by those who do not fly in golden boats, who live and die in the subterranean factory cities, who roam the dusty passages on holidays, yawning from despair, and who seek oblivion frenziedly in the accursed khavra. Tuscoob has made our deathbed. Let him lie on it himself. We do not wish to die. We were born to live. We know that Mars is doomed to extinction. But there is salvation—it will come from the Earth, the people of the Earth—a sound, fresh race with hot blood. He fears them. Tuscoob, you have hidden two men from the Earth in your home. You are afraid of them, the Sons of the Sky. You are strong only among the weak and khavra-doped. When strong hot-blooded men come, you will become a mere shadow—a nightmare. You will vanish like a phantom. That is what you fear most. Your theory of anarchy is a deliberate invention. You concocted your shocking plan for destroying the city on the spur of the moment. You thirst for blood yourself. You want to divert general attention so that you can do away with the two daring men who have come to save us. I know that you have issued an order to...."


Gor stopped short. His face turned purple from exertion. Tuscoob fixed him with his frowning eyes.






108


"I shan't stop—you can't make me!" Gor screamed. "I know —you practise ancient sorcery— But I'm not scared of your eyes."


With an effort he wiped the sweat from his brow with his large palm. He took a deep breath, and staggered. The amphitheatre watched with bated breath as he dropped into his seat. His head fell on his arms. They heard him gnashing his teeth.


Tuscoob lifted his eyebrows and went on unperturbed:


"You say, depend on the immigrants from the Earth? Too late for that. Infuse new blood into our veins? Too late—too late and too cruel. We shall only prolong the agony of our planet. We shall only add to our suffering, for we shall inevitably become the slaves of our conquerors. Instead of meeting our end with dignity, we shall again enter the weary cycle of centuries. What for? Why should we, a frail and wise race, work for the conquerors? So that the life-hungry savages chase us out of our palaces and gardens, make us build new reservoirs, and dig for ore? So that the Martian plains resound again to battle-cries and our cities again breed perverts and madmen? No. We must die peacefully in our dwellings. Let Taltsetl shed its red rays from afar. We shall not admit foreigners. We shall build new stations at the poles and surround our planet with impenetrable armour. We shall destroy Soatsera—the nest of anarchy and delirious dreams. It was here, in Soatsera, that the criminal plan to contact the Earth was born. We shall run our ploughs across the squares. We shall leave nothing standing but the institutions we need to sustain life. And we shall make criminals, drunkards, madmen and day-dreamers work in them. We shall shackle them. They shall be offered the gift of life, for which they crave. Those who obey us shall get country holdings, means of livelihood, and comfort. Twenty millenniums of hard labour have given us the right to live in leisure, quiet and meditation. The end of civilization will be crowned by the Golden Age. We shall proclaim public holidays and organize wonderful






109


entertainments. Perhaps we shall thus prolong our term for a few more centuries, since we shall live in peace."


The amphitheatre listened in silence, spellbound. Tuscoob's face had come out in spots. He closed his eyes as though to see into the future.


The low rumble of the thousands outside reached the vaulted hall. Gor rose. His face was contorted. He tore off his cap and hurled it aside. Holding his arms before him, he rushed down the aisle towards Tuscoob, seized him by the neck and pushed him off the brocaded platform. Then he turned his face to the amphitheatre, spread his hands out and shouted in a choking voice:


"Very well! If you want death, let it be death—but for you! We'll go on . . . ."


The men on the benches jumped to their feet noisily. A few of them rushed to the prostrate Tuscoob.


Gor leapt to the door. He pushed aside the guard with his elbow. The hem of his black robe flashed in the door leading to the square. His voice resounded in the distance, echoed by the howling crowd.