Night gathers at the base of the torch.


Darkness seeps into the traveler’s chest,


And raises there a flag of fear and shame.








“Emergency Sirocco from Ai System Planet 3-3-3,” a neutral voice by Siddhārtha’s ear whispered. “Leave the spaceway immediately. Emergency Sirocco from Ai System Planet 3-3-3. Leave the spaceway immediately. Too many unknown quantities. Repeat, there are too many unknown quantities.”


Complex symbols flashed on the metallic panel before him, signaling some sort of emergency. A large part of his head still felt frozen, hard as a wall of ice, but his consciousness was rapidly recovering.


“Let’s get out of here.”


The three travelers slipped out from between the multifaceted electrodes. They were standing by a long tube that stretched off into infinity. A short distance to one side was another tube—one of the spaceways the voice was talking about, Siddhārtha presumed.


He looked around at the space around them. “What a long narrow room,” he began, then he shook his head. “No, this is a very large room. As large as a spacecraft’s storage hold.”


The wall running beside the spaceway was little more than a partition. Above it, there was a considerable amount of empty space between the top of the partition and the ceiling high overhead, from which white light fell, the color of the noonday sun.


Siddhārtha extended his tri-D sensor cell antenna as far as it would go, observing what lay beyond the partition.


“Well, there are thousands of these spaceways here. I can see several people moving in the distance.”


“Travelers from the Ai System, please report to survey department nine in sector four. Travelers from the Ai System, please report to survey department nine in sector four. There are too many unknown quantities. Repeat, there are too many unknown quantities.”


Asura’s eyes darted around.


“Asura,” Siddhārtha said, “I daresay that announcement is meant for us.”


“I would imagine so. This business about ‘too many unknown quantities’ sounds extremely dangerous.”


“Ai System Planet 3-3-3 likely indicates the third planet from the sun. But what is an ‘emergency sirocco’?”


Asura frowned. “Perhaps these are the closest words for whatever it is they mean. Or perhaps the pronunciation is merely similar.”


Siddhārtha shook his head. It seemed that the autotranslator in his outer ears was terribly confused. It was having difficulty transposing whatever language they were hearing into standard solar speech. The language was so unusual that he lacked samples of it in the neural memory webs inside his supplementary processors. The two exchanged glances again.


“Let’s get out of here.”


There was a small door on the side of the hall. No one was in sight.


The soft yellow light outside hit the ground at a slanting angle, reminding Siddhārtha of the light in the evening when a rainstorm is close.


“What is this place?”


The surface of the space into which they had emerged was covered with needlelike plants standing about thirty centimeters high and deep indigo in color that painted the faces of the three travelers with reflected light.


On the other side of the open space stood a line of windowless, boxlike buildings. Giant spires, about five hundred meters tall and covered with strange, winding patterns rose from the rooftops.


“Let’s cross and go inside one of those.”


The needlelike plants were remarkably brittle. Merely stepping through them caused them to snap, and something like crystalline powder fell from where they broke. They reached the far buildings and looked back to see that the building they had left was massive, at least a kilometer to each side.


“What is this place?” Siddhārtha muttered again to no one in particular.


“A good question,” Asura said. Even she had no idea where they were.


“Do you think Jesus of Nazareth is here somewhere?”


Sunlight spilled from around the edges of the large building they had left, casting long shadows across the bristling tops of the indigo plants. Siddhārtha looked between two of the closer buildings, spying a wide flat surface beyond that sparkled with a silvery light.


“Is that an ocean?”


The three hurried between the buildings up to the lip of what appeared to be a vast crater. Down the slope from where they stood stretched a smooth, silvery plain apparently made of some hard material that was neither metal nor glass.


“What is it?”


“No natural formation, though I see no seams, nor any openings for ventilation. Perhaps something spilled out of the ground here and hardened?”


“Like magma?”


The three looked around again. Behind them, their view was cut short by the row of buildings.


To the front, the curious flat surface stretched at least one hundred kilometers toward the base of a ring of towering mountains that cast a dark silhouette against the light yellow sky.


“It’s as though they took a valley one hundred kilometers across and put a lid on it. Perhaps to build a city below?”


“There are easier ways to fashion an underground city,” Siddhārtha said.


“Perhaps the city was here first, and they constructed the barrier over it.”


To defend against an attack. Siddhārtha and Asura understood the value of defense with painful clarity.


Orionae, however, stood saying nothing, his round head reflecting the yellowish light of the sun. He appeared to have no interest in the strange scenery.


“Let’s see if we can’t examine the inside,” Siddhārtha proposed. “Perhaps we will be able to figure out where we are.”


The edge of the silver plain was about fifty meters below them. Siddhārtha began to make his way slowly down the slope. The ground of the slope was firmer than expected, being comprised mostly of large rocky chunks.


“This looks igneous.”


Asura picked up one of the chunks and held it before her eyes. “Not igneous. These are granules of metamorphic rock created by applying intense amounts of heat to a sedimentary rock with a high calcium content.”


“What does that tell you, Asura?”


Asura narrowed her eyes, her thoughts ranging far off into the distance. After a while she shook her head. “Nothing yet. But I may remember something before long.”


The three stood on the silvery surface, the glacial hardness of it strange beneath their feet. It was as flat as a mirror, but upon closer inspection, there was a faint weblike pattern with crosshatching lines just beneath the top surface.


They advanced for a while until they could look back and see a small sun hanging low above the cluster of massive buildings that housed the spaceways. Its soft yellow light cast long shadows behind the three of them atop the featureless flat plain.


Suddenly, Orionae stood, a violent expression spasming across his usually blank face as he began to speak. “Yellow 17 in the New Galactic Age, the Planetary Development Committee on Astarta 50 received a directive . . .” His voice was jagged, sounding like a recording played backward, and the words struck the other two like hot irons upon their chest.


“Orionae! Is this Astarta 50?”


Orionae craned his head to look again at the pale yellow sun, then returned his gaze to the silvery expanse around them. “Yes. This is Astarta. I would presume that now we are in the age of the Yellow Sun—an age that is near its end. Next we will enter the age of the Blue Sun, which will last for many hundreds of years. This time of transition is called the New Galactic Age.”


Orionae’s already small body seemed to shrink further as he began to walk around on the hard surface.


“Which means that the Planetary Development Committee is somewhere here on this planet.”


“And so is Shi.”


Orionae looked up. “The Ai System is none other than our solar system. Which would make the third planet Earth,” he said, his words a stream of rote information. “Though I cannot tell you exactly what the helio-ses-beta development that took place on our planet entailed, I can assure you that it was a very elaborate process that brought life from simple single-celled organisms all the way to humanity.”


Siddhārtha and Asura stared unblinking at the diminutive cyborg.


“A helio-ses-beta development uses a great deal of energy. Because of this, it cannot be attempted very often—even within our solar system, it was only performed on Earth.”


“Interesting,” Siddhārtha said. “There are those who once postulated that life developed on Earth alone because only Earth was capable of supporting it—but perhaps it had nothing to do with the conditions on the planet at all.”


“Exactly what kind of organization is the Planetary Development Committee?” Asura asked.


“And what is Shi?” Siddhārtha added.


Orionae pointed down toward the surface beneath his feet in silence.


“All our answers lie below, is that it? Then let us go.”


The three widened their search across the plain, but they could find nothing resembling an entrance.


“Asura,” Siddhārtha called out, touching his antenna to the surface at his feet. “Let us try to open a hole in this strange material.”


“I can judge the ionization potential; I’ll just run a high current through the material and see what happens.” Asura directed the energy from her miniaturized reactor pile to the sapphire laser in her finger. That energy was condensed into a gravitationally directed beam with a diameter of a hundredth of a millimeter, which she pointed toward a spot on the ground several meters away. A section of the hard silvery surface roughly one centimeter in diameter where the beam hit transformed to a faded gray, then the dirty brown of singed paper.


“There.”


She stopped the laser, and the discolored section returned to its former silvery hue.


Siddhārtha spoke. “The ionization potential is roughly 207,000 volts. S.H.00913. When reactance is zero, 4.462. Asura, the surface is neither metal nor silicon. This is gravitationally sealed space.”


“Which reflects light, making it look opaque.”


Which meant that the diamond-hard surface supporting them, the material that formed the buildings and the spaceways, and everything else in this place were not physical objects at all, but barriers of gravitational energy.


“But why create such a barrier?” Siddhārtha wondered. “Was some sort of assault launched upon this planet? I’d like to know.”


“Siddhārtha, let us open a way through here.” Asura steadied her aim carefully, firing her laser for about thirty seconds to open a fifty-centimeter-diameter hole in the hard silvery surface.


The three took turns looking down through the hole. An icy cold wind erupted up from the darkness within. There was no sound.


They exchanged glances. The darkness inside spoke only of destruction and death. Asura produced a bundle of wire from somewhere among the folds of her clothes. Sitting down at the edge of the hole, she carefully wove three rough mesh nets, large enough to hold a man. She handed one to Siddhārtha and one to Orionae. Then, gripping the third, she leaned out over the hole and was sucked into the darkness, electricity playing across the metallic webbing beneath her.


Siddhārtha jumped in after her, his head reflexively shrinking back at the icy cold, as he sent a large current through his hastily constructed ionocraft. Below him was a bottomless sea of darkness. He saw Asura’s ionocraft moving through it, trailing a long tail of emerald light. Siddhārtha summoned all his strength to follow her. Rather a long while after, Orionae too came down through the hole. In a group, the three of them rapidly descended. After a long while in darkness, they saw the city below them.






In the center of a plaza, three obelisks stood pointing toward the dark night sky. The obelisks were made of a material that glimmered like gemstone beneath the light of countless spotlights. Several dozen ropes extended from the obelisks out through the crowd toward the edges of the circular plaza, making the whole thing look like a giant wheel, with the obelisks for an axle and the ropes for spokes. The crowd shouted in unison as they pulled on the ropes. With each coordinated pull, the three obelisks wobbled. Flares went up, one after the other, creating tiny stars of light above the surging throng. From somewhere rumbled the sound of explosions.


Suddenly, a swarm of rotodynes descended from the sky onto the tops of the tall buildings around the plaza, from where they unleashed aqua laser rays upon the crowd below. Flames rose up in every direction—people swarmed away from one blaze only to be engulfed by another. Their shouts and cries gradually became one unified scream, like the roaring of the sea. The obelisks toppled, then fell—slowly at first, then quickly, until they lay flat on the ground, pointing toward one edge of the plaza. The impact when the obelisks struck the ground sent up great plumes of dust, and one of the buildings standing at the edge of the plaza collapsed from the power of the shock waves.


The rotodynes began tossing small explosives down into the plaza. The charges were small, yet they exploded with such ferocity that even from a distance they echoed in Siddhārtha’s gut. Flares of light shot into the sky from where the explosives landed, sending up a spray of severed hands and feet. The remaining crowd flowed into a single line like a river and made for the far side of the plaza.


Another explosion rang out, not loud enough to drown out the cries and screams of terror.


The three travelers pressed themselves against the cavity high up on the wall of one of the towering buildings, looking down at the chaos far below them.


“This is more than just a demonstration. This is rebellion,” Siddhārtha observed.


“Look,” Asura pointed out across the city. “Another fire over there.”


An eerie crimson light soaked the sky behind a tall cluster of buildings. More explosions echoed from that direction, accompanied by distant columns of flame.


“We must find the Planetary Development Committee,” Orionae said, his eyes filled with the sort of abject terror that comes from deep experience. “This city will soon cease to function.”


The three went in through an open window in the side of the building and found themselves in a wide corridor. Several rooms lined the sides, but the walls had been stripped and the doors blown off their hinges into the rooms. All had been abandoned for a very long time. They found the doors that had once opened to a lift, long since blown in, the metal remnants hanging like scraps of torn paper.


“Guess we’ll take the stairs,” Siddhārtha said dryly.


The paneling of the stairs and parts of the walls had been stripped, exposing the skeletal framework beneath and making the footing treacherous. They descended cautiously. Halfway down the building, they found more chaos—a wide corridor filled to bursting with people chanting “Death to the leader! Kill the leader!” As one, the crowd lifted their arms and opened their mouths wide, shouting for blood.


“You!” Siddhārtha shouted, grabbing the shoulder of a man passing by them. “Where is this leader of whom you speak?”


The man turned eyes like lenses toward Siddhārtha.


“Where is your leader, the one who governs you?”


The man paused, considering the meaning of the words. “Our leader, yes, our leader . . .” he mumbled.


“Yes, your leader, where is he?”


The man grabbed Siddhārtha’s wrist. His grip was incredibly strong.


“What are you doing?”


“I will take you to him. I will take you to our leader,” the man said.


“I only require you to tell—” but before Siddhārtha had finished speaking, the man broke into a run.


“Wait, hold up! Let go of me!”


The man dragged Siddhārtha along as though he weighed no more than a burlap sack. Though it should have been an easy thing for Siddhārtha to wrest his arm free, the man moved with superhuman speed, not giving Siddhārtha time to think. The crowd turned at the sound of the shouting, dark suspicion in their eyes. Abruptly, those around them stopped moving and surrounded Siddhārtha and the man. With eyes devoid of emotion they reached out to grab him. He felt a grip like iron close around the antenna on his shoulder, and left with no other recourse, Siddhārtha diverted power to his discharge panels and generated a fireball. A ball of flame swelled to an enormous size, rolling through the crowd around him, the smell of ions mingling with the stench of scorched flesh. One of the walls burst into flames. The rage of the crowd quickly transformed into terror. Siddhārtha took advantage of the confusion to slip from the main corridor into a side passageway, leaving both the crowd and his companions behind.


“You have come from another star, haven’t you,” said a voice.


He whirled around and saw a man standing in a brown and yellow jumpsuit. The man’s porcelain-smooth forehead gave off a cool gleam in the glow from the luminescent walls.


“Another star? I suppose so, yes.”


“You wish to meet the leader?”


“That was my intention in coming here, but I’m afraid I got caught up in the crowd—”


“Come with me,” the man said, turning and walking away.


Hoping that Asura and Orionae would be able to determine his location, Siddhārtha followed after the man.


The man passed from corridor to corridor, increasing the distance between them and the confusion back in the hallway. From windows opening in the corridor wall, Siddhārtha occasionally caught glimpses of red blazes in the city.


They crossed through a high overpass and entered a grand building that was surely the seat of the government.


“The leader’s chambers are at the end of this hallway.” The man stood by one wall, lifting a hand to indicate the direction.


Siddhārtha walked on alone, acutely aware that so long as Jesus of Nazareth was at large, he could be walking into a trap.


A door at the end of the hallway opened automatically at Siddhārtha’s approach.


A single tall man was standing in the middle of the large room beyond, wearing yellow-brown robes that cast a long shadow in the dim illumination.


“You are the leader here?” Siddhārtha called out from the door.


“I am. And you are a traveler from another star. You have come here to meet me,” the leader replied in a low voice that nonetheless was clearly audible in the spacious chamber.


“My name is Siddhārtha. I came from Earth, in the Sol System,” Siddhārtha said, sensing a sudden increase in the leader’s interest.


“The Sol System?”


“Is this surprising to you?”


“No, it is just that, as you can see, we are in the middle of a great rebellion here, and it is very dangerous for travelers from abroad. You should remain here within the government complex for your own safety.”


Siddhārtha nodded noncommittally and walked closer.


Observed from less than two meters away, the leader’s cheeks were shiny, with the same porcelain smoothness he had seen in the face of the man who led him here. He had a smooth head and silent eyes with a cruel gleam to them.


“If I may ask, what is the cause of your rebellion?”


The leader nodded. “Our citizens are of two minds, and these two schools of thought have developed into armed conflict. That is to say, an armed conflict though one side has yet to even show itself.”


“I believe I heard them shouting they were going to kill the leader, which I assume to be you.”


The man averted his eyes, anguish rising in the lines on his forehead.


“Unfortunately, I cannot acquiesce to the rebels’ demands. That is why they protest.”


Siddhārtha tried piecing together all he had seen in his mind. Still, he was unable to reach anything like a satisfying conclusion.


“Soon, the rebels will come here,” Siddhārtha said. If it came to it, he and his companions could protect this leader while developing a strategy.


“No, do not worry. The only way into these offices is by the suspended corridor you came through, and it is already sealed by a barrier. Nothing may pass through.”


“Why do you not try to appease the two factions? Is that not a leader’s role?” Siddhārtha asked, an edge to his words.


“Already I have tried reconciliation dozens of times, not entirely without success. But it is a lost cause now. I’m tired. But enough of that. Tell me, why have you come here?”


Siddhārtha paused, unsure of what to say. In truth, he had no real purpose in coming here. He had jumped onto the spaceway in pursuit of Jesus of Nazareth. Yet he still didn’t know why he even had to fight Jesus. The only thing he knew were those words: “Yellow 17 in the New Galactic Age, the Planetary Development Committee on Astarta 50 received a directive . . .” and a vague sense that this curious, shielded city was somehow connected to the Kingdom of Atlantis where Orionae claimed to hail from, and to the barren flats and ruined city that Siddhārtha had found upon emerging from the sea. There was an overall trend toward destruction and ruin in all that he had seen, and lately Siddhārtha had begun to think that some power had placed him here for the sole purpose of investigating that trend and possibly divining its cause and origin.


“I’d like to meet with the other faction of your citizens,” Siddhārtha announced, dodging the leader’s question.


The leader considered this for a moment, then waved his hand off toward his left in a silent gesture. The entrance door slid open and a man stepped inside. This man, too, was wearing a jumpsuit with bands of yellow and brown.


“Take this man to the A-Class Citizens’ compartments,” the leader instructed the new arrival.


“A-Class Citizens?” Siddhārtha echoed out loud, lifting an eyebrow.


“At once,” said the man behind him, and he led Siddhārtha out of the leader’s chamber.


“So your citizens are divided into two classes in this place?” If that were the case, a rebellion made a certain kind of sense, he thought to himself.


Outside of the leader’s room, the corridor began a gentle downward slope, suggesting that wheeled vehicles had been used both inside and outside the building when it was first constructed, making the age of the building at least two thousand years old, judging by the level of the technology he saw.


Together with his guide, Siddhārtha went farther into the depths of the government complex, following the gradually sloping corridor downward. From the length of the descent and the lack of windows, he guessed that they were probably underground by now. At last they came to a giant door at the end of the corridor. Siddhārtha’s guide spoke several times into an intercom on the wall before a red light lit above them and the door slid upward into the ceiling.


The man motioned for Siddhārtha to go through, explaining that he was unable to accompany him any farther.


Steeling himself against the chill that ran through his heart, cold as a polar wind, Siddhārtha strode through the doorway. He glanced up at the bottom of the door as he walked beneath it, noticing that sandwiched among its many layers was a composite silicon layer for filtering radiation. The heavy door shut behind him.






The corridor continued on straight for a very long time. The luminium coating the ceiling and both walls provided dim light, though it had peeled off in places, and a thin layer of dust upon the floor rose in small clouds around Siddhārtha’s feet as he walked. The dust was finer and lighter than volcanic ash, and the clouds that rose from it thinner than a northern sea fog.


“No one has passed this way for over a thousand years,” Siddhārtha muttered to himself. He approached one of the doors along the side of the corridor and pressed gently on it. It opened without a sound. What luminium remained on the walls of the room beyond lit the space with a lonely light. A storage shelf built into one wall was half open, and a mountain of dust spilled out of it, covering whatever contents it had once held. Along the far wall, he saw three chairs fashioned of metal tubing, the rust making the metal look like fossilized bone. A single pilot lamp on the back wall cast a small circle of orange light that made the abandoned room seem unreal, like a place from a dream.


Siddhārtha turned and was about to leave when he sensed a presence behind him. He looked around to see a large gray creature emerging from one of the walls. It had a large head, sturdy limbs, and thick scales like tree bark covering a cylindrical torso. Siddhārtha retreated to the entrance as the creature’s hind legs emerged, followed by a long serpentine tail. The end of the tail was pointed, and it lashed violently against the walls and the floor. Moving as quickly as he could, Siddh ārtha slid out into the corridor and shut the door behind him. A moment before the door slid completely closed, he spotted another of the strange creatures emerging from one of the walls.


Siddhārtha leaned against the door, catching his breath. Then, stepping quietly, he walked farther down the corridor and pressed on the next door. The room behind this one was exactly the same construction as the previous room, and likewise abandoned. Instead of chairs, this room had a single bed that seemed to have been made of some kind of reinforced glass. It was remarkably transparent once he blew the dust off of it. Siddhārtha sat down on the bed, suddenly feeling very weary. Emotions rose inside him, tugging at the corners of his memory, binding together snippets of something that had been familiar to him once, yet now felt very distant. He could feel his subconscious trying to piece together the self he had been from the parts of the self he was now. Threads of memory slowly wound together in his mind, creating a picture. But when he tried to look at it, opening his mind’s eye wide, he felt it recede into the distance, his memories like strangers standing on the opposite shore of a wide river. He could see them with his eyes, but never know or touch them.


He looked up to see a vast blue sea stretching out before him. The sun cast vibrant rays across the water. As he watched, amazed, the surface of the sea split in two, and a single enormous fish swam out of the depths. In the blink of an eye, the fish transformed into two spacecraft, their photonic engines displacing the water beneath into the shape of an inverted umbrella.


Siddhārtha assumed, without explicitly thinking it, that this was some kind of dream, or perhaps a phantasm. He tried to shake it out of his head when he realized that what he was seeing was no phantasm at all, but an actual scene existing in reality. With a start, he leapt back out into the corridor in a single bound, his inertia causing him to trip and roll across the floor in an ungainly ball. He stood, but found he lacked the courage to look back into the room behind him. He ran.


The corridor seemed as endless as it was empty. Siddhārtha could sense no people anywhere along its length, nor did he detect any presence in any of the rooms to either side. Only one of the rooms he found with its door half open. He peeked in to see strange forms rising underneath the dim illumination, rising and falling in the center of the room, spewing flame and smoke.


“What is this place?” Siddhārtha wondered out loud. “Are these the A-Class Citizens?”


He reflected back on what he had seen thus far in the rooms along the corridor—scaled monsters, creatures of fire and smoke, photonic spacecraft—and did not think that any of these could be what one called “citizens.”


He was contemplating returning and speaking to the Leader once again, when at last he came to the place where the corridor ended in a wide, hard panel made of a light green metallic substance. Glowing letters across the panel read A-CLASS CITIZEN AREA.


The panel slid into one wall at the slightest touch, revealing darkness ahead through which long rows of lamps along the floor and ceiling lit and faded, making it look as though the lights were jumping up and down in time to an unheard rhythm.


Siddhārtha lit the light projector fastened to the end of the leather cord wrapped around his waist. It cast an intense white circle of light, revealing an enormous complex structure ahead of him. The structure looked like some kind of shelving system for storing files or physical media, save for the vast number of pipes that ran horizontally and vertically in front of the metal panels providing access to each compartment in the system. Most of the pipes seemed to contain wiring of one kind or another, while others were clearly designed to carry liquids as they were fitted with automatic adjustment knobs at regular intervals. High above, a hoisting mechanism like a giant, flattened crab slid quietly along a silvery rail near the ceiling.


“Are you the otherworlder who seeks an audience with an A-Class Citizen?” came a strangely undulating voice from the direction of the crab.


“Yes. I would know the truth behind the rebellion outside these walls.”


“Very well,” the voice continued after several seconds of silence. “I will bring one out to you. You may ask it any questions you like.”


Two arms extended from the sides of the crab. One of them shot downward, pausing in front of one of the many small panels where it split into four manipulators that deftly opened the container. From inside, one of the manipulators withdrew a thin, silvery dish. Another arm picked a single square tab of metal off of the dish, which it brought back up to the crab and slid into a slot in its side.


Some sort of identification card? Siddhārtha mused, wondering at the high level of security here.


He looked up at the metal crab hanging high over his head to see a green light flicker on just as a bubble emerged from the crab’s underbelly and ran along one of the vertical pipes, descending toward Siddhārtha like a translucent gondola.


A single human shape was crouched inside the gondola. Siddhārtha narrowed his eyes to scrutinize the crab and found it far too compact and flat for a person to fit inside. The gondola landed on the floor directly in front of Siddhārtha. Its canopy opened to either side, and the man inside stood and stepped out. For clothing he wore a simple piece of cloth, hardly more than a bed sheet, and silvery circlets on his wrists. His eyes seemed strangely far apart and filled with suspicion as they looked at Siddhārtha. His thin lips parted halfway, exhaling a surprisingly warm breath.


Siddhārtha observed the man closely. Though he stood only a meter tall, the man’s eyes, nose, and ears were fully formed. Those expressionless features, like something molded out of clay, his round head, and slender arms were elegant in their shape.


“Are you an A-Class Citizen?”


The man looked up at Siddhārtha, his face a mask, leaving Siddhārtha with the nagging feeling that there was something lacking in the man’s expression.


Something is very amiss here, Siddhārtha thought, trying in vain to discern exactly what it was about the man standing in front of him that bothered him so much. “Tell me,” he said at last, “what is different between you and those who are in revolt in the streets outside?”


The man stood, listening intently to Siddhārtha’s words before he spoke. “They are B-Class,” he spat. “Robots, nothing more.”


“Roh-bots?” Siddhārtha echoed. The word was unfamiliar to him.


“Yes,” the man replied impatiently, “that’s how they are different from us. They’re robots.” He seemed to have already grown disinterested in the topic of conversation.


“And what are robots?”


The man looked around uneasily and said nothing. The light Siddhārtha’s projector cast on the man’s expressionless face contrasted starkly with the gloom of the stacked compartments behind him.


“What are robots?” Siddhārtha asked again, feeling that he had heard this word before, but a very long time ago. He tried to force himself to recall its meaning, when he felt part of his mind grow suddenly tense. There was something in that word that he found desperately tragic, a tragedy that seemed out of place here in this quiet, cool underground world. Seeds of memory drifted up from the outer darkness that was his distant past, striking the surface of his mind where they bloomed into dark premonitions. He tried to read the message they contained, yet frustratingly found that his memories remained incomplete. It would take a considerable amount of time before they were ready for him to access.


“I ask again, what are robots?”


The man turned suddenly to look at Siddhārtha, a look of blatant surprise on his face. “Who are you?” he asked, wide eyes taking in his visitor from the top of his head down to the tips of his toes. It seemed that Siddhārtha’s presence had finally become real in the man’s mind.


“Before I tell you this,” Siddhārtha said, speaking slowly while keeping eye contact, “you must answer my one question.”


“Who are you and where did you come from?” the man asked again as Siddhārtha asked, “Why do the B-Class Citizens rebel?”


The two questions crossed in midair, like salvos from two ships. The two stood, glaring at each other.


“Why do they rebel?” Siddhārtha asked again before the man could say anything more.


“There is a rebellion?” the man asked, his face softening once more.


“Yes. One that threatens to destroy the city.”


“I know nothing of this.”


“How could you not know? Do you not live here?”


The man swayed slowly back and forth, showing no interest whatsoever in Siddhārtha’s words.


Siddhārtha frowned. “Do you even understand me?”


“Where is this place?” the man suddenly asked.


“What do you mean? This is your city.”


The man laughed out loud, a sound like a discordant harmony in the key of A. “No,” he said, “this is not our city.”


Siddhārtha looked around, agog. “But—”


“Listen,” the man said. “I know not how this place appears to your eyes, but I know that it is empty. Not a single one of those people outside may enter this place. Not a one.”


“The people outside?”


“You call them B-Class Citizens, but no one has called them that for centuries. Their very existence is immaterial to us now.”


“And you are no longer called A-Class Citizens, I suppose?”


“Those words are meaningless,” the man said simply.


Siddhārtha pondered the situation, trying to make something out of the confusion and disorder. “Then perhaps you can tell me something else,” he said after a pause. “What is the name of this place?”


“You are in ZEN-ZEN.”


“Zen . . . zen?”


“No, ZEN-ZEN,” the man repeated, accenting both words equally.


Despite the lacunae in his memory, Siddhārtha was fairly sure there was no city with such a name in the solar system he knew. Not just in the solar system—in any of the twenty-four inhabited star systems in the Milky Way. At any rate, certainly not in any of the thirteen systems on the side of the galaxy closest to his own. He wondered about the other eleven, his eyes going blank as he reached back into the depths of his memory, finding nothing.


Suddenly, a great fear washed over the man’s face, and he clung to Siddhārtha’s arm.


“What’s wrong?” Siddhārtha said, almost shouting.


The man’s ears perked up, listening for a far-off sound.


“What is it? Can you hear something?”


Siddhārtha trained his ears on the darkness beyond the light of his projector, but he heard nothing. All was unmoving light and shadow, a stillness more quiet than death.


“Did you see God?” the man asked, his grip on Siddhārtha’s arm tightening.


Siddhārtha reflexively pulled away, feeling only the slightest amount of resistance. It was as though the man were practically weightless.


“I have seen no god,” Siddhārtha replied, wondering what sort of deity would be worshipped by the strange people of this strange city, and at the same time feeling a strong desire to meet one. “Although,” he continued, “I was under the impression that it was a god who led me to your world.”


The man blinked as though waking from a dream. “God brought you here?”


Siddhārtha looked up at the countless small lockers covering the vast wall while the man continued talking, his tone pious. “When the signs of our world’s demise became clear, we abandoned the city. Our God protected us, preventing all fear and destruction from reaching this sanctum. Here, we know eternal serenity.”


Siddhārtha gaped, finally understanding what it was he thought was missing from the man’s face. What he noticed wasn’t a lack, but the presence of a complete emptiness, the sort possessed only by those who have obtained absolute tranquility. Those who are connected to an existence greater than their own.


I must see this god of whom he speaks. Siddhārtha strode forward.


“The audience is over,” the voice from the ceiling announced abruptly. “The subject will return to his sleeping nest.”


Siddhārtha had forgotten about the crab. The silvery hoist was stopped on the rail above him. It must have been listening to them the whole time.


The crab moved its multi-jointed limbs, forming them into four individual small diamonds that whirled above the man’s head. What remaining expression lingered on his face disappeared. His widely separated eyes completely lost their focus and his already small ears lost their lobes, leaving the sides of his head perfectly smooth as a veil of weariness wrapped around his body like a thin cloud. The man turned his back to Siddhārtha, then moving like a shadow, he lay down in the gondola in which he had arrived.


“What is a sleeping nest?” Siddhārtha shouted.


The gondola glided soundlessly up a vertical lift rail until it was drawn back inside the hoist.


“The sleeping nest protects its occupant from all physical and chemical change, preserving and recording their biological characteristics in their original form, so that they may be reconstituted perfectly whenever the need arises.”


Siddhārtha quickly worked his supplementary processors, trying to chase down the connotations of the crab’s words. To his disappointment, he found no mistranslations nor any marked untranslatables in its statement. “What does that mean?”


One of the crab’s arms rotated in a large arc, extracting the single square piece of metal from the hatch in its side, then it swung its arm around again, replacing the card on the dish inside the compartment. The hatch closed. There was nothing organic about the crab’s movements. Everything was smooth, mechanical.


“You may leave,” the crab said from above.


“What is that card inside the locker?” Siddhārtha shouted out to the crab as it began to drift away along the rail. “Wait! That thing I just met here was not human!” His voice echoed hollowly off the high ceiling. Siddhārtha ran. “Answer me! Do any living people remain here at all?”


The crab continued to recede into the distance, moving faster though making no sound. Siddhārtha chased along beneath it until his way was blocked by another row of metal lockers extending as far as he could see.


“Answer me!”


The crab twinkled with a silvery light before it disappeared. There would be no more answers here. Siddhārtha stopped running. There was nothing left for him to do but extract his information in a more direct fashion. He ran up to the bottommost row of lockers and placed his hand on the metal door of one. It didn’t budge. Siddhārtha curled the panels on his shoulders, narrowing their discharge surface, and directed them toward the door. A brilliant blue light erupted, dissolving the door into a rain of silvery metal. The silicon fiber door beyond the outer door burned easily. The flames extinguished themselves in a moment, revealing an additional lead-colored metal barrier. Siddhārtha punched the paper-thin barrier with his fist, and it shattered into several pieces on the floor.


He reached in and plucked out the square metal card on the tray inside. The card was covered with indecipherable symbols. The back was scorched brown. Siddhārtha slid it into his pocket, when a high-pitched whine tore at his eardrums. He felt a wave of dizziness wash over him. Crouching low, he clapped his hands over his ears. All the blood in his body rushed upward into his head. Siddhārtha looked up, seeing the crab return, quick as lightning at the edge of his vision. Fighting to retain a hold on his fading consciousness, Siddhārtha prepared for the crab’s assault. But try as he might, all he could do was sway back and forth as wave after wave of dizziness swept over him.


His vision dimmed. A faint feeling of regret gnawed at his heart. I should never have trespassed here. What if this is Jesus of Nazareth’s trap?


The image of his enemy’s face, covered in hair and grime, flickered like distant lightning in a corner of Siddhārtha’s mind.






Several dozen beltways extended from the terminal in every direction like the spokes of a wheel. Some immediately began a gentle upward curve, while others disappeared sharply downward, while still others went upward in a slow spiral, like a tangle of ribbons that could never be undone. Each beltway carried an immense number of people and goods, looking like dark spots scattered across the glowing luminium of the belts. Another terminal hung in space several hundred meters up. All beyond that was lost in a thin mist. Far below, a third wheel-like terminal floated in the depths like an aquamarine star.


A single rotodyne descended through the foggy night air. As Siddhārtha watched, its wings morphed into different shapes to navigate traffic. The rotodyne left a trembling wake in the mist above it.


Immense walls rose all around this vast space, suffused with darkness. The walls were made of translucent glass, inside of which could be seen sparkling colors like the broken fragments of gemstones. There seemed to be many layers of glass, more than a thousand, through which cavities and passages housed the daily lives of all the people in the city. A thick outer wall, built to withstand all climate change and drastic weather, separated them completely from the world beyond. A nuclear reactor on the bottommost level of the city powered a vast electrical network. The citizens of this place had no need to work at manufacturing or production of any kind. They were—


What is this place?


Siddhārtha stood, blinking. The city vanished from before his eyes. He stood, and a powerful dizziness struck him. What he had seen was no vision or dream. The giant metropolis had been there, right before his eyes, a classic tower city capable of supporting a vast population and completely shielded from the outside world.


With dark eyes, Siddhārtha looked over the row of lockers in front of him.


“We abandoned our city . . .” Siddhārtha said, repeating the citizen’s words. Siddhārtha looked up and saw the crab hanging in space over his head. He tensed, readying himself for another psychic attack.


When nothing came, he waited awhile, then spoke. “There is something I want to ask you. Why did you have to abandon your city?”


Deep silence swallowed Siddhārtha’s words.


“Also, has a man calling himself Jesus of Nazareth come here?” There was no answer, but Siddhārtha continued on regardless. “Just now with my own eyes, I saw a massive city stretching into the sky. I believe that this is a virtual city, its citizens the memory cards found inside each of these lockers. You are keeping them there, protecting them from the world outside, watching over them—you are their god.”


“This is so,” said the crab from high above. “The great city you have just seen was revealed to you because you interfered with one of the circuits.” The city, the crab explained, was generated using perfect hypnosis that allowed people to walk through its streets, to live their lives in the company of others. Yet it was all a phantasm, taking place in the span of a few minutes during which time the person might still be sitting or lying on the floor.


“But the people in these lockers—only their biological patterns have been encoded. You might inject one into an artificial body as you have just done, but that does not make it human—it does not even make it alive!” Siddhārtha said, choking back rust-colored nausea.


“Are you any different?” the crab asked. “Can you say with absolute certainty that the planet upon which you were born, the objects in your life, and all of the events you have witnessed are not aspects of some grand phantasm?”


Siddhārtha shook his head. “I can make observations that are shared universally between people—”


“And what if all these people are in the same virtual world, experiencing a shared phantasm?”


“What?!”


“Physical phenomena are not an emergent property of reality. No technology or means of observation can prove that they are.”


“Strange to hear an agnostic argument from a god,” Siddhārtha said.


“To call something unknowable is to assume that anything can be known,” the crab replied.


Siddhārtha smiled. “What happens to the self when you’re on one of those cards?”


“What happens to the self when you are asleep?” the crab rejoined.


When you’re asleep, or when you’re dead . . . Siddhārtha shook his head. “Why did you abandon your city?”






It would’ve taken a bit of courage to call the line of silver compartments Siddhārtha could see in the light from his projector “rooms.” Each compartment sported a circular silvery hatch of an unknown alloy, and their contents were a mystery. The compartments lined both sides of a dark hallway that continued on for what seemed like an eternity in both directions. Electroluminescent material on the ceiling sagged and faded like old paper. He wondered how much time would have to pass for material like this to cease bearing its own weight. He guessed it would have to be counted not in thousands, but in tens of thousands of years.


He walked down the hallway, eventually coming to a place where it split in two, then again into three. No matter which way he turned, the same silvery hatches lined the walls on both sides.


It’s like a mass grave.


Siddhārtha considered the mindset of the people living here in the stagnant air and desiccated darkness, never showing their forms. To them, Siddhārtha must have been an unwanted interloper, a terrifying enemy from the outside. Yet he encountered no signs of resistance, nor any obvious security. Either the city was defenseless, or its architects were confident that no one would ever be able to remove those silvery hatches that doubtlessly held their citizens.


As he walked, he wondered how many levels there were in this place and how far it stretched in every direction. He had been walking now for what seemed like days, at first looking for information, but now looking for a way out.


It’s a trap!


He had suffered the same worry since the moment he set foot inside the “city.”


Siddhārtha walked up to one of the hatches, illuminating it with the beam of his projector. Set in the middle of its compartment, the hatch had a slight outward bulge, like a convex lens. Siddhārtha connected the output from his micro-reactor to the maser on his arm.


A brilliant red beam of light struck one of the hatches, continuing its assault for ten, twenty, then thirty seconds. The hatch glowed like a gemstone with reflected crimson light.


No good!


The light of the maser faded, and darkness massive as a mountain settled over Siddhārtha. The faint reddish glow of the hatch quickly faded. The citizens of this city were well protected in their castle. No wonder they required no alert system or defenses. Siddhārtha had been able to infiltrate all the way to this corridor, what should have been the heart of their fortress, only to find his way blocked—and no exit in sight.


Removing one of his discharge panels from his shoulder, he connected it to his high-frequency agitator and pressed it to one of the circular hatches. Faint, high-pitched vibrations began, softly at first, then increasing in strength. The silver hatch began to audibly whine as the frequency climbed. Siddhārtha lifted his maser again, directing a beam of light toward the center of the vibrations. The ghostlike report of a brittle fracture echoed down the hallway. He turned his maser off at the very instant that the hatch ruptured and fell to the ground.


Beyond, he found a translucent portal made of high-density crystalline silicon. He melted the hinges with his maser and gave it a push. The light metallic screen he found beyond was easily removed.


Inside he discovered a narrow space that was less like a room and more like the engine access bay of a small spacecraft. The room was filled with countless pipes and electrical lines large and small running this way and that, burying the walls and covering the ceiling. A cylindrical console protruded from the center of the floor. The console was connected to several dozen electrical filaments that stretched out to where an atmospheric adjustment unit was spinning its emergency self-cooling fan at full speed. It seemed that by opening a hole in the door, Siddhārtha had dealt a fatal blow to the ecology of the compartment.


A large, organic lump sat in the light from Siddhārtha’s projector, giving off a smell like warm, raw meat. Siddhārtha trained his projector on it, hunching over to get a better look. He could make out a round head on the lump, connected directly to swollen shoulders, and incongruously short arms and legs protruding from a thick torso. In the brilliant light, the thing’s exposed skin was light brown in color.


“Are you the occupant of this compartment?” Siddhārtha asked, leaning forward, not really expecting an answer. The organism was quivering irregularly, its breath growing thinner and quicker. Apparently, even the desperate countermeasures taken by its life support system were not enough to prevent the compartment’s occupant from heading toward a swift death.


Siddhārtha straightened up and was about to leave when he noticed a pipe roughly five centimeters in diameter extending from either side of the organism to small holes in the sidewalls of the compartment. The pipe was not attached, but rather was an extension of the organism’s body itself.


He touched one, detecting a slight pulse and the trickling of liquid inside.


Siddhārtha removed the tantalum steel cover from another of his discharge panels and pressed its sharp edge to one side of the pipe until it broke. The organism began to spasm wildly, flopping around inside the confines of the compartment. Siddhārtha looked closer to see that the pipe’s interior was divided into three compartments. Out of one sprayed a translucent liquid that wet Siddhārtha from his elbow to his chest. Another of the compartments held what were clearly nerve bundles, sheathed in a soft, gelatinous protein that was now being pushed out to drip onto the floor by the organism’s internal pressure. The final compartment seemed to be a blood vessel. Deep green liquid oozed from the crushed opening where Siddhārtha had cut the pipe in two.


Out of curiosity, he slashed through the other half of the pipe, finding it identical to the first.


The organism shook two or three more times before it stopped moving altogether.


“Perhaps it’s dead.”


Siddhārtha exited through the destroyed hatch back out into the hallway. Outside, he peered in both directions through the darkness, hearing nothing. He flipped the switch on his light projector, sweeping away the gloom around him, finding nothing but the same deathlike stillness he had found upon his first arrival to this place.


No, wait, I can hear something!


Siddhārtha directed all of his nerves to his ears, listening through the silence around him. Something like a breeze was coming from the depths of the darkness on one side. He raised the power going to his supplementary processors, broadening his range of hearing. The sound rose high, then went low, swirling around Siddhārtha like the crashing of waves.


What is that?


Siddhārtha began to advance quietly down the corridor, looking for the source of the sound. Yet the faint trembling in the air seemed to come from above him at one moment, only to sound as though it was emanating from below a moment later. He went right down the corridor and felt the trembling come from the left. Continually, the noise shifted so that he could not determine its source. With a sudden clarity, Siddhārtha realized he was the target of a powerful enmity. He extinguished his projector, put his back to the wall, and attempted to conceal his own presence.


Rage made tangible and viscous as tar crept closer, an unseen wrinkle in the fabric of space around him. He could feel the rage emanating from a vast number of points surrounding him in every direction—at least one hundred million, he guessed. It was coming from the compartments—the agony and death suffered by one rapidly spreading to all, becoming a virulent wrath.


Here, suffering and death are shared equally!


He ran down the dark hallway.


This was no city.


It was a hive.






Outside, cold rain fell without ceasing. The sky seemed close enough to touch, and gray clouds hung low, no more than one hundred meters off the ground. With each gust of wind, the rain fell harder.


The light metal roof was brown in places and spotted, and the rain leaked through. Fragments of reinforced glass covered the floor, where the rainwater formed rivulets soaking down into the ground. Not a single spot remained dry. The cold rain penetrated through Siddhārtha’s clothes to his body.


Beneath the slanted roof, several figures huddled beneath carbonic-vinyl tarps. The frigid rain splashed, rattling as it sprinkled onto the spread vinyl. Empty, desperate eyes looked out from underneath, following Siddhārtha.


As far as he could see, there was not a single home here worthy of the name. The rooms were warped, the walls half fallen, the streets were rivers that lacked even proper drainage ditches. What’s going on here?


Siddhārtha stopped, feeling six pairs of eyes from six round heads staring at him.


“I would not imagine this city to be so poor that its residents could not afford to build homes for themselves,” Siddhārtha muttered to himself.


He looked back toward the giant cylindrical obelisk that towered behind him. This was the center of the city, this was everything.


“Do you know what that is?” asked a voice from the shelter, and a thin arm extended from beneath the vinyl sheet to point toward the giant cylinder.


“I do indeed.”


“More than three thousand years it’s been since they locked themselves up in there. What were we who were left behind supposed to do? We would rebuild our city, if anyone knew how.”


Siddhārtha wondered what use a people unable to build with their own hands would have of a city in the first place, but he kept his thoughts to himself.


“Why did only they move into the cylinder?” he asked at length.


Another of the round heads answered him. “They say that was the n-n-nah er . . . natural progression of development.”


“Natural progression?”


Do they mean to suggest that turning their society into a giant hive was a natural, necessary progression for a city?


“Why did you not follow them in?”


Beneath the vinyl sheets, the people exchanged glances before one of them responded, “Because they are human.”


As one, the round heads nodded in agreement.


The rain blew sideways between the posts holding up their ramshackle roof. An orphaned panel of lightweight siding came tumbling along, driven by the wind. It fell into a puddle and sent up a fine spray of water like smoke. Beyond the falling rain, the giant cylinder stood like a cutout silhouette against a screen in a shadow play.






“As our natural environment worsened, humanity adapted by developing into a new communal body, with individual compartments for shells to house each individual. The simple act of forming the communal body was an excellent strategy for ensuring our survival. However, an environment that necessitates such an act will ultimately fall to ruin. In order to stay that destruction, a more high-level strategy becomes necessary. Thus were all citizens reduced to simple code, protected from all change.”


“But that is neither evolution nor development.”


“Where do these things lead? Only to destruction.”


Siddhārtha nodded. “Who are you, really?”


The hoist above his head was quiet for a time, then it spoke, spitting out the words.


“I am God. More precisely, I am what the inhabitants of the city used to call God.”


Siddhārtha thought he detected a hint of lament in the crab’s voice.


“I see. For a god, you have a very peculiar shape.”


The god on the sliding rail seemed to laugh at that. “Is there a preordained shape or role for a god? No, for it is a fact that depending on the world in which they manifest, gods take on many forms. They may be benevolent beings, made of kindness and mercy, or a high-tech machine or an incubator. They can even take the form of a financial organization.”


“Are all ses-beta developments performed by gods, or indirectly via their influence?”


“Pardon?”


“Did a man named Jesus of Nazareth come here?”


“Beats me. What is this ‘Jesus of Nazareth’ of whom you speak?”


Siddhārtha shrugged. “He was the coordinator of the ses-beta development on Earth. I want to know who put him in that position, who gives him his orders,” Siddhārtha said, feeling with some certainty that this director was none other than the god hanging over his head. “What is your name?”


“ZEN-ZEN.”


Siddhārtha muttered the word to himself, feeling its shape in his mouth. “I believe that Jesus of Nazareth is hiding somewhere on Astarta 50,” he said, realizing that he had yet to find a single trace of his enemy here.


“Could it be that this man whom you seek belongs to the Planetary Development Committee? If that is the case, then leave the city and go north. I have heard that the building of the Planetary Development Committee lies upon a small plain surrounded by hills.”


Siddhārtha turned and walked back down the long dark hallway, hearing the words at his back. All ways in this city were barred to him, but one of them must lead to Shi.






The three obelisks had broken just above their bases and lay flat across the stones. Several of the buildings around the plaza joined them on the ground amid piles of rubble. Fragments of shattered concrete and dust rose in a giant umbrella cloud over the city. Aquamarine laser light still coursed across the top of the crowd that ran like fleeting shadows toward safety. Incredible explosions and gouts of flame rose upward, the sparks flowing like a river into the sky.


Siddhārtha had found his way back to the chamber of the leader. The leader stood like a statue, trailing a long shadow in the dim light. Siddhārtha wondered if he had even moved since his last visit.


“Leader. I believe I now understand the rebellion. And the cause of this city’s downfall.”


The leader slowly turned to face him. “You must have met God.”


“Yes. He said his name was ZEN-ZEN.”


“A great God, yes. Yet not even he could save this city from destruction.”


“Oh? As I see it, ZEN-ZEN has abandoned you.”


The leader chuckled, dark shadows playing across his face. “It is only natural. God was not ours to begin with.” With a sudden surge of emotion playing across his features, the leader advanced to stand in front of Siddhārtha. “Yet is it not we who support the city now? Are we not the engine of this city’s economy? Are we not her true citizens?”


That may be, Siddhārtha admitted to himself, but it would have little meaning to Shi. Shi was not interested in the people who felled the obelisks in the plaza, but only in the people who slept eternally, reduced to single data cards deep within the city.


“I’m afraid you have been abandoned, just like those who squat out in the rain.”


The Leader looked toward him, his eyes focusing on a great distance. “It seems that our time in history will not come for a long while yet.”


Siddhārtha left in silence.






Red flames reflected across the skin of the ionocraft where it sat abandoned beside the building. Two figures stood in the shadow of a protruding section of wall.


“So you met the god in the deep.” Asura smiled, flames near her feet casting a flickering light on the lower half of her face.


“How did you know?”


“I can know things through your mind and through your eyes,” Asura said with a laugh, though it was unclear whether she spoke truth or not. “Which is how I have learned that the Planetary Development Committee is to the north, on a small plain surrounded by mountains.”


With the three aboard, the ionocraft slid above the smoke from the blazes in the city, heading toward the dark canopy above.


Outside, the vast silvery surface reflected the outline of the small pale yellow sun like a halo.


“Think those are the mountains?” Siddhārtha asked, pointing toward the ring of mountains on the horizon.


Ahead of them and on the horizon to either side rose dark mountains.


“What will we find on the other side?” Orionae wondered out loud.


“The Planetary Development Committee.”


“Those who act upon Shi’s directive?”


“The very same.”


“So is this thing called Shi also upon that plain?”


“Who knows?” Siddhārtha muttered.


“Both Atlas the Seventh and the Poseidonis the Fifth were as large as small mountains,” Orionae said.


“You’ve met them?”


“They said they came from the land of our ancestors, Atlanta. They tried experimental methods for forming their kingdom and were quite successful. The success of their experiments in Atlantis were to inform other planetary developmental efforts.”


“Atlanta, land of ancestors . . .” Asura muttered.


“Where is this place?” Siddhārtha asked.


“Siddhārtha, it’s—” Asura paused, crinkling her nose and looking up at the tiny sun. “It’s clear that the helio-ses-beta development attempted on the third planet of the Ai System was a failure.”


“As it was here on Astarta 50.”


Siddhārtha and Asura exchanged glances.


“So the Planetary Development Committee was unable to carry out Shi’s directive.”


“Humanity advanced into the stars, taking their wars and their incessant economic crises and their population problem, yet they could not dominate the Milky Way. They couldn’t even revive a once green land that had fallen to desert.”


Siddhārtha felt his chest tighten as though he were about to weep. “It seems to me,” he said after a moment, “that since the very beginning, humanity has been walking upon a path toward destruction. Everywhere is disease and disaster, death and conflict. These things have always been part of civilization, right by man’s side. I wonder if any human, anywhere, has truly been at peace from the bottom of their heart.”


Asura looked up at the rapidly approaching black shadow of the mountains and said nothing.


The small, pale yellow sun was about to slip closer toward the distant horizon, its weak rays striking out horizontally in bands of light across the land below them. They were passing over another flat surface, apparently an ancient seabed that was now completely dry. They had left the silver shield covering the valley far behind to glitter in the distance like a glacier. Beneath that, organisms that had long since given up being organisms continued their frail attempts to stave off their own doom. A civilization whose story of destruction had begun after history had already ended.