To the north, there is a fence.


A sign upon it reads:


“When the star crosses, the sky will burn.


And there will be great sorrow.”








The bottom third of the pale yellow sun had already slipped below the horizon when they crossed the high ridgeline and gazed down on a flat, smooth, steep-sided plateau. The plateau was nearly perfectly square, roughly two kilometers to a side; it had the appearance of an island that had once risen from the foaming waves of an ancient sea that had long ago dried up. The side that faced the setting sun sparkled reddish brown, while the far side cast a long shadow across the basin beyond. A flat, semitranslucent structure sat near the center of the plateau, its appearance suggesting that it had been built by stacking enormous calcite crystals.


The three flew across the basin, descending onto a rocky shelf within sight of the building. The sun had now set halfway, and deep indigo crept across the sky from the opposite direction. It was extremely cold—so cold that the three feared their hearts would freeze. All was silent; the dim sun glittered in the chill.


“Do you think this is the Planetary Development Committee’s headquarters?” Siddhārtha asked.


If it is, then why is it so quiet?


Even from a distance, they could look through the semitranslucent material of the structure to see many rooms dividing it into compartments of indeterminate use. A row of six columns stood in a large hall toward the middle of the structure, and another hall that held a large flat table appeared to be some kind of conference room. There was also a wide staircase, its edges tracing complicated lines as it rose through the structure.


“Doesn’t look like anyone’s inside.”


The weak rays of the setting sun passed directly through the vast, empty building’s interior. Nothing moved.


One of the large doors at the main entrance had been pulled off its hinges; it lay just inside the wide, slanting entry hall. Cold air ripped through the opening, scattering thick brown dust in a fan pattern beyond the doorway.


The three entered in single file, stepping over the fallen door. Their feet sent up plumes of fine dust with every step.


“It’s been a terribly long time since anyone used this place,” Siddhārtha said.


Several thousand years, he judged from the appearance of everything on the ground floor. Hallways extended from either side of the entry hall. These connected in turn to the many smaller rooms the companions had seen from the outside. In each of the small rooms, they discovered powerful gravitational barrier generators, now inactive and quietly decaying.


“Sandstorms must have damaged the place,” Asura said, her eyes taking in the signs of severe abrasion on the exterior wall. The whole structure had probably once been perfectly transparent. “What’s that?” she added, pointing toward a large metal bowl-shaped object lying at an angle just outside the far end of the building. Metallic panels and tangled wires were scattered over the ground beside it. “Looks like a parabolic antenna.”


The antenna had been attached to a rotating platform that had, over the course of thousands of years, decayed to the point where it could no longer support the weight of the dish.


Orionae placed his forehead against a wall, staring through it at the fallen dish. “I have seen something like this before. Twice.” He wore a vague, clouded expression as he turned to face the others.


“A parabolic antenna?” Siddhārtha asked. “Where?”


Orionae craned his neck to look up at the thin yellow sky. “The first time was by that village in the desert, Elcasia. The second was on the roof of the royal palace in Atlantis.”


“Interesting,” Siddhārtha said. “Could it mean that the Planetary Development Committee here on Astarta 50, and the village of Elcasia, and Atlantis, were all connected?” He imagined an invasion coordinated along a single line of communication. Could the fall of Atlantis have been dictated remotely from across the galaxy?


“Yes,” Orionae nodded. “That might explain the window of the suzerain. And the mystery of the orichalcum. Now that I think about it, I wonder why I didn’t look into things more closely back when I was there. It is most vexing.”


“Orichalcum, you say?”


“Yes—a strange material that was used everywhere in the construction of Atlantis . . . yet there were no records at all concerning its composition or means of fabrication.”


The last pale rays of the setting sun painted the large hall on the upper floor. The walls sparkled as the light passed through the dancing dust that marked their progress through the lesser rooms. Other than the dust, there was nothing at all in any of the small rooms that added to their information.


The upper hall had an arched ceiling over fifty meters in height. It had clearly lain abandoned for a very long time. The only sound there was the sough and echo of the wind as it swept down the corridors. Toward one edge of the building was a section that looked as if it had been struck by some kind of meteor; a large hole had been opened in the exterior wall, facing out toward the basin beyond.


In the center of the upper hall stood a large spherical object constructed of thin translucent pipes interconnected in a complicated weave. The sphere was about ten meters across.


“I wonder what that could be?” Asura asked.


It looked out of place, a memory stripped of its context—perhaps the last remaining vestige of whatever civilization had once thrived here. A thick layer of dust had settled on the thin pipes and the short metal bars that supported the sphere at its base.


Twilight had fallen outside, casting the world into depths of indigo. As one, the three travelers were stricken with homesickness for their own planet, and in that mood they contemplated the staggering length of time in which this place had sat as a ruin.


Asura had seen tragic devastation many times in her long life, but she had never seen anything quite so barren as this. The sort of devastation from which there can never be a recovery comes quietly and over many years.


“Well,” Siddhārtha said simply. “Even if this were once the Planetary Development Committee’s headquarters, that was long ago.”


“So our hunt ends here,” Asura said, perching on a fragment of fallen wall.


“But this cannot possibly be the end of the trail. This must be Astarta 50. We will find something. Let’s look again.”


“I am not so sure,” Orionae said, his voice solemn. “Those words we all know mentioning the Planetary Development Committee on Astarta 50 are from five or six thousand years ago. It is rather unlikely, in fact, that anything remains here at all.”


“I suppose they could have moved someplace else,” Siddhārtha admitted. “But since we’re here anyway, let’s take a better look around. The enemy we seek is not human. Just because this place is a ruin does not mean they aren’t using it. It would be dangerous to assume anything.”


“True,” Asura said. “And if there is no way to influence one’s destination on that spaceway we traveled, then we can say with some certainty that Jesus of Nazareth did come here before us.” Abruptly, her eyes focused on the darkness overhead. “Look!”


The ceiling above them had begun to emit a pale aquamarine light. The light grew steadily brighter until the hall was suffused in a beautiful brilliance. Quickly the three retreated to a corner hallway from which they could see through the walls back into the main hall—see, and also be seen.


The sphere in the hall began to emit light in many colors. Bright crimson orbs appeared, traveling along the pipes, and from these emerged minute particles of illumination that scattered like dust. Soon, the entire hall was scintillating with projected color. The light breathed, growing in intensity and then fading in pulses. It must have seemed fantastically and eerily beautiful from outside the translucent building.


Siddhārtha and Asura could feel their spines growing cold. Whatever was happening, it seemed likely that this was the trap they had long expected.


“Someone’s there!”


The light wavered like a mirage as it passed through the translucent wall, suddenly revealing a figure on the other side. Siddhārtha engaged the polarized filters on his light-condensing contact lenses, while Asura extended infrared night vision sensors from a bracelet on her wrist to scan the hall.


The figure—a human man, apparently—was walking around inside the hall, wearing something like a monk’s robe that fell halfway down his legs and was sewn beneath his arms on both sides. On his feet he wore leather sandals. His eyes sparkled and darted with an eerie quickness that left a glowing trail across the imaging readout on Asura’s screen, making it easy to see where he was looking. His eyes seemed to shift regularly toward the sphere, then back to the walls of the hall.


“I wonder what he’s doing?”


The figure walked slowly in a wide circle, then paused as though listening. He raised the small object he held in one hand.


Part of the corridor that led from the great hall vanished. The destruction had happened without a sound; not even the chilly night air moved. The man continued walking, moving slowly as though he examined something as he went. Once again, he lifted the object in his hand. This time a section of wall next to where the meteorite had hit vanished, along with part of the rocky shelf beneath it. Where the crumbled wall had stood there was now just a gaping hole, like an empty pool. The figure returned to the sphere, staring deep into its intricate structure. His silhouette was clearly discernible against the light from the sphere.


“It is Jesus!” Siddhārtha gasped. “Perhaps this is one of his bases of operation?”


“But why destroy his own facility?” Asura asked.


Jesus lifted his gaze from the sphere to look out at the dark night sky.


“Perhaps he is removing traces of his organization’s presence here?” Siddhārtha said. Even as he spoke he became certain that this was what they were witnessing. Jesus’s organization had accomplished all of its objectives, so its members were now removing their strongholds, eliminating proof of their own activities. They had reached the end of their plans—now they were starting to worry about cleanup and the possibility of pursuit. “Let’s grab him, then, and find out what that sphere is!” Siddhārtha moved quietly from column to column like a shadow gliding along the corridor.


Asura slipped outside through a crack in the wall. A scant number of stars glittered in the dark sky. She strode toward the front entrance to the building, making no attempt to soften her footfalls. Stepping over the fallen door, she headed directly into the large hall.


“Man of Nazareth!” she shouted. “It seems you have finished what you came to do!”


Jesus glanced over at Asura as she walked in, showing just the slightest bit of interest.


“So,” she continued, “is your Final Judgment done, or are we still waiting? Either way, no one remains to be judged.”


Jesus waved away her words with one hand. “You did well to follow me this far,” he muttered, “but now it is over.”


Asura switched off the infrared device on her wrist, returning it to a regular bracelet. “Yes, and I lost. When I realized that a transcendent being was responsible for the destruction and decline that began on Earth five thousand years ago, I made all efforts to determine the nature of that entity’s existence and stop it. Yes, I was too late. Their plans have come to fruition. As you say, it is over.”


Jesus looked away, snorting with derision.


“Man of Nazareth, allow me to ask a question.”


A look of alarm spread across Jesus’s face.


“Don’t look so frightened,” Asura said. “I merely want to know what that sphere is.”


Jesus stared up at the large object looming above him. “This thing?”


“Yes. Its meaning has eluded me.”


The Nazarene peered at the sphere with weary eyes, then returned his gaze to Asura’s face. “These paths of light here are galactic longitudes, and the green paths there are galactic latitudes.” He trailed one sick finger along the surface of the sphere where the brightness rippled in waves. “This is the galactic equator. An entropy D index is overlaid on this curve, indicating that an entirely different spatial dimension will be generated in this area.” Slowly he moved his right hand, and the aquamarine glow within the sphere slid diagonally to follow. “See, it will be like this. You understand?”


Jesus pointed toward the sphere with his chin. He scratched the back of his left leg with the tip of his right sandal.


Choosing her moment, Asura launched into the air. Her right hand extended in a flash, striking him squarely in the chest. He staggered, and when he regained his footing, Asura was standing between him and the sphere.


“What are you doing?” Jesus shouted, his whiskers bristling.


Asura fixed him with an icy glare. “Finally, I understand!”


Jesus clenched his hands into fists and stepped forward. “What do you understand?”


“The Archangel Michael—the being you claim to have seen coming down from Heaven by the Jordan River? I know who that was. As I know the identity of the great god who plunged Jordan into darkness the day you were executed upon the hill at Golgotha, and spirited you away into the sky—”


“You know nothing!”


“I’m not finished. I know now the provenance of the two giant kings—Atlas the Seventh and Poseidonis the Fifth—whom Orionae served in Atlantis, and I understand the statue of Maitreya in the Pearl Palace. I know now of Tuṣita, that land I desired so greatly to see. I have thought long and carefully about these things—where they could possibly have come from and what their intentions might be. Though the latter are still clouded to me, man of Nazareth, I now know the path by which they entered our world!”


Jesus peered at Asura through the hair that hung loosely down over his eyes. “Gods sometimes do violent things,” he said, his voice soothing, “but it is a mistake to want to exact revenge upon them.” He held up one hand, as though offering salvation.


“Say what you wish,” Asura spat. “Yet to revere a herald of destruction as some sort of heavenly father figure is surely a sin—”


“Herald of destruction?”


“Perhaps you do not understand. In this Milky Way, there are many planets upon which higher intellects have thrived. Imagine, if you will, that these beings you look up to as gods did not approve of these emerging sentient life-forms and decided to remove them. How would you go about doing this, if you were them?”


“What do you mean, ‘how’?”


“I will give you one possibility,” Asura said. “You could visit the life-forms at every stage in their development, sowing seeds that would, over the course of millennia, result in inevitable destruction.”


Jesus’s face twisted.


“You could build in economic dead ends, military strife, population problems, declining health, psychological and physical atrophy, and much more. Take any one of these calamities that plague humankind, and you can see that its true cause lies far in the past. Some hail from as far back as the ancient age when humanity’s forerunners existed only as single-celled organisms living in a warm, shallow ocean.”


“Blasphemy! You have it wrong—”


“Not that they had to predetermine everything. Some of the conditions could have been arranged later on, when there were more variables to work with.”


Jesus fixed Asura with two eyes blazing like fire. “O, dear God who is in Heaven—”


Asura laughed merrily. “Jesus! There is a legend which says that when you were born into our world, the King of the Jews was terrified by news of the Savior’s birth, and so he took every male child from his mother’s arms and killed them.”


“A terrible thing, yes.”


Asura clapped her hands with mirth, laughing again, though in her eyes there swelled a hatred strong enough to make a strong man quail with fear. “Terrible, you say? That, I suppose, would depend on your point of view.”


Jesus looked away.


“It was I who whispered murder into the mind of the king,” Asura said. “Would that he had been more thorough in carrying it out, for in the end, the massacre was for naught. You escaped, and in later years, you joined forces with the giant beings you call gods and angels. If you had died along with all those other children, how then would things have been different? . . . Well, Jesus of Nazareth? Speaking of which—your Final Judgment never came, did it?”


Jesus looked out toward the dark horizon as though searching for an escape route.


“When the four wise men appeared to Siddhārtha, they came as Brahmin monks. Yet in his case they made a terrible error of judgment. The prince never would have met me at all without their intervention, man of Nazareth. And the knowledge they gave to him! Their teachings speak of the cakravarti-rājan, and Maitreya who is to descend to Earth in 5,670,000,000 years as the Savior, and all the cosmology—why did they carelessly leave so many words suggesting the truth? I believe they underestimated the human capacity for understanding.”


Jesus staggered, his face pale.


Asura raised a hand, pointing toward the dark horizon. “Go, Jesus of Nazareth! Go into that barren, shadowed plain, and do not return. It is a most fitting place for you.”


Jesus cursed softly under his breath. Cold sweat trickled down from his ashen forehead, collecting on his chin to drip between his feet.


“Well?” Asura’s glare grew darker.


Jesus’s eyes suddenly widened and the sweat on his brow visibly retreated. An instant later, all noise ceased.






Finally, Asura thought, some results.


“Asura!”


By the sound of his voice, Siddhārtha was moving rapidly from right to left behind her. Asura didn’t need to turn—she knew what was happening. They had reached the moment of maximum peril. Springing into action, she ran from the hall on silent feet. The moment she was through the outer door she crouched and rolled across the cold, dry ground. She could feel Siddhārtha and Orionae moving off to her right. Inside the translucent building, Jesus had become a receding silhouette.


Something like a dark tide had begun to spread from inside the great hall. It expanded in all directions as it came, pushing back the vast night before Asura’s eyes. As it grew it transformed in shape until it had become a gigantic figure looming over the plateau like a towering peak. There were arms and shoulders like mountain ridges, a chest like a sheer cliff face, immense pillared legs. Strangely molded armor wrapped around the chest and shoulders.


The giant silhouette looked out over the barren stillness of the basin, seeming to envelop all the endless spread of night. Something like a crown grew from its head, concealing the few stars in the sky.


You appear at last. Asura’s terror at facing the most dangerous of enemies mingled with her elation at the realization that they had at last found the entrance to their enemies’ world. Her enemies’ achievement had been near perfect, yet Asura and her companions represented a final remaining threat, a pinprick that had turned into a wound their foes could no longer afford to ignore.


The giant figure stepped slowly out onto the basin. Beneath the shadow of its headdress, the features of its face were impossible to make out. Shrouded in darkness, it took another step.


“I saw your statue,” Asura said, her voice traveling low through the frozen darkness. “When was it you were supposed to appear and save the masses? Five billion six hundred seventy million years from now? As I expected, you are big enough to reach the heavens, yet in places your statue rusted—”


For the first time in her existence, Asura understood that there was a kind of fear in this world impossible to overcome. It began deep inside her and came with a terrible dizziness and nausea that swiftly developed into a bottomless whirlpool of madness she was unable to contain. She realized she had only one or two seconds remaining in which to escape this place of death. She took a step.


“You did well to come this far,” a voice echoed down from the darkened sky. The force of the giant god’s words was almost enough to stop Asura’s heart on the spot. She had no time to think.


“We did not expect anyone to reach this gateway to eternity. Yet this is the end of your road. The path beyond here is not one you may travel.” The great being’s denial scattered the shadows of Asura’s reality in every direction. Mountain ranges and giant oceans lost their shape. Before her loomed an unfathomable emptiness, a barrier which nothing in her world could hope to overcome. It seemed to block even the flow of time. No wonder he called it the gateway to eternity. This was the end of the world, of all worlds—the bridge to the true void.


A wind blew across the dark basin, its passage through that unsympathetic darkness reminding Asura’s crumbling mind of where she stood. Slowly, she felt her former self returning from someplace deep within her shattered heart.


“Where did you come from?” she demanded, thinking the question more than speaking it, unsure of whether her words would even reach the god before her.


“You may decide that for yourself. The place you choose is my origin.” Her enemy’s response bored through Asura’s mind, scattering sparks in its wake. She wondered where exactly in the space-time continuum that enveloped her home world a presence like this had found entry. These beings had revealed themselves several times on Earth in the past, and doubtless had done the same on other planets and in other galaxies. Where did they come from, and why?


“It appears you have questions concerning my existence, yet you know that I exist to the same degree that you exist. You seem secure in your knowledge that your solar system and the spiral galaxy you call the Milky Way, and all the hundred billion other galaxies in this universe, occupy the same space-time continuum on the same time axis. Asura, it appears you think of your universe as being on the inside of the sphere which extends to infinity, and that is well. But have you considered what lies beyond the borders of that sphere? What lies beyond the limits of your universe?”


“It is meaningless to consider that which lies beyond infinity,” Asura responded.


The god looked down with pity. “You understand that infinity is nothing more than an abstract concept, do you not? Or do you believe that there exists true infinity in this universe?”


The being’s words sent a shadowy coil across Asura’s mind that threatened to paralyze all thought. Yet she understood instinctively that now was no time to consider the structure of the universe—not with her own destruction looming.


“Maitreya!”


A shooting star streaked above the shadow in the darkness, leaving a long fiery tail between the scant stars.


“What possible purpose could you have to make a wasteland of this world? What reason could you have for doing everything in your power to drive humanity to extinction?”


An aurora the color of blood flickered on the distant horizon, spreading like a thin curtain as it shifted from red to blue, then back to red, its light ebbing. The dark sky was visible behind its thin red veil, looking deeper and vaster than ever she had seen it.


Asura’s mind went blank as she faced its light. Then she noticed the giant Maitreya moving soundlessly, the distant aurora reflected in his face and across his chest. His face was visible now beneath his boat-shaped crown. She saw long slitted eyes, set deep under long eyebrows, that held the calm glimmer of a bottomless lake. The giant’s chest was full and rolling beneath the lines of the garment he wore, and she noticed a necklace around his neck that radiated an unusual energy; its emanations struck the sensor on Asura’s chest, causing it to glow a bright orange.


“Asura. There is something I would ask you.”


Asura smiled, revealing a glimmer of white teeth. “You have quite the nerve to say that when it is I who have come such a great distance with so many questions.”


“Answer me, and I will have no reason to destroy you. I will send you wherever you wish.” There was a tone of peaceful kindness in Maitreya’s voice that might have been interpreted as curiosity.


“But not before reducing me to a husk of my former self, devoid of memory.” Asura laughed as though she were talking about someone else’s fate entirely.


“Don’t be greedy.”


Asura felt the tension between her and Maitreya quietly increase. “Fine,” she said, breathing out a long sigh. “What’s your question?”


“You are here with two others. Who is it that gave you your mission? What organization maintained your sleeping webs for some five thousand years?”


The instant Maitreya’s words rang in Asura’s mind, she switched off the circuit that connected her brain to her supplementary processor’s neural memory web. Asura became empty, filled only with the darkness of night. A feeling of release spread from her emergency circuitry, making her feel lighter than the wind itself.


“Speak, Asura! Who gave you your mission? What is the name of your organization?” Maitreya’s voice grew increasingly irritated.


By the time the first blast hit, Asura had already become one with the night around her. The fear in her heart fled into the darkness, leaving nothing in its place but an empty hollow.


“Well? Asura? You cannot escape. I will give you another ten seconds.”


In the unmoving silence that followed, even the wind died. It lasted for exactly ten seconds, during which Asura stood, quiet, her mind frozen and unchanging.


The second blast hit.


Asura felt herself plummeting at a terrifying speed through endless space in which there was no up or down, left or right. No stars shone in the monotone darkness around her.


Somewhere off in the distance, the aurora flickered a lonely red. She tried to focus on the color but it slipped away, and her consciousness followed.


Neural memory web still off-line, Asura’s supplementary processor activated a secondary metabolizer, designed to handle massive expenditures of energy. Her processor began to rapidly analyze her situation. Once all internal systems had been checked and no abnormalities were found, the processor turned its attention outside. With the neural memory net inaccessible, this was an extremely difficult procedure. The processor was forced to pick targets for analysis based on an endless reiteration of basic logic patterns.


One of her eyes saw only the darkness of a deep night sky with a scattering of stars. No cause for her current state could be found there. The other eye looked out over the cold basin. The faint sound of wind stimulated her auditory nerves, then both of her eyes moved together, focusing on the giant shape that loomed ahead of her. Her processor noted the animosity radiating from that figure like a tidal wave, and all became clear. Only a sliver of time remained.


Her supplementary processor connected directly to her cerebellum. In a flash, Asura sprang to her feet. Her right hand reached up to pull out the hairpin from the back of her head and fling it forward. The hairpin left a faint trail of light, golden ions scattering into the night behind it. At almost exactly the same time, the god-figure towering in the darkness began to waver like a mirage. The hairpin burst into flame and fell to the ground.


Asura regained consciousness. She welcomed the ache in her head—though it felt as though her skull had cracked wide open, it was the surest sign yet that at last the advantage had passed to her side. This was a chance she could not afford to waste.


Bands of pale blue light swept between Maitreya’s form and her own. She could feel her body shivering under the terrifying brunt of her enemy’s psychic attack. If her supplementary processor hadn’t been engaged to run her systems automatically, she would have died without ever waking again. Quickly she cranked her micro-reactor to full and extended the agitator from the magnetic field generator on her bracelet. Its tip touched the next band of blue light as it approached. There was an incredible flash.


The high-voltage stream generated by her agitator arced between the two gravitationally sealed spaces between her and Maitreya, and both barriers collapsed. Before the sparks had even faded, Asura dived into the remains of the crystal building. The floor was now a sea of flame, but she felt no pain or discomfort. She stood with the sphere of translucent pipes at her back. Supported on short metallic bars, the sphere appeared to be floating over the intense flames that licked along the floor.


“Maitreya! How can you possibly destroy me, you who have come from another world? To me you are void, like the sea of darkness from which you emerged.”


There came no answer.


Moving swiftly, Asura wrapped the sphere inside a dimensional barrier. There it flickered faintly like a failing neon sign. She could sense a violent struggle taking place somewhere nearby in the remains of the building—but though she knew this was likely Siddhārtha and Orionae engaged in a battle to the death against Jesus of Nazareth, it was far too dangerous for her to pay any attention to their combat. If she lost her own engagement, she would have no way of ever knowing the true nature of the being that had turned this world into a wasteland.


Outside the translucent walls, the sky began to lighten until it was as bright as day. Its color shifted from yellow to green, from green to blue; then the basin and the sky arcing above it were filled with a shimmering purple radiance. That too faded and was replaced by a faint, pale light suffusing sky and land.






A grayish curtain of snow hung down from the clouds to touch the ground to the north. Gusts of wind blew flakes down to swirl and sweep across the icy slope. The snow increased in intensity, quickly reducing Asura’s visibility to zero.


A ceaseless wind screamed in Asura’s ears. In the few moments when the snow let up for a moment, she spotted a vast number of shadows moving across the white glacier in the distance. In between gusts, she saw the shadows multiplying, approaching. Then she spotted an object in the distance, a strange shape like a flattened disk with a complicated protrusion on its top. From its tip a blinding light erupted. The light formed a revolving beam that swept across the snowy plain, transforming snow and ice to scalding steam that drifted up toward the gathered clouds. Off to her left, a cannon mounted atop an igloo-shaped base began to fire. Plumes of snow shot up into the air like trees in a forest, incandescent light flaring between them—cannons on the hills engaging each other across the glacier.


Off on the distant horizon to the west, a river with a name Asura didn’t know undulated slowly, the color of lead. If only she could reach the river, she might awaken from this nightmare.


She took stock of her surroundings. Her enemy had already advanced onto the icy plains beneath the rise on which she stood. Thin wisps of smoke rose from impact points halfway up the low ridgeline to her right, spreading until the entire side of the mountain was veiled. Her enemy’s armored vehicles were already advancing onto the plains. The dozen or so vehicle-mounted heat-ray cannons that formed Asura’s final line of defense at the base of the rise were already engaged in combat. Pale arrows of light crisscrossed in the sky, and tanks and armored vehicles spit sparks like crucibles between the billowing clouds of steaming snow and ice.


Asura gathered her infantry amidst the flames and the steam and sounded the retreat. They went around the foot of the ridgeline, making for a snowy valley between two ridges to the west. Missiles skimmed across the tops of the high cliffs, making the air shake around them. An incredible explosion sounded from the entrance to the valley ahead. The blast wave hit the walls of snow and ice like a hammer, echoing like thunder in the distance. The enemy was asserting his control of her escape route.


Another missile exploded ahead of the infantry, sending shattered chunks of ice and rock up to ricochet off the cliff walls; fragments continued to fall back down into the valley for what seemed like several minutes. Columns of flame rose around her line, blocking their advance.


Their route into the valley was now piled high with shattered ice and rock. Asura turned the column and led her men up the cliffs on her right, climbing until she reached the top of the ridge where she could look down across the entire battlefield. It appeared that now their only possible route for retreat was via the great river to the west.


With a start, Asura realized she had no idea where she was, nor how great her own forces were. Was this a small section of a vast battlefront, or was this the only engagement, the struggle on which victory or defeat would hang? The only thing that was clear to her was that the enemy army covering the snowy plains behind them was led by none other than Maitreya.


There was not much hope to be found here. Surely she would never reach the river with the dozen or so foot soldiers remaining to her now. They stumbled along, ice forming like cold flowers on their chests and limbs. She called for them to move faster, directing them along the ridge toward the west. Yet it was not long before she noticed that her troop was no longer visible—though she guessed that the burning pyres that dotted the ridgeline behind her were their remains.


“Well, Asura? You know you will never make the river. Join my forces, Asura. It is the only future remaining to you in which you survive.”


The familiar voice echoed in Asura’s chest. She raised her snow-encrusted face toward the western sky. Not a single living shape moved in that uninterrupted vista of snow and ice. Suddenly, she was reminded of another battlefield from another time, beneath a dark night sky.


An aurora had rippled in the distance on that battlefield, colors of light crossing through the frozen air. In that bleak place only death had thrived.


Where was that again?


When was that again?


Here, there was only the white landscape as far as she could see in every direction. No night. No aurora.


What was that?


What?


What?


The image she held in her mind’s eye burst abruptly into flames—this was a nightmare battle from which there was no escape. Everything had begun here. Everything returned here again.


Memories of bitter fighting for long, long years against the forces of Śakra crawled across her vision, intermingling with the white wasteland before her. The giant statue of the god hidden in the depths of the Pearl Palace was nothing more than a promise of destruction, and yet those she fought believed it to be a symbol of their salvation. The distant memories burned in Asura’s breast. She was trapped in a phantasm of struggles past. Trapped!


Asura stood.






Wrapped in its protective barrier, the strange sphere loomed above the sea of flame. Hatred and enmity swirled through the tongues of fire, burning Asura more than the heat that flooded over her.


This is all part of Maitreya’s psychic assault! I must be strong!


She held a hand to her forehead and shut her eyes tight. She felt the inside of her skull grow suddenly cool as her supplementary processor employed a secondary circuit to transmit high-frequency waves into the gray matter of her cerebrum. Filters activated, absorbing the hypnotic electrical emissions that were targeting her, reflecting them back at their source.


Even under the brunt of the psychic assault, she retained her control over the barrier around the sphere.


Using the brainwave detector attached to her tertiary semicircular canal, she searched for Maitreya. Unable to pinpoint him, Asura measured the hypnotic wave patterns and fired a hand missile back along their trajectory. She lamented the lack of any form of psychic attack in her own personal arsenal. Compared to Maitreya’s mental assault, even an antimatter proton bomb and an antigravitational barrier were sticks and stones.


Asura’s missile flew, trailing a long tail of fire behind it, the power of a splitting lithium atom turning one of Maitreya’s radiation shutters into scalding steam. Before the light from the blast had faded, Asura fired another. But the jet of super-hot gas following the second missile struck the metallic fastenings of another shutter and reflected back, sending a wave of molten metal splashing toward Asura’s face fast enough to cross the distance in a few hundredths of a second.


Asura twisted her body. No time to raise a barrier—her processor went into hyperspeed, rerouting her reflex pulses from her cerebrum down toward her spinal column, shaving milliseconds off her reaction time.


Danger!






If only dawn would break. The thought was on the mind of every soldier and general on the field. Their enemy’s attack had begun halfway through the night, growing in intensity as the crescent moon dipped down toward the west. Anticipating the night attack, Asura had placed skirmishers in black camouflage at intervals along the battle lines, but she had not expected an assault of such intensity. Apparently, the enemy was hoping that this battle would be the turning point in the long and grinding war. By the time the reports of failure from the front lines reached her headquarters and Asura was able to send out reserve forces, the enemy had already penetrated deep within her lines.


Great blades and halberds shimmered in the dark, sending up warm sprays of blood into the wind. Screams of terror and roars of rage overlapped with the shouting of men on both sides, and the soldiers mingled like fighting ants, slashing and grappling, rolling on the ground. In the dark, the psychological pressure on the defenders heightened to a fever pitch. For those who tried to flee, the darkness itself became an enemy.


If only dawn would break. Asura bit her lip and gazed toward the crescent moon, now low in the western sky. It would still be a long while before daybreak, and the tide of battle was rapidly shifting against her. The enemy had already reached the basin in front of the high ground where she now stood. A storm of arrows fell around her headquarters, sounding like a monstrous bird flapping its wings through the trembling night air.


“General Vajra, go!”


Vajra, one of her finest generals, defender of the northern banks of the Jinsha, descended from the high ground with his troops, his leather armor creaking. The soldiers moved silently, their footfalls as soft as those of nocturnal beasts drifting through the woods, until there came the sounds of violent hand-to-hand combat from midway down the slope.


Fire rose up in the deep forest to the north of the high ground, quickly engulfing the trees in a sea of crimson flame. The incessant reports of splintering trunks sounded across the intervening distance; every leaf became an arrowhead of fire, whirling up in the sky only to rain down around Asura’s camp. Soon the grass and the shrubs along the plateau began to burn. The dark silhouettes of Asura’s soldiers as they stomped the fires out looked almost beautiful, as though they had spontaneously abandoned war to engage in a great and graceful dance.


The fire wrapped around the rise, reaching the plains to the west. Their enemy was cutting off their route of escape.


Two or three of General Vajra’s men came staggering back, accompanied by a terrible smell of blood. One of them fell like a stone amongst the burning grasses. The stench of scorched flesh stung Asura’s nostrils. Now the enemy’s advance guard came dancing in among the wounded. Their silvery helmets reflected the flames, shining like red jewels. Asura cut down three of them personally with her greatsword while her guard rallied, managing at last to push the enemy back down the slope.


The white blush of dawn began to creep into the sky in the east and a chill morning wind blew across the battlefield. By now, the front lines were firmly engaged on the slopes. During the time between midnight and early morning, Asura’s ten thousand troops had been reduced to a tenth of that number, the rest killed, captured, or wounded so badly they could no longer fight.


A moist wind blew low over the field and rain began to fall. Gray clouds hung low like shredded flags, drawing a watery veil of light over the upland fields. Black smoke continued to rise through the rain, and the burning ground spat hot steam.


Now, a barrage of fiery cylinders arced through the sky, each trailing golden flame as they plunged into the high ground. Where they hit, huge gouts of flame burst up, dancing over the grasses, becoming a sea of flames too intense to face. The shock wave swept everything before it. Men ran wild like dancing matchsticks soon to be ash.


“Asura!” Another of her officers, General Tāshkand, raised a gauntleted hand and pointed. Explosives had already melted off the man’s ears, nose, and lips. “Their launchers are positioned over there!” At the base of a hill off to the right, Asura spotted a six-wheeled vehicle sporting a launching platform on its upper surface. A new salvo of twelve fire tubes had already been set on the metal wires that guided them. They were pointed straight at Asura’s position.


“General! Do we have any long-range crossbows remaining?”


Tāshkand darted out into the sea of flame and returned, carrying a crossbow in his hand. A small incendiary bomb had been fixed to the tip of the bolt. Asura raised the weapon and fired toward the launching platform. The bolt traced a line like a single silken thread through the rain, crippling its target on impact.


It would have been meaningless to remain there any longer. Asura’s front lines were collapsing; enemy forces drew closer with every passing moment. She gathered her remaining troops and began a retreat. The rain increased in intensity, turning the battlefield into a churning sea of mud. Enemies rose on all sides, and Asura’s foot soldiers fell one by one, but they left ten times their number in enemy corpses behind them.


A great rumbling sounded through the earth ahead of the retreating column. Asura wiped the rain from her face with one hand and stared. A line of shadows like small mountains were advancing through the white veil of water. This was their enemy’s main force, an armored elephant brigade. They swiped at her men with their long trunks and beat the ground with their massive feet, rumbling toward Asura like an avalanche. Crouching low, she rolled like a ball through the mud. A giant foot stomped down, barely missing her shoulder, and the shock threw her up into the air. She got to her feet, only just making it between the legs of the next elephant. One after the other the giant beasts stampeded over her. She lifted a hand to protect her eyes against the flying mud, dodging between thick pillars of gray flesh that shot past her with the speed of the wind. She twisted and spun like an acrobat, running till she was out of breath.


“Asura!” A voice sounded from far above her head. “There is no longer any escape. Abandon your cause and join me . . . or I’ll stomp you to a pulp right here in the mud.”


She looked up and spied a stern man seated in the gondola atop the clifflike flank of the nearest elephant.


Asura smiled, the line of her white teeth showing brilliantly against her mud-streaked face. “Śakra, you coward! Why don’t you come down from there and fight me, sword to sword!”


Śakra put a hand on the edge of the gondola and looked down. His silvery armor shone in a stray ray of sunlight. “Asura! Look around you.”


She didn’t have to look. She was standing in a sea of mud, a circle roughly fifty meters in diameter defined by nearly two hundred elephants standing side by side. Soldiers perched in the gondolas on the elephants’ backs leveled several hundred crossbows directly at her.


“You may possess miraculous talent in battle, but there is no way for you to escape this encirclement. You should know that better than anyone else. Well? Join my forces. It’s about time.” Śakra looked down at Asura as she stood in the muck at his elephant’s feet. “Who sent you to wage this endless war and plunge Brahmā’s world into chaos?” he demanded. “For how many years have you fought against my celestial army, never realizing the sin you wrought, not once suing for peace? Whence this ceaseless animosity you bear for me? Why continue this profitless struggle?”


Asura raised her sword, pointing it straight at Śakra’s face. “I will tell you this! I know your objectives already, you who call yourself Śakra, and even those of Brahmā who rules this world. Already you have destroyed too many civilizations. Mohenjo-daro, Sumer . . . all have disappeared into the flow of time by your design. Why? Was it because you saw in them the potential to become aware of your existence and thereby endanger your own world? Is that why you doomed their civilizations to eventual destruction? Is that why you seeded their hearts and their beliefs with pathways to ruin? Ever since you placed that statue of Maitreya deep in the Pearl Palace, you have been working to fulfill that singular purpose. And to this you added the great insult: the lie of promised salvation! Tell me, how long is 5,670,000,000 years in your reckoning? One year? One day? The merest blink of an eye? I would drive you from this world! I would destroy your world! Those were my—”


My orders. Asura snapped her mouth shut.


“What’s that?” came the voice from above. “Everything is as you say, but what were you about to say next? Having second thoughts, perhaps?” Śakra tilted his head toward her, urging her to continue.


“I . . . I . . .”


“Yes, you. What about you?”


A look of despair crossed Asura’s face as her eyes went from Śakra above her to the elephantry all around her. She was trapped, a tiny squirrel among wolves. The great sword fell from her hand.


“Cakravar . . .”






A powerful shock wave fragmented Asura’s thoughts. Her enemy’s psychic assault was incredibly powerful—more powerful than any she had before experienced. She felt cold sweat running in torrents down her body. Her enemy had brought all of his power to bear in an attempt to destroy her, here in this corner of this cold basin—and not just to destroy her, but to expose her to a higher existence than her own, exalted and unbearable.


Searing pain ran across her shoulder. Without thinking, she probed with her hand and found a fragment of metal panel buried deep in her shoulder. She yanked it out. Fortuitously, the tip of the metal had damaged part of her secondary circuitry, sapping the effectiveness of the hypnotic waves directed toward her cerebral matter. This will be my last chance. Asura brought her gravitation-generation device to full power and closed the dimensional space where Maitreya was hiding. Negative heat entropy resulting from the adiabatic change shrank the closed space to a singularity in an instant—an infinitely dense, infinitely negative space, awash in a Dirac sea.






The darkness thickened; only the lingering hot breath in the air told of the flames that had raged there moments before.


“Asura! Are you okay?” Siddhārtha and Orionae came running out of the corridor. Orionae had his emergency respiratory system cranked to maximum—he was breathing with his entire body.


“Our enemy is very powerful,” Siddhārtha gasped. “We were almost destroyed ourselves.”


For the first time in a very long while, Asura let herself relax.


“Jesus escaped west across the basin,” Siddhārtha told her. “We were going to give chase but were concerned about you.”


Asura smiled bitterly at Siddhārtha’s words. They were right to be worried for her. She had been on the defensive from start to finish and had only narrowly escaped destruction. Maitreya’s next assault would surely not be long in coming.


“Siddhārtha,” Asura said quietly. “Have you ever wondered . . . ?”


“Wondered what?”


“Wondered if, perhaps, we are working under someone or something’s orders?”


Siddhārtha raised an eyebrow.


“How about you, Orionae?”


Orionae shook his head in silence.


“As it so happens,” Asura told them, “just now in my fight with Maitreya I was held captive by a psychic attack and surrounded by a phantasmal army led by Śakra himself. He spoke to me from atop an elephant. He wanted to know who had ordered me into battle—who launched the assault on his world. He wanted a name.”


The three exchanged glances. It was as though the veil that covered their hearts, unnoticed until now, had peeled back, revealing something they had never glimpsed before: the idea of an entity supporting their minds and bodies from time immemorial—a power in opposition to the endless war that threatened to demolish their universe, a transcendental being that actually wanted to save their world from destruction.


“Have you ever thought about it before now?”


“At times, yes,” Siddhārtha admitted. “I wondered what power had fashioned us into cyborgs and placed me near the shore in that barren, lifeless land—and buried you in the sands. There had to be some design behind it all, or at least I thought there was. But whenever I tried to recall what it was, I found a complete blank in my neural memory web. The circuit had been cut, you might say. Perhaps as a defensive measure. And, seeing that Śakra had to resort to ordinary words in order to try to badger information from you, I would say that our designer’s plans met with perfect success.”


Siddhārtha turned to face the vast basin of the night, as though he might find the truth of the world buried within that darkness. “Do you have any idea who it might be, Asura?”


She shook her head. “I feel like I should, and yet—”


“Orionae?”


The cyborg philosopher tilted his head, frowning, then began hesitantly. “A long time ago, I heard of a civilization that believed in an evil supreme being who existed in opposition to their good god. I have visited the village where they believed in a god of night in opposition to the god of day. The good god is the sun god, and the sun itself, and eventually the god who is heaven—the heavenly father. I always thought that the evil god, the night god, was a purely allegorical being.”


Asura and Siddhārtha stared intently at Orionae.


“So the people who believed in an evil god believed in something other than, or perhaps even directly opposed to, the ancient god of the sun?”


“Yes,” Orionae said. “Or perhaps they realized that God was only a pathway to destruction and saw in the god of night the means to save their world.”


“Is this, then, the nature of the transcendent being who designed us, Asura?” Siddhārtha asked.


“I do not know,” she said. “Gods who administer death, sin, disease, and poverty have featured in the folk beliefs of many cultures. What do these gods mean? And to what end were they eventually abandoned and forgotten?”


“You are one of them, Asura,” Siddhārtha said.


“All right,” she said, “then it could be possible that my very existence is part of the effort against those beings that want to destroy our world. If that’s the case, then who sent me here? And sent me here to coincide with our enemies’ arrival?”


Orionae strode across the stones, hands clasped behind his back. “Your existence, Asura, was hidden from the people’s eyes by the religion started by Siddhārtha. I believe it was this transcendent being who opposed the destruction of our world that inserted concepts into that religion such as the idea that ‘all is void,’ and the story of how souls cross a river to reach the afterlife. Such details suggest the true nature of our struggle to the minds of humankind.


“Siddhārtha—” Orionae turned. “You believed your teachings could lead to an escape from the misery of life, a path toward enlightenment and freedom from the endless cycle of reincarnation. Yet you erred. Why should existence be a void? Is the void not a denial of consciousness itself? Your words were twisted and used against you by those desiring our destruction. I presume that the transcendental being, as a final measure, sent both of you into the far future, and that is how you came to be standing here, at the very entrance to our enemies’ realm.”


“Yes.” Siddhārtha nodded gravely. “There’s even a sutra claiming that Asura became a believer in the Buddha . . . Their ploy met with smashing success.”


Dark orange clouds stretched out across the sky. The air grew gradually colder as an ancient stillness wrapped around the ruins.


“When I looked out upon the distant gray land from those barren reefs, I saw shapes like mountains sliding toward the city ruins on the horizon. Many of them. That was the moment when I first realized how odd my situation was. Asura, do you have any idea what those mountainous shapes were? And there was another mystery—a large, black shadow that lay deep in the sea trench near the reef where I had been hidden. The fish, when there were still fish in the sea, were too frightened to approach. Yet I couldn’t help but feel that it bore some deep meaning for me.”


Asura turned her eyes to the distant clouds. “It is dawn. Another day begins—I do not know whether I will live to see night. We must leave here at once. But before that—Siddhārtha, those shapes you saw, could they not have existed in an alternate dimension? A warping of space beneath that troubled sky could have created a mirage, amplifying whatever was passing across the flats.”


“Perhaps,” Orionae said. “Whatever they were, they were looking for us—me buried beneath the dust of Tokyo, Asura ensconced in the desert sand, and Siddhārtha under the surging waves, all back when we knew nothing of our future selves. Though their repeated search attempts did not meet with success, it is likely that this was the time they first learned of our existence.”


“Then what was that thing sunk at the bottom of the sea trench?” Siddhārtha asked. “It bothers me. All the more so because we lack the means to go back and find out.”


Asura took a deep breath. “Okay, let’s go. We need to take that sphere someplace safe.”


The three tugged on the glowing construct, enveloped in its gravitational barrier. They brought it out in front of the ruins of the crystalline building. “I see no point in returning to that city beneath the shield. Let’s go to the foot of that mountain range to the south. There we can examine how this sphere works.”


By now the orange light reached halfway across the plains. The sun still hung below the horizon, as yet unrevealed. In those fleeting moments between day and night, the three hurried southward, carrying the sphere between them.






“Well, can you fix it?” Siddhārtha asked, peering down at Orionae’s hands as he worked. He had been asking the same question every minute or so, and each time, Orionae had answered “I think so,” though it was doubtful whether he was listening at all.


Siddhārtha shrugged and turned around to Asura. “Do you think he can fix it? Shouldn’t we consider other options?”


Asura was lying down on the cold earth of the basin, gazing up at the indigo sky. Her eyes betrayed no emotion. She seemed indifferent to the icy ground, her arms and legs sprawled out unfeeling.


Looking at her, Siddhārtha ruminated on how different he was from his strange companions.


“Give him a chance,” she said at length. “We’ll consider other options if he fails.”


Orionae was struggling to reconnect a pair of broken supports beneath the sphere. If these could not be fixed, the secondary coils that slid along the outermost surface would remain stuck in place.


“Well? Can you fix it?” Siddhārtha asked again.


Orionae used his maser to separate the broken pieces into three sections. “I think so.”


Siddhārtha extended a hand. “What if we melted some metal and fashioned a pipe the same length? We could probably find some in the city.”


Orionae pushed Siddhārtha’s hand away. “We won’t need to do that.”


Orionae cut another section, fusing it to part of the sphere.


“If you break it, it’s all over.” Siddhārtha frowned over Orionae’s shoulder.


“I know.”


Carefully Orionae measured out a second, equal length of pipe, cutting off the excess from the part he had fused. Then he took the remaining fragments and fused them together to make a small orb that he then passed through the polls of a gravitational generator, reshaping it into a length of wire. Siddhārtha walked away, shaking his head.


The whole time, Asura laid splayed out on the ground, as unmoving as a stone.


Siddhārtha looked up at the sky. Through the barrier dome they had erected over themselves, the edges of the small, yellowish sun appeared to stretch to either side, like a strange mouth opening in the sky.


In Orionae’s hands, the sphere had lost half of its size. A considerable bundle of tubes, twisted into all manner of shapes, were stacked at his feet. It appeared as though he was in the process of constructing something entirely different.


“What’s that?”


“Please don’t touch. It will destroy your processors.”


Siddhārtha withdrew his hand at the last moment.






Again, night visited the plains. The thin atmosphere rapidly lost its heat. A dry, cold wind blew from one edge of the basin to the other. The scattered stars winked in the sky above the ancient stillness.


“It’s done.” Orionae sat up.


“You finished it?” Siddhārtha leapt to his feet, then gaped. “What is it?”


The sphere they had taken from the ruins was completely gone. In its place rested a pair of coils, one inside the other. Lying on their sides, their height was roughly the same as Orionae’s.


Siddhārtha’s gaze shifted suspiciously back and forth between the coils and Orionae’s face. “You’ve rebuilt it?”


Orionae turned slowly toward Siddhārtha. “No. I did not rebuild it. I’ve made an entirely different thing. Though I did use two or three of the basic principles that were fundamental to the original sphere.”


Asura slowly rose to her feet behind them.


Orionae lifted the coils and placed them in front of her. He touched a part of the device, and the coils and the cylindrical space inside them shimmered a beautiful aquamarine. Fine bands of light formed on the surface of the cylinders, moving from one end of the coils to the other at an incredible speed.


“This flow of light reveals an extraordinary transfer of energy from the exterior of the coils to the inside.”


“Where does the energy come from? I don’t see any kind of generator attached.”


“Asura, look here. See the part that looks like a diffraction grating woven of wire? I made this wire out of the supports from the original device—though one of these also existed in the sphere. If you induct this with a secondary coil, an incredible amount of power will flow through it. I believe the source of its power to be the Dirac sea.”


“The Dirac sea?”


Asura and Siddhārtha stepped forward.


“Yes, the birthplace of all protons.”


The two others scanned their own neural memory webs, discovering recollections of this strange term from ancient atomic physics.


“And so?”


“I aim this secondary coil’s deflector toward an unlimited function index. This is the same as orienting it toward the entropy D index that was in the sphere. Then, observe—another space is generated on the inside of the larger coil.”


The primary coil’s diameter was about a meter and a half; Orionae reached over it and held down the deflector on top of a rail fastened to the secondary coil. The deflector slid down the rail.


ZZZZING


They heard a faint sound like a metallic wire trembling, a vibration that echoed at the bottom of their ears.


Suddenly, the space within the coil grew dark: a true darkness, permitting absolutely no light to escape. The blue brilliance of the coil wrapped around it grew in intensity until it was blinding.


“What is the inside of this coil connected to?”


Orionae returned the deflector to its original position. The darkness inside the coil gradually brightened into the original blue bands of shimmering light.


“The thing that was hardest to understand at first was the coordinate system of the grid. I had no idea what the numbers represented. However, while I was analyzing the Milky Way’s galactic latitude, longitude, and the equator baseline range, I figured it out. According to my results, the darkness we just saw here originated from the following coordinates: Y=88.5711; X=43.026; Z=19.3920; T=n-n Δt.”


Asura’s eyes grew as narrow as needles. “Those coordinates sound like they’re inside the Andromeda galaxy.”


Orionae nodded quietly. “Indeed. They lie within the second arm in the eighth quadrant of Andromeda.”


A deep silence followed. No one said a word; even their breaths were drawn lightly. Starlight twisted by the polarizing effect of the gravitational barrier played across Asura’s still features.


The path toward destruction that had begun far in their past had taken a new turn here, heading off into the night sky. Destruction had come to their galaxy, their solar system, their Earth along that path several times—the result of some transcendent being’s displeasure with human progress. The seeds that being had planted had grown into inescapable tethers, and the once great civilizations of humanity were now reduced to ruin and dust and sand. It was already too late to try and stop it. The damage was done. Their enemy’s work was complete, leaving no tomorrow for the three cyborgs.


“Let’s go.”


The necklace around Asura’s neck sparkled in the blue light, reflecting in the eyes of her companions.


His face expressionless, Orionae once again reached out to the deflector. The coil emitted a bright blue light.


“I will go in last. It would not do to leave this here behind us.”


Asura crouched down, stared at the darkness inside the coil, then slid inside.


Ziiiiiiiiiiiiiin.


The strange vibration struck her skin like countless needles. She thought she heard Siddhārtha shout something, but in an instant, everything was swallowed in darkness.