In the beginning was the Word.


And the Word was with God.


And the Word was God.








The large scallop shells hanging in the corner of the room rattled like dry bones as the air stirred.


“Come in,” Pontius Pilate called out as he tossed his writing quill down on the desk.


What a grating racket those shells make, he thought. I’ll have to have them replaced. They had hung from his ceiling ever since a merchant from the East had given them to him as a gift many years before—and Pilate had hated them for almost as long.


A hand brushed aside the curtain in the doorway and his advisor, Ceint, entered, catching his breath. “Prefect!” he huffed.


“What is it, Ceint? I don’t think I’ve seen you looking so agitated in my life.”


“Well, it was most unexpected,” the advisor grumbled, brushing back his cape and folding his thick arms across his chest.


“What was?” Pilate leaned forward.


“That carpenter fellow, Jesus of Nazareth—Yeshua, the locals call him. He’s come to Jerusalem.”


“Made his move at last, has he? That complicates matters.” The wrinkles deepened on Pilate’s brow. The carpenter from Nazareth had already been giving him headaches for the past four or five days; he could only imagine what it would be like now that the man was sharing the same city.


“What about the Jewish priests—what do the kohanim have to say about all this?”


If there was anything that gave Pilate bigger headaches than prophet carpenters, it was the kohanim.


“Plenty. They’ve been gathering in the courtyard in front of the hall since a short while ago.”


Pilate cursed under his breath and looked in the direction of the courtyard—though several walls stood between it and his quarters. The white petals of a large dragon-tongue orchid that sat in the window swayed in the breeze.


“Well? Drive them off, Ceint!”


His advisor frowned uneasily. “Er . . . I’m afraid that if we ignore the kohanim’s feelings on this matter we’ll pay dearly for it later.” Ceint knew as well as Pilate that governing Israel without the support of the priesthood would be an exercise in futility. It was his acceptance of this fact that made him such a valuable advisor. “Which is to say,” he continued, “it’s almost tax collection time, and their requests for exemption grow louder with each year.”


This Pilate knew without being told. The Jewish clergy’s tax payments accounted for a good four tenths of his entire income from the Roman territories of Israel. It was one of his most important duties as Prefect of Jerusalem and representative of Rome in Israel to badger the kohanim into coughing up a portion of the coin they received from their congregations.


Ceint was warming to his topic. “Prefect, the missteps of the Roman empire in recent years have made it very difficult to administer these provincial territories. Even the proud Roman army is mostly made up of foreign mercenaries these days. Should the unthinkable happen and an uprising against the Empire take place here in Israel, I do not think we can expect much support from the homeland. We must keep that in mind when dealing with the locals.”


This too, Pilate knew, and the knowledge gnawed at him. Just as the midday sun begins to descend toward the western horizon the moment it reaches its zenith, the Roman Empire had begun to weaken year by year, almost imperceptibly, yet with undeniable certainty. The word had passed from mouth to mouth in the markets, dispersing in every direction on the lips of Jewish pilgrims, until every scruffy-headed street urchin in the province knew it for a fact. This knowlege gave the kohanim more influence and made it easier for them to be openly defiant of Rome and her representative.


“Prefect!” someone shouted from outside the room.


“What’s that now?”


Ceint went out to check.


Pilate heard his advisor and another man speaking intently outside. His head felt heavy. They had thrown a banquet the night before for Tethias, the head of the Roman garrison in Jerusalem, and it had left him exhausted. Tethias was a famous lover of alcohol, and the wine they had served, made from some grain grown in lands to the east, was heady stuff. The morning light had already begun painting stripes of light across the dusty cobblestones of Jerusalem’s inner streets when Tethias’s men had helped the inebriated prefect back to his quarters.


“Macillus!” he called. “Where’s Macillus?”


The door in the rear opened and the prefect’s servant came sidling out. “Yes, Master?”


“There you are, Macillus. I require a bath.”


“Very good, Prefect.”


Macillus shuffled from the room, his belt of silver chains clinking across his wine-colored sheepskin tunic.


Ceint came hurrying back in. “Prefect?”


“What is it now?”


“Simon has come with a request from the kohanim.”


“So? What do they want this time?”


Ceint leaned in closer. Pilate caught a whiff of scented oil.


“They want you to arrest Jesus and hand him over to the Sanhedrin . . . or execute him yourself.”


“What? Since when do the kohanim give orders to the representative of Rome?” He spat. “Fine. If it’s blood they want, then it’s blood they’ll get!”


Pontius Pilate picked up the longsword that rested behind his chair and strode out of the room, his face flushed with anger.


Ceint yelped. “Wait, Prefect, wait!” He scurried to stand in front of his chief, holding out both hands in desperation. “You must wait!”


Pilate paused, his jaw twitching with the embarrassment of being manipulated by the kohanim. How could one rule a people if you were forever frightened of angering them?


“Prefect! Er, I was thinking—what if we gave this Jesus a summons instead? It would look better than arresting him. After all, he has committed no crime.


“If necessary,” Ceint continued in that way he had of stating things so evenly that one might take them to mean whatever one wished, “I could do the questioning myself.”


Pilate considered. If they served this “prophet” with a summons now, they would always be able to jail him afterward under the pretext of incivility toward a Roman agent.


“Not a terrible idea,” the prefect admitted with a sigh. In truth, it was a great annoyance to him to have to question and try heretics. Prolocutors of faith had a way with words, but they always seemed to lack a basic grasp on logic—and yet pointing out their errors never seemed to have any effect, much to Pilate’s consternation.


“Perhaps, Prefect,” Ceint continued, sensing his master’s hesitation, “we should have a look at this Jesus fellow first. I will be happy to join you. We can watch him anonymously, then decide his fate.”


If they did so, Pilate knew, Ceint would be sure to slowly win him over to his way of thinking. But the realization did not upset him. It was often the case that Ceint’s stated plans were what the prefect had been unconsciously planning anyway—another reason that he was such a good and loyal advisor.


“Right. Let’s go see for ourselves what all the fuss is about.”


Pilate returned his longsword to its customary place behind the chair and stuck his head into the gallery behind the office.


“We’re going out.”






Pontius Pilate mounted his horse and Ceint walked beside him. Several guardsmen completed the entourage, one holding the horse’s bridle, the others bearing spears.


“Where do you think he is?”


“Preaching in the Plaza of the Dead, most likely.”


“He’s popular?”


Ceint looked up at Pilate with a frown. “Quite popular, strangely enough.”


“He’d have to be to get the kohanim so riled up.”


Ceint pulled his long robes more tightly around his body. “He came into Jerusalem last night. I hear he was proselytizing out to the west, saying something about receiving a revelation from God.”


Pilate squinted—a habit of his whenever he was particularly wary about something. “How have people been responding?”


“Apparently, many in the city knew of his imminent arrival half a month ago. Some disciples of his, a group of twelve or so from what I hear, came to the city ahead of time to do some publicity.”


“Aggressive, aren’t they?”


“He’s calling his arrival ‘The Entry into Jerusalem,’ ” Ceint said with evident derision.


“Fancies himself some sort of great religious leader, then?”


Ceint nodded. “This is what has gotten the Jewish priesthood so, as you say, riled up.”


If the man was as big a braggart as it sounded, Pilate thought the kohanim probably had the right of it. This carpenter turned preacher was a fool, and worse, a popular fool.


The entourage made its way down the cobblestone streets, turning into the arcade that led toward the Plaza of the Dead. The merchants there, who had spread their wares so thickly upon the street as to block all but a narrow stream of foot traffic, panicked at the sudden arrival of the Romans and hurriedly gathered their wares and took shelter beneath the eaves of the houses. One who was late in pulling up his blanket received a whack on the back from the haft of one of the guards’ spears.


It was then that a bundle of greens tied with a hempen cord flew out of the crowd and struck Pontius Pilate directly in the chest. Pilate’s face went red, but before he could react further, Ceint stepped to the leader of the guards and whispered an order in his ear. The guard captain took three of his men and plunged into the milling crowd. The two remaining pointed the tips of their long spears toward the throng that had gathered around the horse.


“Prefect, they have caught the man responsible.”


Pilate looked to see his guardsmen dragging a young man out of the crowd by both arms. The man was wailing something, a look of torrid fear upon his face. An old woman clung to his shirttail and howled. It was hard to see her clearly in the dim light of the stone arcade, but her despairing cries were clearly audible above the noise of the onlookers.


Ceint strode over to the captive. He said something to the guard captain, who pointed the gleaming tip of his spear at the young man’s chest. The unexpected silence that came over the crowd in that instant planted a sudden black fear in Pilate’s heart.


The guard captain tensed his muscular arms. In a moment, the spear would surely pierce the captive’s chest.


“Wait!”


A sharp and yet oddly calm voice sounded from amidst the crowd behind Pilate’s horse.


“What?”


The Roman prefect turned his horse around to look.


A lone man stood in the middle of the street.


His face was gaunt, framed by a long beard and long hair that was gray with ash. His eyes gave off a piercing light. He held a gnarled stick of wood in his right hand as a walking staff.


“Will you not spare the life of this young man? Lord Pontius Pilate, great emissary of Rome, humbly, I beg your pity,” the man said with a reverent bow. His face and body were soiled and his bearing no better than a slave’s, yet something in his manner struck Pilate as earnestly noble.


“And who might you be?”


The man lifted his face. The clear look in his eyes made Pilate swallow despite himself.


“I am Peter, one of the twelve apostles of Jesus Christ, son of the Almighty . . . He whom you call ‘Zeus,’ our Father and Lord in Heaven.”


Pilate gritted his teeth. He couldn’t have met a worse person at a worse time. “Are you aware that this young man threw a bundle of filthy leaves at my person?”


“Lord Prefect, are these green leaves that were thrown to you not a token of God’s blessing upon this very land of Israel which you govern? It is God, after all, who has given us these life-sustaining grains and vegetables. God’s love be praised!”


Peter intertwined the fingers of his hands and knelt upon the cobblestones in supplication. The members of the crowd mimicked his actions, falling to their knees and bowing to Pilate atop his horse.


“May God grant his blessings to this young man, and may He grant His love which is higher than the blue sky above us and deeper than the sea to Lord Pontius Pilate, representative of Rome. Amen.” Peter’s resonant voice lifted above the heads of the crowd.


Pilate despaired. The bowing, praying throng completely outdid any display of authority he might have hoped to make. As it stood in that crowded street, Rome was losing much, while the poor people of Jerusalem had lost nothing—even when many of them would have been better off dead than live the way they did.


“Release him, Ceint.”


A look of defeat came over the advisor’s face.


“I said release him.”


Ceint whispered to the guard captain. Abruptly the burly soldier let go of the young man’s arm and thrust him away. The freed man stumbled backward into the crowd of bowing onlookers, where the sobbing old woman, near-delusional with relief, embraced and clung to him.


A moment later a cry went up from the crowd—a victory cheer.


“Let’s go.”


Pilate took his whip to his horse, flying over the stones of the arcade. All he could see around him were omens of Rome’s decline.






They did not speak of the incident until after they had stopped to calm their nerves with some refreshment. Then, as Pilate was climbing back onto his steed, Ceint drew close. “Prefect,” he said. “I am increasingly of the opinion that we should arrest this carpenter when we find him.”


Pilate frowned. “As representative of Rome, I really don’t want to get involved in local troubles. The Jews can do whatever they want—they can even start a new religion. It makes no difference to the Empire.”


Ceint shook his head.


“Ceint, as you know, it is the foremost duty of the prefect in Jerusalem to collect taxes from the land and send them back home. Next, I am to protect those Romans who work here from banditry and ensure a modicum of peace and order. Lastly, I am to ensure that the roads leading from Rome to this province are always kept in proper condition so as not to hinder the movement of our armies. These three things are expected of me. Beyond this, the representative of Rome has no business interfering in local affairs.”


The administration of Rome’s colonies had always hung on these three requirements. The Romans had never considered the vast territories that they held to be part of their own native soil—they thought of the provinces as barbarous lands belonging to uncivilized peoples. They had no desire to claim them as second homelands, nor did they invest much capital into developing the regions. Such was the Roman way of thinking, and it had succeeded in making a giant orphan out of Rome.


“Pax Romana!” the people shouted, yet in the echo of their voices, Pilate could hear the sound of an empire crumbling.


“Lord Prefect. Will you be returning to your quarters?” Ceint asked, his voice betraying a hint of mockery.


“Not yet. Let’s have a look at this man they call Jesus. Show me the way.”


Ceint prodded the shoulder of the servant who held the reins of Pilate’s horse.


The entourage proceeded down a crooked backstreet paved with bricks of fired clay. Tiny rooms were packed like crates along both sides of the narrow way, each providing living quarters for an entire family. In these cramped stone spaces, the inhabitants had laid out rugs of woven hemp and hung curtains to shelter themselves from the street. The rugs and curtains were so dirty and tattered that it was impossible to tell their weaves or patterns, and they spilled out over the bricks, occasionally catching the feet of people as they passed.


The air smelled like stewing vegetables and sweat. The clouds of flies were inescapable, and the swarms of children seemed equally numerous. Such were the backstreets of Jerusalem.


It was no wonder that the perfumes favored by the nobles of Rome had always been greatly coveted in the provinces. In the beginning, all Roman emissaries were members of the military, and they had spent their days eating the same food and breathing the same air as the dusty, sweaty locals. Their wives and daughters likewise spent their hours in the grime and sweat. Fresh water was a valuable commodity in the provincial cities; bathing was a rare luxury. Later emissaries had established a greater distance between themselves and the local populace, but there was nothing they could do about the living conditions—thus the high level of interest in perfumes. For those who live a wholesome life in a clean environment there is little need for masking fragrances.


The great baths of Rome and the fine quality of its perfumes might be a testament to the unsanitary conditions of Roman life—but they were also a sophisticated comfort unavailable to the provincial servants of the Empire.


“Two more years,” Pilate muttered. That was all he had left in his term as Prefect of Israel. He had been living here for three years already.


“Yes?” Ceint looked up from beside his horse, lifting an eyebrow.


“Never mind.”


Pilate wanted nothing more than to serve his last two years without incident.


After they passed through the brick arcade with its dust and its flies and its cacophony of voices, they emerged quite abruptly into a large circular plaza that seemed comparatively empty—though there were still a large number of citizens bustling about in the course of their daily activities. In the very middle of the open space stood an ancient royal poinciana with bright crimson flowers, looking like a pillar of flame. Pilate held up a hand to shade his eyes from the sun.


Ceint stopped in his tracks. “There. Over there.”


“Where?” Pilate followed his advisor’s gaze.


Ceint was staring with great intensity into a corner of the plaza. There, beyond the giant tree with its fiery petals, a dozen or so people were gathered near a wall of stone. Some members of the small crowd stood, some sat, others lay sprawled upon the ground, but all were looking upward at a lone figure standing atop the wall.


Pilate advanced his horse slowly. No fewer than twenty different streets opened into this plaza; it was a central meeting place and crossroads for this part of the city. Now the movements of the merchants going to and fro, the beggars along the edges of the streets, and the town officials surrounded by weary travelers struck Pilate with a strange sort of uniformity, like the movements of actors upon a stage. It seemed that the Romans’ sudden arrival at the plaza was spreading a very tangible ripple through the crowd. In the middle of the hubbub, the group standing beyond the poinciana seemed eerily quiet.


Fragments of garbled speech, thick with the accent of Galilee, reached the prefect’s ears.


“No matter how much man possesses, no Kingdom of God will he build . . .”


“. . . makes this . . .”


“. . . man must look back upon the deeds of the day . . .”


“. . . that is our Lord in Heaven, Jehovah . . .”


“. . . Jehovah will judge . . .”


“. . . and when He decides that yes, it is good, only then will . . .”


The man atop the wall looked like a farmer. He wore a grimy hempen robe sewn together at the sides like a monk’s—probably a gift from some Roman—and garlands on his feet in place of sandals.


“Jesus, carpenter of Nazareth,” Ceint whispered.


Drops of sweat gathered in the man’s sunken cheeks while his small eyes darted around, taking in the citizens gathered before him.


“It will come. Don’t forget it. That is—ah, that is to say . . .”


An old man hunched over at the foot of the wall lifted his face and said in a clear voice, “The Final Judgment, my lord.”


“That’s it! That’s right! The Final Judgment is what it is! Oh, and it is a truly frightening thing! Jehovah, our Lord in Heaven, will look at every one of our sins . . .”


Pilate strained to hear the words over the bustle of the plaza.


“. . . to the Kingdom of God. Those who are left will be burned in Jehovah’s fire, charred . . .”


“. . . which is why we must all make haste to . . .”


A breathy collective sigh emerged from the small crowd of listeners. Pilate frowned. To these poor, simple people of Jerusalem, the image of a final judgment at the hands of God should have been a nightmare vision of their own deaths. Why are they so enthralled?


“That’s why everyone has to pray to God. You get it? And praying isn’t about saying you want God to do this or do that. You have to make yourself ready! If you’re a drunk, stop drinking. If you are a gambler, stop gambling. Just for one day. And on that day . . .”


There was something about the man’s crude Galilean accent that perfectly matched the tone of his words. Pilate had to admit that the man’s voice was imbued with a certain unique passion, a strange intensity that was altogether unfamiliar to him.


Pilate urged his horse forward until he had reached the edge of the carpenter’s audience. He gazed over the heads of the listeners at the man who addressed them.


“Are you Jesus of Nazareth?” he asked, deliberately keeping his voice as low as it could be and still be heard. As one the crowd turned. Several grew pale and began edging their way toward the nearest alley.


“There is no need for flight,” Pilate urged. “I’m merely asking a question.”


Yet as the silence lengthened the audience gradually dispersed until only the man on the wall and the older man hunched before him remained.


“Are you Jesus of Nazareth?” Pilate asked again.


“The prefect asks a question. You should answer,” Ceint declared loudly, hand on the hilt of his short sword.


“Yes. I am Jesus Christ, son of Jehovah our Lord in Heaven.”


“Hmph.” Pilate raised an eyebrow. “Okay. What about you, old man? We’ve met before.”


The old man got to his feet and bowed curtly. “I am Peter, one of the twelve apostles of Jesus Christ, son of Jehovah, our Lord in Heaven.”


“I see.”


Pontius Pilate sat atop his horse, wondering how this “apostle” had gotten here so fast, and wondering what he should say next. There was nothing in what the man was saying about God that should concern an emissary of Rome or require his intervention. He had seen several Jewish sects of this kind spring up lately. That is, they purported to be sects, even though they rarely displayed any original thought or had anything new to say. Most were led by provincial priests who had been barred from joining the kohanim and so sought another way to make a name for themselves by proselytizing on their own.


So why are the kohanim so upset about this man? He barely seems capable of drawing a crowd, even here in Jerusalem. Not to mention that from the look of the rags he’s wearing, he doesn’t have many supporters. Is that blood on his feet?


Ceint moved closer to the wall. “Carpenter of Nazareth who calls himself Jesus! What is your true name? There are plenty of Christs around, but few Jesuses. I’ve heard the people here call you Yeshua?”


“That is my name. I am Yeshua of Nazareth.”


“Good official,” spoke Peter, “it is in truth his name. In the land of Nazareth, there are many with the name of Yeshua.”


“Are there now?”


“What’s troubling you, Ceint?” Pilate asked quietly, knowing full well what his advisor was about. He was seeking to turn this chance encounter with Jesus of Nazareth into a pretext for taking the man into custody.


“Ceint?”


“Prefect—the people of the town are watching. The supporters of the kohanim are among them. We must be wary.”


Pilate glanced at the plaza behind them. Where it had appeared only sparsely populated before, it now seemed unexpectedly crowded—as if every citizen who lived off every side street that opened into the plaza had suddenly decided to put in an appearance. Fully half of the broad space was packed with people, all standing in utter silence, intently watching the discussion between Pilate and the shoddy-looking preacher.


“Jesus of Nazareth. Tell me, this ‘final judgment’ of which you were speaking—”


“Is something the matter?”


“Yes, something is the matter! Where did you hear such nonsense?”


“It is not nonsense. Good official, are you a follower of the Jewish faith?”


Ceint smiled a cool smile. “The Romans have no religion. At least nothing like the kind of ‘faith’ your lot goes on about.”


“That is because your spirit has withered.”


“Excuse me?”


“The Romans pilfer the gods of the Greeks and call themselves pious!” The preacher’s voice grew suddenly louder. “There is only one true God. No ‘god of the sun,’ or ‘goddess of the moon,’ or ‘god of lightning,’ or ‘god of the sea.’ So many gods and they all mean nothing!”


The outburst left the loquacious Ceint tongue-tied. While most Romans understood that the gods were to be feared, they were also inclined to treat them as a kind of game, often evoked for little more than entertainment. Romans knew little of hardship; they had managed to cope rather well with the challenges and sorrows of their world, and they saw very little need for a savior in the true sense of the word. The gods of the Romans cast light shadows on the empire. In truth, for most they were little more than seasoning to add a touch of gravitas to the citizens’ daily lives.


This conversation had been doomed from the start. The carpenter-turned-preacher spoke from a spiritual height that the pragmatic Ceint could not fathom.


Pilate leaned forward on his horse. “I’ll admit that the concept of a final judgment is an interesting one,” he said, his tone that of an instructor reprimanding an impertinent pupil. “Yet will the ignorant people not fear you for your dire predictions? It does not seem the best way to gain followers. There are a lot of men popping up these days saying very similar things, you know. They talk about how the gods will judge us, and how those with evil hearts will be burned with fire.”


“But it’s true. I saw it,” Jesus said.


“That’s what they all say,” Ceint spat, unable to restrain himself any longer. “Every one of them. I saw it. It was me. Me me me. The sun lost its light, the moon and stars fled, and in the eternal darkness that followed the great God in Heaven appeared, ripping the void in two, and cast a shining spear down upon the sullied land. And where the spear falls it rends the land, molten rock spews forth like a fountain, the seas rise up and sweep the land clean, all life perishes . . . blah, blah, blah.”


“Ceint,” Pilate interjected, a sadness in his voice, “there’s no need to take this man back to the guardhouse. Tell the kohanim they have nothing to fear.”


“But, Prefect!” Ceint whispered urgently. “Should we not first take him back with us? We can release him later if we feel it is the right thing to do. If we simply let him go now, it will seem to the crowd that the representative of Rome challenged him and lost.”


Pilate sighed. At least I tried. “All right, do it.”


Ceint motioned with his eyes to the captain of the guards. Within moments the prefect’s bodyguard pulled the man from Nazareth down from the wall. They held him roughly, pinioned by both arms.


“Ow! That hurts!” the carpenter yelped. “There’s no need for such violence. I’ll go peacefully.”


“What about the old one?” Ceint demanded.


“I don’t care about him. Let him go.”


After a moment’s hesitation, Pilate’s advisor thrust the apostle Peter aside with a sour look.


“Time to leave.”


With Pontius Pilate at its head, the Roman entourage led Jesus from the plaza. The prefect hurried them along, eager to get away from the growing throng.


The crowd that gathered now around the fiery poinciana watched the Romans’ departure in silence, faces dark with betrayal, brows creased with a nameless yearning.


What the prophet says is true.


Surely the Kingdom of God will appear before us, a beautiful, ideal land. What need have we of harsh rules and privations, and petitioning our masters for forgiveness?


God forgives. Jehovah takes pity on mankind and forgives us all our sins. We must pray to Him.


Only those who truly let God into their hearts may reach the kingdom of Heaven. God is absolutely fair. God’s heart is big enough to hold our entire world many times over . . .


Such was the God that the people wanted. They dreamed of the glory and the blessing of the Kingdom of God that would come one day to relieve them of their endless toil, their sickness and their poverty.


And yet, the carpenter of Nazareth had miscalculated.


“You know, I’d rather drink then get picked up by some God when the Final Judgment comes.”


“When is this final day coming anyway?”


“Sometime, according to what he says.”


“So when is sometime?”


“How should I know? Probably not while we’re still alive.”


“Then what’s the point?”


“Maybe if we live our lives right and pray to God, our children or their children will be saved at the time of the judgment?”


“Well, I don’t have any kids, so who cares?”


The crowd muttered and began to disperse, flowing back into the alleyways and arcades like a receding tide, leaving the flowers of the poinciana to flutter by themselves like lonely flames. Peter, the wizened disciple, had also vanished. Most of the citizens of Jerusalem had already forgotten about the man who was taken away—most would never again think on what had happened in the plaza that day or remember the man who called himself a carpenter of Nazareth.






When the kohanim heard that Pontius Pilate had taken Jesus of Nazareth into custody they were greatly pleased. This representative of Rome had never shown much promise before, but the latest turn of events was worthy of attention. With time, the kohanim decided, they might even be moved to reassess their views on the prefect. Future potential aside, it was an excellent sign that this man of Rome could be dealt with.


The next morning, before the sun had risen, a crowd of men in long black clerical robes had gathered in the stone-tiled courtyard of Pontius Pilate’s villa. The harsh criticisms they had muttered on the day before were gone, replaced by an intense interest in the sentencing of Jesus.


The sun was already well into the sky when Pilate left his bedroom. He spent a long time straightening his hair, clipping the nails on his hands and feet, and arranging his new toga, before he finally made his way toward the annex where his official offices were located. A band of merchants from the East had collected on the cobblestones beneath the hall that connected the main villa to the annex. Pontius Pilate recalled the amount of gold he had received from them the night before as a fee for permission to set up their markets here in Jerusalem. A great deal of that gold was destined for his own personal coffers. With that in mind, the prospect of Jesus’s trial—which would probably take up most of his afternoon—didn’t seem quite so onerous.






In the court adjacent to Pilate’s offices, six judges under the direct employ of Rome sat in tall chairs along the wall. Across from the judges sat four priests, representatives of the kohanim who were there both as observers and as the plaintiffs. When the prefect arrived, the kohanim were huddled together as they discussed something in low voices.


Pilate sat languidly upon his sofa, which was covered with the thick mane of a mountain lion.


Immediately High Judge Achaioi stood beside him and proclaimed, “Hereby begins the trial of Jesus of Nazareth in the name of Pontius Pilate, Prefect of Jerusalem and representative of Rome in Israel.”


“All right, let’s begin,” Pilate said, nodding to Achaioi. He accepted a cup of milk tea from a servant who stood in attendance behind the sofa.


“Bring Jesus forth.” Achaioi signaled to a guard standing in one corner of the room. The guard went outside, his chain-mail hauberk rattling, and returned immediately with the man they had taken into custody in the Plaza of the Dead the day before. Silently the guard brought the prisoner into the center of the chamber and then held him steady there with the butt of his short spear on the man’s shoulder.


“Back to your place.”


The guard nodded and returned to his corner.


Jesus blinked several times and looked around the chamber nervously with bloodshot eyes. He looked as if he hadn’t slept the night before.


Achaioi began to read the allegations, the grim words persisting in the heavy air until their weight seemed tangibly to press against the captive’s back, pushing him toward his fate.


Pilate sipped his milk tea—it was pleasantly, mildly bitter—and withstood the long boredom. Occasional sharp calls could be heard through the open window from the street outside—the shouts of the Roman guards stationed at the prefect’s villa, practicing their formations for battle. The cries seemed oddly erratic, continuing, fading, then erupting again as soon as he thought they had finally ceased. “My officers have been lacking in spirit lately,” Pilate muttered from behind his bowl.


“Prefect?”


Achaioi was leaning over Pilate. He had apparently been addressing the prefect for some time. Pilate snapped back into the present and quickly handed his bowl off to his servant. He did not need to hear the judge again. Achaioi was asking him whether he, as representative of Rome, had any questions for the accused. What that meant was that the long explanation of charges was finished, and the trial was finally moving to its conclusion.


Pilate had been gradually sinking into his sofa until he was half buried in furs. Now he sat up and addressed the prisoner.


“I have but one question.”


The man from Nazareth stood in the center of the courtyard, staring in Pilate’s direction. His face betrayed no emotion.


“Jesus. This ‘end of the world’ of which you speak—exactly when will it occur?”


The carpenter leaned forward, a sudden passion kindled inside him. “You mean the Final Judgment?”


There is a certain imbecility behind his earnestness, thought Pilate.


“Yes. This judgment of God you like to talk about.”


Jesus nodded several times, his face flushed, like a young boy who is asked a question regarding his favorite subject.


“Ah yes, that!”


“Yes, that. What else could I be asking about?”


“It is not clear exactly when it will come, but it will come soon.”


“Soon?”


“Yes, that’s right.”


The accused shut his mouth with finality, as though he had said all that needed to be said on the subject. He was the star student again, eagerly awaiting the next question.


“And?” Pilate asked with the faintest of sighs. “What do you think we should do to get ready for this end of days?”


“Well, I think everyone, including me of course, should prepare their hearts to be judged by God.”


“How exactly should we prepare?”


“Prepare for what?”


“Prepare to be judged by God!”


“Well, pray to Him with a pure heart. Pray and follow Him.” Then he added in a deeper voice, half as though he were admonishing himself, “And we must repent, yes. That is the way to true prayer.”


“What am I supposed to make of that? It’s too vague, what you’re saying. That’s why people accuse you of things, you know.”


Ceint, on Pilate’s left, discreetly nudged the prefect’s arm. One of the judges stood from his tall chair, faced Pilate, and bowed.


“Proceed.” Pilate yielded the floor and sank back into his sofa.


“Jesus of Nazareth!” Jesus turned to face the judge. “I’ve heard that you call yourself the Messiah.”


“I am the Messiah. People call me a prophet, but they’re wrong. I’m no prophet. Prophets speak of life and death and destinies that stretch into an unseen tomorrow, but I do not do these things. I save people. I free them from their sins.”


Another of the judges stood. “And you claim you will atone for the sins of all people before God in Heaven?”


“Indeed I will. I am the Messiah. I am the Son of God. That is why I will atone in anticipation of the Final Judgment that will come before long. In your stead, I will do penance for all your sins.”


The carpenter’s thick, pallid lips moved quickly, as though he were discussing a glorious plan for future entertainment. Spittle flew from the corner of his mouth.


“I have no desire for you to take on my sins, Jesus of Nazareth. I just want to know whence comes your confidence in claiming that you are the Messiah. I’ve heard you can perform miracles?”


There was a titter of laughter among the kohanim.


“The Messiah will appear as a servant to all men,” Jesus said, his eyes now fixed on a point in space somewhere above the judges, as though he were reciting from memory. “He will bear mankind’s sins and suffer upon the cross, offering himself up to appease God’s anger. Thus will my soul act as a guide, leading all men to the Kingdom of Heaven.”


“Jesus!” Ceint spoke suddenly. “Who told you that?”


Jesus blanched. “Who told me?”


“Yes, who told you? Don’t tell me you heard it directly from God himself?”


“The prophet John.”


Ceint lifted an eyebrow. “John? The one King Herod Antipas executed in Balqa?”


The man shook his head. “No, he’s not dead. John cannot die.”


Ceint smirked. “Why ever not?”


“Because he’s friends with the Archangel Michael. He even introduced me. Though I only offered my greetings from a distance.” The prisoner’s voice was soft with chagrin.


The poor fellow wanted a closer look at the angel, Pilate thought, before realizing how ridiculous the story was, and how foolhardy.


Ceint tensed for a moment. “Are you saying you met the Archangel Michael?”


“Yes.”


The kohanim stood one after the other, black rage mounting in their faces. Their murmurs of fury were audible across the chamber.


“Silence!” Ceint’s voice cut through the air like a blade. He fixed the prisoner with a piercing stare. “Where? Where did you meet Michael?”


Jesus cast his eyes over toward the kohanim, then back to Ceint. “In the Jordan Valley. He came down from Heaven.” He lifted a finger on his right hand, pointing upward. For a moment, the face of the Nazarene was transformed entirely, filled with an unshakeable, ironclad confidence. His profile was as rough as if it had been hastily carven with a chisel, his eyes intoxicated and wild as briars. “Yes, I saw him,” he said. “I saw him!” He began to pace before the representatives of Rome, muttering loudly.


“There’s not much time left,” he continued. “It’s just a feeling I have. The Kingdom of God may well be at hand! The Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of God—”


He put his hands to his head as though he were searching through murky memories for some clue.


“Only those who have received the permission of God may enter God’s kingdom. Heaven’s gates are very wide, but how many will be able to enter? His judgment is harsh—so harsh.” Jesus spoke in a monotone, as though relaying someone else’s words.


“What was that?”


“Stake him to the cross!” the kohanim shouted, their whiskers bristling with outrage.


“Death to the fool who does not fear God!”


“Death, death!”


“Prefect. Order this man to his death. The worst death possible!”


Pilate grabbed the glorious silk cape that hung over his shoulders and used it to wipe the sweat from his forehead.


“Your orders, Prefect?” Ceint asked, kneeling beside the sofa. Pilate crossed his arms and frowned.


“Death to him!” The echoing voices of the kohanim hit Pilate’s chest like a physical blow.


He stared at the man from Nazareth.


It would be so easy to give the kohanim what they wanted. He could think up any reason he required. This man might in fact be blameless, yet what did it matter? This was nothing more than a provincial squabble.


“Shall we return Jesus to his cell, Prefect?” Ceint asked softly, trying to read his master’s mind. They had resolved several similar incidents in the past by returning the accused to his cell and there ending his life by poison or assassination. Death by “illness” in prison had a way of stifling trouble before it started.


“Do you think that will satisfy the kohanim?” Pilate had already accepted the fact that the carpenter-turned-preacher would not be returning to the streets of Jerusalem alive. He scowled bitterly. “We could have let him go if he hadn’t gone on about meeting Michael like that. The fool!” A sudden anger rose inside him toward the man who had put the simple carpenter on the spot in the first place.


“Achaioi!”


He beckoned the High Judge to him. “What do you think of what this man has said here?”


Achaioi responded with his eyes downcast, one hand stroking his snow-


white beard. “I believe he has a sickness of the mind. However, there is a certain percentage of the folk in the poorer parts of town who actually believe him—they think he is their savior—and the number grows. In order to avoid needless entanglements between the representative of Rome and the—the unique religious issues in this province—it falls to us to be very wary of this sort of disturbance, and careful of how we handle the present matter.”


Pilate nodded and waved Achaioi back to his original position.


“Ceint. I propose we call a hiatus.”


Ceint shouted a few orders and the judges and the kohanim shuffled out of the courtyard, followed by the prisoner and his escort. When the last spear-toting guard had disappeared from sight, the heat of the day seemed to rush in suddenly to fill the empty space between the walls. There was silence outside; training was over at the garrison.


“Well, Ceint. What do you think of what he had to say?”


“You mean the bit about him meeting the Archangel Michael?”


“That too.”


Pontius Pilate and his advisor looked at each other for a long moment, neither saying a word. There was confusion in the eyes of both men.


“I don’t think much of it at all. But the town officials say that he’s been healing people—sick people waiting to die and those who cannot stand. He brings them back to health in an instant, and former cripples run like the wind. There are even some town officials who say they have seen these things for themselves.”


“Some kind of sorcery, then?”


“That is what the kohanim call it, for certain. They’re quite incensed. They see it as blasphemous.”


“What I want to know is how you see it, Ceint. Do you think the stories are genuine?”


Ceint put a hand to his head. He always did this when he lacked a response.


“Prefect,” he said after a long pause. “I wonder if some of these accounts might not actually be true.” Ceint spoke slowly, carefully selecting his words.


“Some of them?” Pilate leaned forward. “If even one of these stories is the truth, we have a serious situation on our hands.”


“Which is why, Prefect, I feel it is highly dangerous to allow this Jesus any more free rein.”


“Why, Ceint . . . it sounds as though you actually believe this man possesses some sort of mighty Heaven-sent power.”


Pilate’s adviser did not answer, but instead turned his face toward the sunlight that poured in through the windows. There was a sudden pallor in his visage. “If he—” Ceint began at last, then swallowed his words. Pilate saw his throat move with the effort. “If he has truly caused cripples to run and lifted those waiting to die from their sick beds, then I would have to say that he may truly be a—well, a god.”


“And someone says they’ve seen him do this?”


Ceint turned slowly back toward Pontius Pilate. “Prefect, if you saw him hand out a single piece of bread to a throng of the poor who came to hear his sermons, and you saw those who took the tiniest crumb and put it to their lips filled with joy and sustenance—if you saw this, what would you think?”


Tiny beads of sweat had appeared on Ceint’s face. Several of them joined together and ran down his cheek, forming a glistening droplet at the tip of his chin.


Pilate stared at his advisor. He didn’t move a muscle. He hardly even breathed. “You saw this, didn’t you?” he said finally.


Ceint gave no reply, but his silence was testament enough to the conflict in his heart.


“Miracles.” Pilate moaned. “Splendid. Who else but a god possesses such power?”


A spear that a soldier had left leaning in one corner of the chamber slid and fell to the floor with a loud echoing clang, but neither of the two men so much as glanced in its direction.


“But, Ceint. Can gods really appear just like that in our world?”


Pontius Pilate found himself struggling to grasp the situation. His Roman upbringing and secular spirit left him ill equipped to grapple with the improbable, radical gods that seemed to persist behind every shadow in this land of the Jews—and in every word and deed of the poor carpenter from Nazareth.


“Ceint. I’m afraid I don’t understand how feeding a crowd of the poor with a piece of bread necessarily makes one a god.”


“The gods control man’s destiny, and through natural phenomena they let their existence and their will be known. Usually, they are far removed from men, but when they do appear to us . . . that’s when we say a miracle has occurred.”


“A miracle did occur. Does that make Jesus of Nazareth the Messiah?”


“Prefect. We must not allow Jesus to live because—”


“Yes?” Pilate said.


The light reflected from the leaves outside the window gave a greenish cast to the tense features of the two men. Or perhaps it was the unease they felt in their hearts showing on their faces.


“You know why.”


Pontius Pilate uncrossed and recrossed his legs and rearranged his cape across his shoulder.


“It is time to finish this trial.”


Once again the judges and the kohanim were called back into the chamber. Behind them came the guard, dragging Jesus of Nazareth by a rope that was tied around his waist. High Judge Achaioi declared the court back in session.


With the silver rod of office in his hand, Pontius Pilate pointed toward the priests.


“Kohanim. Before I pronounce my judgment upon this man, I have a question to ask of you.”


As one, the kohanim inclined their heads.


“Kohanim. I would like to know what you think about the Day of Judgment this man of Nazareth predicts. Tell me.”


An old man, the eldest of the kohanim, stepped forward. The depth of his anger was clear upon his face.


“Prefect, God is not some—some thing which comes after some final day of judgment, such as this man claims. What, I ask you, is this judgment at the end of days—this Final Judgment? Does God judge men? God gave birth to men. Men are an expression of God’s will. Perhaps, after we were created, our thoughts and our actions were somewhat different than what God had hoped for.” The old man had a far-off look in his eyes as he spoke. “Thus there might be a time when God reviews mankind and decides to create men anew . . .”


“And isn’t that the Final Judgment?” Pilate asked.


The kohen waved his hands in a grand gesture. “Absolutely not. Prefect, this review will not take the form of a judgment. God speaks through his prophets to communicate his desires. Men follow these prophecies to plan their lives.”


Another of the old kohen stood. “Prefect. What troubles me is what this man says about the need for us to purify our hearts and rectify our actions in anticipation of God’s judgment. There is a terrible threat veiled within these words. The dread of a Final Judgment is a terrifying thing for this man to lay upon our unknowing, piteous people.”


The third kohen stood. “Even if peace should come to our land as a result of the people’s fear, it would be a distant thing indeed from true happiness. God is not some kind of side effect, Prefect.”


Then the final kohen, unable to restrain himself any longer, threw up his hands and shouted, “Nail him to the cross!”


“Yes, Prefect,” the first kohen declared, “what more questioning could you possibly require? His guilt is clear and apparent. Give him a swift death!”


Pilate waved down the kohanim with one hand and turned to the accused. “Jesus of Nazareth. I have a question for you. You must’ve known when you came into Jerusalem that this would happen. I cannot believe you imagined you would leave the city alive. So why did you come? What was it about coming to this place that made it worth risking your life? Did someone tell you to do this? If so, then who? Well?” Pilate’s eyes flashed.


The man of Nazareth was gazing off into a corner of the courtyard, perhaps listening to Pilate’s words, perhaps not. When the prefect had finished talking, Jesus turned bodily to face him. His eyes glimmered like flames. “It was not suggested to me that I come to Jerusalem, nor was I so commanded. I came because I had to.”


“You had to come?”


“Prefect, do you believe in miracles?”


Pilate fell silent. His previous discussion with Ceint drifted up unwelcome in his mind. “What about miracles?”


“If I am to show the people that I am truly the Son of God, then I must show them miracles.”


“And exactly what sort of miracle will you perform to prove that you are the Son of God?”


The Nazarene’s face twisted into a smile, revealing filthy teeth that stuck out from between his scabbed lips.


“That’s the thing, isn’t it?” Jesus nodded, pleased that they were finally getting to this part of the conversation.


“What’s the thing, now?”


The man of Nazareth extended his arms out straight to either side. “One of you wanted to put me death? Then do it. I don’t care. I’ve come to Jerusalem to reveal my greatest miracle. I will show you. No, I will show all of Jerusalem—everyone throughout the entire Roman Empire—that I am truly the Son of the one true God.”


“You mean to say that you came to Jerusalem knowing full well that you would be put to death?” Pilate shook his head. Leaning back in his seat, he tapped the silver rod in his hand upon the arm of the sofa.


“Prefect, I will be nailed to the cross. And upon that cross I will die. At that time, there will be a great miracle, and men will tremble in fright, and they will fall to the ground and beg forgiveness before God for all the sins they have committed.”


Pilate took another cup of milk tea from his servant, downed most of it in one gulp, then threw the bowl at the captive’s feet. It broke into shards and the remaining tea splashed across the stone tiles like a scattering of white petals.


Jesus spoke on. “For those who doubt that I am the Son of God and the Messiah, I must give them proof. The time is nigh. Put me up on the cross! It is all I wish.”


From his position behind Pilate, Ceint called out. “Jesus of Nazareth. Do you understand what it means to be crucified? Have you ever seen a man die upon the cross?”


Ceint’s irritation was clear in his voice. He clearly still found it frustrating that he’d been unable to win a battle of words with this man who was so poor and simple—practically a refugee. “No, let me say instead that I believe it is a terribly noble thing to follow one’s beliefs even to the point of self-destruction. But, Jesus, tell us about this miracle you have planned. Is it truly so great that you are willing to trade your life for it, with no regrets?”


“Don’t you want to see a miracle? You do, I know. I will show it to you—for I do believe that I’m truly the Son of God. In fact, I don’t even know why I’m wasting my breath telling you this. I will show you my miracle and you will believe whether you want to or not.”


Jesus’s face dripped with sweat, and he thrust his arms out forcefully as he spoke. He shook at the knees like a man suffering from heat stroke. Even looking as he did—his shoulders thin and pointed, his body covered in dirt and grime—he was a living example of confidence so complete and unshakeable that it could overcome even the fear of death.


A cold and unfamiliar sensation raced through Pilate’s breast. It froze his heart like ice and split it like a naked blade. The prefect exchanged a quick glance with Ceint.


“So we are supposed to love Jehovah, not fear him?” Pilate muttered.


“And when the Day of Judgment comes, God will judge all mankind and make Heaven here on Earth,” Ceint intoned.


For a moment, despair flickered in their eyes.


“And we’re supposed to believe this day will come and so give ourselves to God, I suppose?”


“The Messiah has come—really!”


Then the two men softly laughed. It was a laugh drier than cobblestones left all summer in the sun—for at that moment the two Roman nobles felt an insurmountable finality seep into their hearts. Perhaps the feeling was brought on by the palpable tenacity emanating from the upstart Nazarene—or perhaps his terrifying vision of the Final Judgment had grown within them until it cast its shadow wholly through them.


Pilate stood, his lip curling. There was only one thing he need say now. One wager he need make.


He was aware of the possibility that his words might draw a terrible truth out into the light—that all of Rome was lending a hand right now to the scheme of this man from Nazareth.


There was only one thing he could say. “I, Pontius Pilate, representative of Rome and Prefect of Jerusalem, have tried and judged Yeshua, carpenter of Nazareth, here before this court. He is hereby found guilty of two crimes. Firstly, he has troubled the ignorant yet good people of this land by summoning images of a dreadful ‘Final Judgment,’ stirring within them unfounded fears and disrupting their daily lives.


“Secondly, he has profaned the teachings of the ancient deity of the Jewish faith, slandering their sects with baseless claims and committing numerous attacks upon the faith of the kohanim.


“For these two crimes, I, Pontius Pilate, Prefect of Jerusalem and representative of Rome, sentence Jesus, carpenter of Nazareth, to death.”


At once, the kohanim burst into cheers.


“Long live Rome! Long live the emperor! Pax Romana!” they shouted.


“Fools!” Pilate found he could remain in the chamber no longer. He turned and departed, his cape whipping behind him.


“Lord Prefect!” the High Judge followed behind him, calling out. “Upon what day shall the execution take place?”


Pilate stopped. “A good question. What do you think?” he called out over the judge’s shoulder to Ceint, who had appeared in the hall behind.


“Today’s the twenty-fourth of March. How about tomorrow, in the morning, with the rising of the sun?”


Pilate turned again and did not look back. It was only when he had reached the walk leading to his residential chambers that it occurred to him that he hadn’t seen the expression on Jesus’s face when the sentence was pronounced. He couldn’t even clearly remember whether or not the carpenter had still been standing there. But of course—he had to have been there. Where else could he have gone?


He regretted that he had not watched the man’s face more closely as he spoke the words of the sentence. Not that there was any chance Jesus would have been appropriately crestfallen. Perhaps, then, it was best that he hadn’t looked at him at all. He would not have wished to carry around the memory of the man’s smiling face as his death was declared.


Pontius Pilate slept fitfully that night.


Jesus of Nazareth is to be crucified—


The word spread quickly through Jerusalem, and all who heard it had their own response. Some knelt and prayed to God, others nodded and said it was his just reward, while still others frowned and muttered quietly their hopes that nothing unwelcome would result.


Late that night, a strange light was seen far off in the sky to the north. It shimmered like a multicolored curtain, rippling in waves, flowing through the middle of the sky in great promontories of light. People ran from their houses, summoned by the cries of those who had gathered to stare.


“What could it be?” one whispered.


“An omen of bad things to come,” another replied.


“It’s the Devil’s fire,” said another.


Some called out the name of God and pressed their eyes shut, as though they had seen something they were not meant to see.


In order to quell the spreading unrest, Pilate was forced to send his company of guardsmen to walk the streets. The soldiers went from alleyway to alleyway, chasing people back inside their homes.


“In you go now!”


“Prefect’s orders. Everyone inside, shut your doors, and latch your windows.”


The soldiers stood out as dark silhouettes against the backdrop of the strangely shimmering light.


“Look at that, Ceint. Do you see that? It does not fade! It’s growing even brighter, and redder now. It’s as if the sky itself were burning.”


Pilate turned to his assistant, who stood behind him on the balcony. The white night robes of both men faintly reflected the glimmering in the northern sky.


“I would guess it comes from somewhere up in Syria, north of the Tigris, perhaps? Either there is a wildfire large enough to cover every mountainside up there, or a great city is burning.” Ceint’s broad forehead was colored with atypical unease. “I think we can expect considerable unrest tomorrow.”


“Summon a scholar!”


“At once.” Ceint turned and headed inside.


“Judas Iscariot should do,” Pilate called out to his back. “The man is well versed in both astronomy and geography.”


The summoned man arrived a few minutes later, led by two of Pilate’s men. Judas Iscariot was sixty years of age, the top astronomer in Jerusalem, and a well-known prophet among the people.


He wore hempen robes dyed deep green and a wide oxhide belt of the same color. His uneven gray hair was bound into a small knot at the back of his head and wrapped with a black cloth. His feet were large and sturdy, and he wore heavy-looking sandals of thick woven leather.


“Over here, Judas,” Pilate called from the balcony.


“When I first saw that marvelous cloud of light in the northern sky this late at night, I prepared myself for your call, Lord Prefect.” Judas swept aside the hanging curtain and stepped out onto the balcony.


“Well? What do you think it is? Tell me plain.”


Pilate crossed his arms and turned to face the brilliance in the north.


Judas held his peace. Hands clasped behind his back, he strolled along the edge of the balcony.


After a moment Pilate spoke again. “I’m sure you know that Jesus of Nazareth is to be executed on the morn.”


Judas nodded, his face dark.


“There are people who believe he is the Son of God, that he is the Messiah—they believe that his execution will be the end of our world, and they’re frightened because they think this light and his execution are connected. Well, Judas? Tell me what you think it is.”


The prophet put both hands upon the white marble balustrade and leaned out, his eyes searching far off into the night sky. A long silence passed.


“Judas. I must confide in you that the more I saw of this Jesus of Nazareth, the more I found it hard to believe that everything he said was a fiction.”


Judas seemed to smile then, faintly. “Lord Prefect. I’m surprised to hear you admitting such things. This man must be persuasive indeed. No wonder the people take him for the Messiah.”


Pilate scowled.


“Lord Prefect. Two years ago, when the carpenter of Nazareth was still proselytizing on his own up near Samaria and Arbela I requested that he be apprehended. Do you recall this?”


“I do,” Pilate replied, a bitterness in his voice.


“Lord Prefect, it is true that of the many acts that he calls miracles, some do not follow the course of logic or any natural scheme. They are wondrous, to be sure. He calls them miracles of God. And he foretells that these miracles will one day govern our world. Lord Prefect, you should have sentenced him two years ago. I’m afraid that now you may have waited too long,” Judas said.


The prophet had indeed recommended this course of action to Pilate several times before. And perhaps he was right, Pilate thought, though the realization didn’t make him any more pleased to be reminded of it now. He felt a chill sting, as though he’d been struck upon the cheek by a thin razor. He wanted very much to say something piercing, something that would stab into the heart of the wise man, but as always before Judas, he found himself unable to summon the perfect retort.


“True,” he said eventually, “but back then I never expected him to gain so many fervent followers in the city.”


“I would not say they are that many.”


“Yes, but still—”


If you do not think them too many, then why accuse me of staying my hand overlong in his execution?


“They are merely frightened, Prefect. Fear and faith are two different things . . . though tomorrow their fear will become faith in truth.”


“How can you say that?” asked Pilate sharply. He was sure that Iscariot had some specific knowledge of Jesus, something about the carpenter of Nazareth he was unwilling to share, that had disposed him against the man. It was almost as if he bore him ill will.


“Do you know what his apostles do now?” Judas changed the topic, leaving Pilate’s unanswered question to drift away with the night breeze.


“I’ve heard that they dispersed after he was taken into custody and went into hiding. Apparently, the profound guidance of their God was not enough to eliminate their fear of death altogether. They probably were worried they might pass on before their paradise came to Earth.”


Judas shook his head. “I wonder how much his apostles really understood of Jesus. The love and the God he spoke of are little more than a kind of code. In fact, everything he says comes from a very different place than human thought and desire.”


“So whose God is Jesus of Nazareth talking about? Who is it that he’s preaching for?”


“I do not know, though I will admit I had expected much of him.”


This time, Pilate’s question seemed to have struck a chord in Judas’s heart.


“When first I saw him giving a sermon, in a small village in Galilee, I knew he was different from the many other prophets I had seen—those false prophets who are so numerous that on a given day, a man might throw his sandal in any direction and be sure to hit one. Why?” Judas said. “Because he does not speak in prophecies. The things he says may indeed cause unhappiness, but they will never bring joy.”


“Why not?”


“Because if a final judgment by God is truly necessary, would that not suggest that our world was on a path to ruin?”


Pilate stood still and silent as a stone. A hot wind blew up from the Jordan River Valley and swept between the two men.


Together they stood listening to the sound of the wind in their ears.


At last Judas lifted his right hand and pointed toward the far-off brilliance of the night sky. “That light? To be quite frank, this is the first time I have ever seen anything of the kind. An elder sailor of Phoenicia once told me that there is a frozen sea at the northern end of the world and a land of ice at the far southern end, and in those places, sometimes, one can see strange, beautiful lights in the skies. Yet I cannot help but think that this is something altogether different.”


“Then you think it has something to do with Jesus’s execution.”


“No. I think it has nothing to do with that man’s faith. That this spectacle should appear on the night before his execution is merely a coincidence. I believe this is a simple yet exceedingly rare natural phenomenon, nothing more. You have nothing to fear from that light, at least. You should tell this to the people and see them safely to their beds.”


“Judas,” Pilate said, “that still won’t stop them from saying that a terrible miracle was witnessed on the night before the Nazarene’s death.”


Something pale and without form, invisible to the eye, emerged from Judas’s body and blew directly over Pilate.


Pilate thought he heard Judas say, “It is a terrifying thing.”


“Terrifying? What’s terrifying?”


“I fear . . .”


“Yes?”


Judas turned away from the burning in the northern sky, as though his back might bear the brunt of the tragedy and destruction it would bring.


“Yes. The people will connect the execution of the man from Nazareth with something truly terrible, and they will tell their children.” With that, like a shadow, Judas drifted across the marble balcony and returned to the chamber within.


A short while later, Ceint came hurrying out. “Prefect, Judas Iscariot gave instructions as he left.”


“What did he have to say?”


“He said we should place soldiers at every crossroad in the city from the very early morning and prepare for the worst. He said we should also check our stores of food and watch the roads closely.”


Pilate let his shoulders drop. “Very well, Ceint. Do it, and do it quickly.”


Ceint cast a wondering glance at his master’s face. “Have you received word of some rebellion? I did not get that impression from Judas.”


“I expect no rebellion.”


“Does this have something to do with the execution of the man from Nazareth?”


Pilate put a hand to his forehead, a pained look on his face. “Ceint, in truth I have no idea. But Judas may be right about the need for caution. Do as he says.”


“Prefect, if it is a matter of such gravity, shall I not summon Iscariot once again and have him explain himself?”


Pilate pressed his fingers against his temples and shook his head. “No, Judas will tell us nothing. It is likely he himself does not know exactly what will transpire. All will be revealed on the morrow. Go now, Ceint. Go.”


Ceint lingered for a moment longer, but when he saw that Pilate intended no further words, he departed.


Clouds of multicolored light continued to shimmer in the north, but when Pilate looked to the east, he saw there the watery light of approaching dawn. The stars in the north and east were already dim, filled with the premonition of a terrible ending to come, yet the strong winds that whipped past the vast star field directly overhead promised that the day would dawn hot, without a single cloud in the sky.


High in the sky over Mount Zion and the ridges of Har Hatzofim across the wide Jordan River Valley, gigantic thunderheads had been gathering since morning. But the sun still shone on the near side of the river, suffusing the region’s famous cliffs of white granite with blinding light.


A right turn off the road that leads to the Shushan Gate brings the traveler to a barren, rocky hillside called Golgotha. Judas was standing where the two ways met, looking down at the Jordan Valley below. Several steep, jagged paths were cut into the stepped faces of the cliffs, looking like scars left by lightning bolts. The small collection of dingy dwellings near the center of the valley was the village of Jericho. Beyond that, the Jordan River curved like a silvery snake beneath a shimmering mirage.


Following the bends of the river with his eyes, Judas gazed across the vista to his right to where the Jordan swelled suddenly to become the Dead Sea. Half of that body of water glimmered a rich, brilliant blue, while the other half sat in the shadow cast by the protruding cliff of Tel Bet Yerah.


Once, when Judas was a boy, he had seen something sunken in the depths of the deep water beneath the cliffs—an ancient, empty city. There were buildings of stone there, with square windows cut in their walls; an arcade leading to a wide plaza; even trees turned to stone. All of it seemed close enough to touch were he to reach over the side of the boat. He’d asked many people why there was a city at the bottom of the Dead Sea but had never received a satisfactory answer. Some merely shook their heads fearfully and declined to speak of it, while others had made the Jewish hand gesture for warding off demons and had either promptly departed or driven him away. It was only much later that he had learned of a legend, passed down by the prophets, that identified the city under the waves as part of Sodom or Gomorrah, sunk by no lesser power than the wrathful God Himself.


When Judas was around thirty years of age, a powerful earthquake had struck the region, destroying many buildings in Jerusalem and in other towns and villages on either side of the Jordan. After that, the city at the bottom of the sea could no longer be seen. Where it had been, a large pile of boulders covered the seafloor. Judas harbored doubts about whether the lost ruin really was the remnant of Sodom and Gomorrah. All the legends were in agreement that God in His wrath had rained fire and sulfur down from Heaven, and the two towns had been swallowed by the earth. Judas took this to be a clear indication that, at some point far in the past, a severe earthquake had shaken the Jordan River Valley, causing a volcano to erupt and fissures to open in the ground. Yet the underwater city in Judas’s memory had appeared whole and unblemished. How could this be, if it had suffered such a calamity? It was an unfathomable mystery, and now unanswerable for all time. As such it had joined the set of suspicions that had lingered and grown in Judas’s mind for some time now.


He had always found it odd that the legends of the region pertaining to things divine were so startlingly real. It was almost as if a mere two or three generations before, it had been a regular occurrence for the people of the Jordan River Valley to encounter gods. They spoke with them, fought with them, and sometimes collaborated with them . . .


And whence the abundance of self-proclaimed prophets? Many of them did it for money, of course—prophecy was an occupation, nothing more. Yet still the people of the Jordan hungered for word from the gods as those living elsewhere did not, and they accepted uncritically the revelations of the many prophets. It was possible, Judas had to admit, that since ancient times, there truly had been people living here who had some privileged knowledge of the divine. Moses had been one of them, and Jesus of Nazareth another.


“There you are, Judas. What are you doing here? Time to head up to Golgotha. I expect the crucifixion of the Nazarene to begin shortly.”


Judas turned to see Pilate astride a white horse—the Prefect of Jerusalem must have ridden up the switchbacks to the crossroads. He had several soldiers in attendance. Each of them was fully armed with javelin and shield and wore a heavy metal breastplate of a sort rarely seen outside of times of war.


Judas nodded and followed Pilate’s entourage from the crossroads up the path to Golgotha.


In the center of the rocky slope stood a large wooden cross atop a platform. It appeared to have been quickly assembled, and the naked white wood shone in the morning light where axes had hastily hewn its shape. Several soldiers stood underneath it. As Pilate and Judas made their way up the slope, the soldiers turned in unison to face them, the silver tips on their long spears glinting. Though it was difficult to see from the road, it appeared that a man had already been hung upon the cross’s other side.


Pilate frowned and urged his horse onward to get a better view. From high on the hill, he could see that a large number of people had come to observe; they were gathered in a semicircle further down the slope.


“Be wary,” he shouted to the soldiers at the platform. “His believers might attempt a rescue.”


“Prefect, those are not his believers,” Ceint called out, appearing astride a horse of his own. He gave his mount’s neck a blow with the flat of his hand to urge it on. “They are people from town come to see the crucifixion—that is all. I spotted several of the kohanim among them.”


Pilate rode up to the cross with Ceint and Judas following close behind.


Jesus had been writhing in agony up there for nearly four hours by now, having been crucified with the first light of dawn. His arms were spread wide along the horizontal beam of the cross and tied at the wrists with crude twine, and a long nail had been driven through the palm of his left hand. The rust-covered heads of two other nails could be seen protruding from his ankles at the bottom of his limply hanging legs. A line of blood trickling from the wound on his right leg made a path across the top of his soiled foot and ran down to collect and harden at the tip of his toenail. Ash-colored hair caked with grime and sweat was plastered to his forehead, making his face difficult to see, though Pilate could clearly hear his occasional moaning and muttering.


“Any idea what he’s saying?” Pilate asked Ceint.


“Something about wondering where God in Heaven has gotten to, I hear.”


Just then, a stone came flying up from the crowd on the hillside and struck Pilate’s horse on the rump. Startled, the prefect’s mount whirled in a circle, rearing and stamping its hooves as he struggled to calm it. The exposed layers of the rocky slope were slippery, and the horse’s sliding hooves made a dry sound like a clattering of bones that echoed off the boulders around them.


“Lord Prefect! I’ve caught the culprit—this is the man who threw that stone!”


A soldier came from the crowd, dragging a young man behind him. The captive opened his sunken blue eyes wide and glared at Pilate with all the malice of a viper.


“You there,” Ceint asked the man, “are you a follower of Jesus of Nazareth?”


The man did not so much as glance at Ceint, but instead leaned toward Pilate sitting atop his horse and spat ferociously. He was too far away to actually hit the prefect, and the spittle fell short, becoming a tiny dark spot on the hot, dry ground between them.


“Insolence!”


Pilate urged his horse nearer and, lifting the rod in his hand, struck the man across the face. The prisoner lurched backward, held up by the soldiers who clutched his arms on either side.


“Forgive him. He understands nothing,” said a clear voice from above their heads. All of them looked up to see Jesus gazing down on them from the cross, his head bowed as though in supplication. “Forgive that man. He is just a fool.”


The blood had long since drained from the dying man’s face, leaving his skin the color of clay. A brilliant green horsefly was perched below one of his ears.


“You call me a fool?” The young captive was the first to speak. “I threw that stone because I pitied you—I wanted you to see me get back at Rome for you! And you call me a fool?”


The prisoner writhed, fighting to free himself, his face filled with terrific rage. The soldiers yanked hard on his arms, pulling him back farther from the base of the cross.


“Who are you to call me a fool? If you really are the Son of God, then step down off that cross yourself!” The man’s shouting echoed down the slope.


“Jesus of Nazareth. I am Judas Iscariot. Do you know me?”


At the sound of Judas’s voice, Jesus again opened his eyes with great effort. His gaze wandered until he found the speaker.


“I do not recall it well . . . but I believe we met once . . . in Galilee,” he gasped between breaths.


“That’s right. I spoke with you about the Final Judgment you preach. At that time you told me you were the Son of God—that you were a true prophet.”


“Yes, that’s right, I am a prophet. I am the mouthpiece for God’s will . . .” Jesus’s voice trailed off into a low moan.


“Jesus of Nazareth!” Ceint called out, his voice heavy with loathing. “Will you not take back your words? Say only that you are not the Son of God, that you are not a prophet, and I will release you from your pain.”


Jesus made no reply but, with head hanging low, began to softly mutter the words of a prayer.


“Father in Heaven, please forgive these poor men, my brothers. They do not know you, they do not know that you truly exist. Father in Heaven, please . . .”


“Do it!” Ceint commanded, as though he could drive Jesus’s prayer back into the man’s mouth with the force of his own voice.


Two soldiers advanced, brandishing long spears held at an angle. A clamor rose up from the spectators around the hill, though it was impossible to say whether they were lamenting or cheering.


“Well, liar of Nazareth? Shouldn’t your God be coming to save you about now?”


The rod in Ceint’s hand made a whistling sound as he swung it through the air, a final signal.


One of the spear-wielding soldiers reached upward, thrusting the silvery tip of his weapon deep into the side of Jesus. When he stepped back, blood flowed from the fresh wound, staining the soiled hempen ropes of the wounded man.


Jesus’s face twisted in agony, his features changing until he looked like another person altogether. “Father!” he cried, lifting his begrimed, contorted face to the sky. “Why do you abandon me?”


The ragged cry reached the ears of all who stood around that hill, the soldiers and the people from Jerusalem and the valley towns, with startling clarity.


Then all was silent. The sound of the wind was gone, leaving only the brilliant sunlight to shine burningly upon the bare rocks. So quiet it was that Judas half expected to hear the sound of the water lapping against the banks of the distant Jordan.


The vivid blue sky over the river suddenly dimmed. Pilate, searching with narrowed eyes, could see no difference in the sunlight where it struck the land, nor in the contrast between light and shadow, and yet the change was there. A bird began to cry raucously in the distance; shouts went up from the crowd on the slope. Something was approaching swiftly from the far banks of the Jordan, spreading as it came.


Pilate gripped his horse’s reins tightly and galloped down the hill.


A wind, chill as ice, enveloped Golgotha. Now the dimming was clearly noticeable. The brilliant sun faded, and darkness wrapped around the sky. The soldiers standing guard at the base of the cross began to run in a pack uphill. Quickly it became so dark that Pilate thought he had gone blind—he could see nothing, not even the tip of his own nose. Soldiers and spectators alike staggered unseeing, thrusting their arms out in front of them, or crouched and felt their way along the uneven ground.


Startled by the darkness, Pilate’s horse reared high on its hind legs. The prefect had entirely lost track of where he was on the slope.


He heard a scream of terror cut through the darkness with the speed of a shooting star. Loud at first, the scream grew fainter and then stopped abruptly. He heard another. That must be the direction of the cliffs, Pilate thought. Some people must’ve lost their way and wandered too close.


“Miracle! It’s a miracle!” shouted a man through the darkness. “The Nazarene was the Son of God in truth!”


“God judges us!” another voice cried out. “We tried to kill his son! The prefect! The prefect has brought this evil to pass!”


Then the words were lost in a chorus of insane screams and women’s weeping.


Judas stood a short distance from Pilate, though neither man could see the other. The old scholar leaned upon his staff, considering the phenomenon. I wonder what Jesus of Nazareth is doing at this moment, he thought—and with the thought a burning need to know overcame him. Dropping to one knee, he carefully felt the ground around his feet to determine which direction was uphill, then slowly he began to climb.


Bits of dislodged earth and small rocks had begun to roll down the slope. They stung his face, getting in his eyes and nostrils. He covered his face with his hands. Then something else came flying down and struck him hard—a human body. Their arms and legs tangled, and together they rolled down the hill.


Even as he fell, Judas wondered about Jesus. Has he undone his ropes? He tried to grab the other man, but when he reached out, his hands closed on nothing but air. Then he noticed that his rate of descent had accelerated, and despite himself he screamed with fear. Flailing wildly, he scrabbled at the increasingly steep slope, finally clawing his way to a stop. He could hear falling earth and stones and endless screams disappearing below the shelf to which he clung. In the darkness, Judas wiped cold sweat from his brow. Though it seemed his tumble had lasted a very long time, he realized that during the entire ordeal he had only had space for two or three breaths.


All at once Judas was bathed in light. A sudden blue incandescence from somewhere high above his head illuminated the hilltop and cast the land below in shadow, giving the Jordan River Valley the appearance of a vast dark ocean.


Looking upward, Judas saw a swirling column of light atop the hill, like a pillar extending from the layered rock of Golgotha into the sky. Everything, both heaven and earth, was wrapped in a blue, icy light. All things trembled before the wrath of God.


He heard a scream and then another in the distance, sounding horribly far away.


Judas was out of breath, but he forced himself not to gasp, afraid that he might pass out. Stumbling to his feet, he began to make his way up the steep slope again. His entire being was screaming Run! You must run! Get away! And yet another part of him was certain this was not the wrath of God after all—no miracle come down from the heavens. Whatever he was witnessing, it was something of a completely different, if still terrifying, nature.


Now he could see the barren slopes of the distant rocky hills lit by the bluish glow, each individual blade of withered grass standing out with vivid clarity. The light had increased so greatly that it even illuminated the wide flow of the Jordan River below, making it shimmer like a mirage.


Then the cloud of light atop the hill swirled violently and took on the form of a giant figure of a man, nearly half as big as the hill itself. The giant wore a helmet low over the top part of what Judas took to be his head—a helmet not so dissimilar from those worn by the Roman legionnaires. His chest and waist formed one enormous pillar. There were two clearly defined arms and two long legs, the latter planted firmly upon the hill of Golgotha. The giant’s body, wrapped in pale bluish light, was half transparent, like a glowing mist; an unending darkness was revealed beyond.


Within the borders of the brightness, the body of Jesus of Nazareth was floating upward. He was already some distance from the ground.


Then the bluish white light flared in the darkness, forming a ring in the air. Within that ring, Judas saw the giant figure carrying Jesus in his hands.


A sharp tearing sound rent the air, like the tearing of a silk curtain. The earth shook with thunder, a vibration that passed from the top of the hill down to the river valley. Several of the steep cliffs crumbled, their remains tumbling downhill in a landslide. Quakes rocked the darkened land, and the land shuddered and fell.


And yet, despite the apocalyptic noise, all who were there could hear the quiet words of Jesus as he drifted up into the sky:


The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali,


By the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,


The people who were sitting in darkness saw a great light,


And those who were sitting in the land and shadow of death, upon them a light dawned . . .


Soldiers and citizens clung to the shaking slope, their imminent deaths assured, and they cried out the name of God.


Judas Iscariot picked himself up. He could hear another voice speaking to him from somewhere in the rolling earth below his feet.


“Your Majesty! You must tell me what this means. Why do you strike down your own people?”


“Legate. I will soon report on my failure to the Planetary Development Committee. Yet understand that this failure is only one of my results. Legate, you saw the fire? It was that fire that foiled my plans! It was the greatest barrier to the designs of the committee, and the final reward for our efforts.”


“Your Majesty—!”


Judas stood, flustered, and looked around. Majesty? Was that the emperor in Rome? Surely not! And who is this “legate”?


By now, the blue brilliance was nothing more than a dot of light among the stars that shone in the vault of the sky.


“Have you understood, my prince? Do you know whose statue that is? Not even Brahmā, ruler of this world, does. The great god after whom that statue was modeled was a resident from another world who visited this region and claimed it for his own. This world is to be ruled from without, you see. Five billion six hundred seventy million years from now, he will once again appear in this world and determine the fate of all who remain here. That is what they call Maitreya.”


“What of salvation? What of salvation in the time of the last dharma?”


Judas’s mind raced, his thoughts wild. Who is this prince? And who is Brahmā? Five billion years seems an impossibly long amount of time. And Maitreya . . . Maitreya?


Judas cocked an ear in hopes of hearing more of the strange conversation that seemed to be coming to him from some impossible distance. Yet there was nothing. He ran up the slope of the hill, stopping occasionally to listen, ears pricking like a wild beast’s. The voices were nowhere to be heard.


Who was that talking? And why did it feel as though the weight of the world hung in their words?


Judas crawled up a steep ridge, then ran again. True darkness had returned to the hill around him. The memory of the distant voices filled his mind, feeling far more important than the miracle Jesus had wrought.


He had no way of knowing how long the darkness would continue—indeed, it might never end. It might actually have been a punishment from Heaven. The conversation he’d overheard, on the other hand, was certainly not divine. Judas felt himself standing at the juncture of two worlds.


He saw a line of torches, wavering in the distance.


Before he had time to catch his breath, Judas found himself thrown from the rocky ledge on which he stood, hurled out into empty space. A vast amount of dirt and rock crumbled behind him, following him into the void. The thought came to him that he should reach out to grasp something—anything—but quicker than he could act, his consciousness was lost to the depths of darkness.






The darkness that fell upon the hill of Golgotha that day began around eleven o’clock in the morning and continued until about two o’clock in the afternoon. According to ancient records from the region, this day fell on the third month of the nineteenth year of the reign of the Emperor Tiberius. It was the seventh day before the first of the fourth month, fourteen nights after the new moon. It was also noted that this was the seventy-ninth year by Antiochus’s reckoning, since Sulpicius and Sulla tangled in Rome, and Casius, Prefect of Syria, was designated the new commander of the region of Jerusalem by the emperor.


Though the veracity of this report is a matter of debate, it has often been quoted as fact. It is important to note, however, that there was no Prefect of Syria named Casius. It is also true that there are no other examples of the emissary of Rome to Jerusalem simultaneously holding office as Prefect of Syria. This was primarily for military reasons—the road that led from the port of Acre on the Mediterranean overland through Nazareth and on into the Jordan River Valley, which then passed through Ha-arava, through Petra and Al Lejjun and on to Aqaba on the Red Sea, was a trading route far too important to be left in the hands of a single official. It was common practice for three commanders, one in Jerusalem, one in Syria, and one in Aqaba, to divide administration of the road between them. This fact alone is sufficient to cast considerable doubt on the reliability of these records.


There is, however, reason to believe that the Roman Empire willfully removed all mention of the darkness at Golgotha from the public record, claiming that the occurrence was no more than a legend and therefore unworthy of official recognition—motivated, perhaps, by a wish to eliminate any suggestion of misgovernment in Jerusalem.






On the third day of the fourth month in the thirty-third year of the Julian Calendar, the entire region around Jerusalem experienced three hours of darkness in the middle of the day, centered on Golgotha. Historical astronomical analysis shows that at no time in the weeks around that date did the Middle East experience even a partial solar eclipse.


Years later, a historical theologian would claim that the stories of that day were, in fact, accounts of a lunar eclipse that occurred on the fifteenth of Nisan, tales that had become twisted over time. However, the darkness upon Golgotha is said to have occurred while Jesus still writhed in pain upon the cross—early in the day, not during the night.


There is more.


In Revelation 4:6–7, it is written:


And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind. And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying eagle.


It is thought that these hallucinations symbolizing the four apostles came as a vision, yet who can say what Saint John, Saint Mark, Saint Luke, and Saint Matthew truly saw that day?


According to the accounts of one Roman centurion, from that day forth, there were none in Jerusalem who laid eyes upon the man Judas Iscariot. Nor was Judas’s body found among the dozens who fell from the cliffs that day in the darkness.






Thus did Jerusalem’s most devastating day come to an end.