The traveler left behind a pot.


The villager hung it on a tree.


The traveler returned and said:


“This pot is your home.”








The sky was a single band of light, sending vast waves of brilliance like nuclear flames to beat down upon the ground. To one who gazed through a polarized screen, however, the blazing torrent was distinguishable as a rush of countless particles. Some of these light fragments were enormous—bright enough that had they been placed in a starry night sky, they would have drowned out stars of the first magnitude, or even negative first.


For a while, Asura stood staring vacantly at the falling light, forgetting her purpose entirely.


“What do you think it is?” Siddhārtha whispered at her ear, bringing her back to the present. A vast glacier spread out before them, its ice harder than steel, its polished surface reflecting the forms of the three travelers where they stood.


Not far off to the right, cliffs of ice formed a continuous wall that stretched into the distance. The cliffs were steep and perfectly vertical, as though cut deliberately from the glacial ice. Their upper rims melted into the sea of light extending from the sky.


“What a sight!” Siddhārtha said. It seemed impossible for even a cloudless, star-filled sky to give off so much light. “It’s as though someone covered the sky with some stupendous sheet of electroluminescent material.”


Though the idea was outrageous, there were no better words to describe it.


“Where are we?”


“Where we intended to be,” Asura said, checking her readings. “Y=88.5711; X=43.026; Z=19.3920; T=n-n Δt—the eighth quadrant of the Andromeda galaxy, in other words. Roughly 130,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy, just outside the two spiral arms that pass near these coordinates.”


“Doesn’t seem to be much life here,” Siddhārtha noted. “Or perhaps it has all withered away, as it did on Earth and Mars and Astarta 50.”


Orionae looked around, taking in their surroundings. “Together with seven other planets, this planet we’re on orbits a single star. Judging from the deviations I’m reading in our coil, the star radiates sufficient energy to support life. It is about twice as massive as our own sun. And yet, we’re standing on a glacier—”


“Orionae. We have already seen another planet brought to ruin for reasons we do not understand, have we not?”


Orionae shook his head firmly. “That is not so. There have been reasons for all the devastation we have seen thus far. For example: our failure to take appropriate measures when the earth began to dry out or to revitalize the failing production in our cities. But there is nothing here, nothing at all. The sun gives off sufficient warmth, and it’s shining directly on this location.”


“Let’s climb those cliffs and see what we can see,” Asura suggested.


Orionae hefted the coil on his back, and the three set off single file across the glacier.


“I do not understand why our observations do not match the numbers,” Orionae muttered, frustrated.


Asura paused several times as they walked, staring out across the glacier, pursued by an unsettling feeling that something was eluding her. There was something here, something mysterious, suffusing the place and yet impossible to discern. It was growing thicker, wrapping more closely around them as they walked.


The light from the sky still streamed down onto the ice, reflecting off the cliffs with such intensity it was nearly painful to their eyes.


At length, they came to the base of the cliffs. Siddhārtha hesitated to study the wall of ice; then he released the safety switch on the maser in his arm. Orionae continued walking, still muttering formulae to himself. The strangely shaped coil he carried on his shoulder bobbed and swayed as though it were part of his body.


Asura stopped. She could feel something sweep across her body—a readiness for battle that came not from within, but from without.


“What is it, Asura?” Siddhārtha asked, following the line of her gaze. He stared in shock.


A giant city stood buried deep behind the crystalline surface of the icy cliffs. At first, they thought it was only a trick of the shadows created by light refracted through the wall of ice—but with all of the light on this world, there were no shadows.


Roughly two hundred meters beyond the surface of the ice, rectangular buildings, some hundreds of stories in height, stood so close together they almost touched. Beltways ran through translucent pipes that wove between the buildings’ enormous walls. Every surface in the city reflected prismatic sprays of light.


More surprisingly, the city was approaching them at roughly the speed of a man walking. It seemed to stretch all the way to the horizon on either side, and it was impossible to gauge how far back it might go. The glacier was as quiet as a coffin beneath the piercingly bright curtain of the sky. The phantasmal city approached without a sound, moving the way a tide sweeps in at sea, suggesting nothing so much as the approach of certain death.


“Asura! Maitreya knew we would come here—we’ve walked into his trap!” Siddhārtha cried, his voice ringing out from the bottom of his throat. A chill colder than ice ran down Asura’s back. She detected something far more dangerous in the advancing city than Maitreya’s assaults.


Turning back to Orionae, she shouted, “Quick—create a barrier with that coil! This is not one of Maitreya’s psychic attacks! Quickly, Orionae!”


In one smooth motion Orionae lowered the coil from his shoulder onto the ice. He manipulated the deflector until the instrument began to emit a calm blue light. The space around the three travelers grew keen with a noise like vibrating silver wire. Immediately, the shining sky dimmed, and an ultramarine shadow fell over the glacier. Wrapped in the barrier’s curtain, the three travelers shimmered like a mirage.


“Now, we each need to make our own barriers,” Asura said. “Orionae wrapped the coil in several gravitationally sealed spaces. You have to maintain the link to the Dirac sea via an imaginary numeric circuit.”


Standing in the middle of the shimmering blue light, the three companions shone with tremendous intensity. The heat entropy inside their barrier shot up rapidly before reaching a balance point.


Moments later, the moving city slid over the dome of their barrier.


The giant carved faces of the buildings, the countless rows of windows, beltways, and spires, passed soundlessly through their bodies, over their heads, and beneath their feet, continuing on to disappear behind them.


Beyond the city, the ice cliffs stretched like a dark shadow across the glacier. The translucent city continued to spill forth from the wall of ice, passing through them, gliding on and away until the buildings disappeared into the distance.


“What is this, Asura?” Siddhārtha asked from within the incandescence of his personal barrier. Asura was hanging upside down in her own sequestered space, looking like a minnow inside a shell.


“My guess, Siddhārtha, is that this planet is a gravitationally sealed imaginary numeric space. A ‘negative energy world.’ I’m sure you have a record of Noya’s Formula somewhere in your neural memory web.”


“Ah! You’re referring to the event in 3005, when Noya Clark of Jupiter suddenly found himself inescapably trapped in what appeared to be a two-dimensional space, like a screen. There were others present, but though they could see a path within the ‘screen,’ when they tried to enter it, they simply passed through.”


Orionae sat hunched over the coil’s diffraction grating, apparently not listening. A strange light gleamed in his eyes as he murmured to himself.


“What is it, Orionae?” Asura asked.


“Don’t tell me we’re trapped inside this barrier or something like that,” Siddhārtha grumbled.


“That’s it, I’ve got it!” Orionae shouted. “There’s been a terrible mistake!”


“What kind of mistake?”


“Asura. We must leave this place at once. I must find a safe location where I can repair the coil.”


“I see,” Asura said. “But, Orionae, in order to move, we will have to drop the barrier on that coil, and the barriers around each of us, and our external barrier as well—but, surrounded by imaginary numeric space as we apparently are, I’m afraid that’s impossible.”


Orionae held his head in his hands and moaned.


“What happens if you touch imaginary numeric space, Asura?” Siddhārtha asked.


“You generate a perfect void at the point of contact. Energy is consumed in order to create the void, and then negative energy will wrap around the void like a shell, spreading almost instantaneously into a limitless pool the ancients called ‘Dirac’s sea’ . . .”


The city flowed on through them without the slightest break, buildings and streets appearing like phantasms, then disappearing into the distance.


“Look! The city is alive!” Siddhārtha spread his arms wide, as if to push the cityscape that surrounded them off to one side. The corner of a building passed through one of his hands. They saw buildings and hallways and beltways, then many men and women wearing outlandish clothes, walking through the streets. No one seemed to notice the three travelers at all. Nor did they notice that they were passing through the side of a cliff on top of a gigantic glacier. Their city was grand and beautiful, protected from all unhappiness and decay.


Orionae abruptly lifted his face. “If we combine our energy together, I wonder how much we could generate?”


“Roughly 1.1 billion megawatts, I should guess,” Siddhārtha replied.


“Ah! If we truly can generate that much, then, for a very short period of time, we could control the flow of negative energy through the diffraction grating.”


“I see. And how long would this very short period of time be?”


A shadow crossed Orionae’s face. “At most, 0.08 seconds. We could not hold it much longer.”


“Will we be able to move far enough in 0.08 seconds?”


“It shouldn’t be a problem,” Orionae said.


“What if it is?”


“Then all of the energy we’ve used will convert into a massive amount of heat radiation from the surface of the diffraction grating . . . I think.”


“And all of us will be swallowed in a sea of negative energy.”


“I could set it up so that, in the case that we did overstay our allotted time, the circuit would automatically collapse. However, quite a bit of energy will have already been consumed by that point, so I think it would be best to arrange it in such a way that the very first recovery circuit to activate will absorb any excess radiation. Then at least one of us will be able to recover their original form.”


Siddhārtha shook his head. It seemed their options were limited. “All right, Orionae. Let’s go with that plan.”


“Orionae,” Asura spoke up. “What was that you said a moment ago about a mistake? Whose mistake?”


Orionae looked back at the coil. “Do you know of a material called orichalcum?”


“I do! You’ve spoken of it—the special alloy used in creating the royal palace and other grand structures of Atlantis.”


“When I was still in Atlantis, I once looked into the origins of that mysterious alloy. I discovered a few fairly interesting properties, and by far the most interesting was that orichalcum is an incredibly stable substance. Reflecting back on it now, I realize that each element of the alloy must contain a perfectly sealed heat-entropy world. Each segment of the orichalcum alloy would be able to contain a massive amount of energy. Furthermore, it could be used as a filter for negative energy.”


“So what brings this up now?” Siddhārtha asked, growing impatient.


“As it so happens,” Orionae said, “this coil is made out of orichalcum.”


Asura and Siddhārtha stood for a long while in silence, watching the phantasmal city flow through them.


“So,” Asura said at last, “we can imagine that at some point in the distant past, someone brought a bit of that strange metal to Earth and tried to explain its miraculous properties to humankind—perhaps even gave them the technology to understand it. Then when those bent on destroying our world arrived, they eventually discovered the orichalcum and took great pains to completely remove it from the planet, wiping mankind’s collective memory as they did so. Siddhārtha, Orionae . . . it’s very possible that there were other such materials on Earth that were subsequently removed by an external force. In fact, roughly three thousand years ago, a fragment of pure tin was discovered on Earth. One hundred percent pure tin does not occur naturally on that planet. Perhaps this too bore some great meaning, and yet the tin and all records of it have been entirely lost. And there was another material, tektite, that resembled obsidian. This too has been entirely lost. Our enemy is nothing if not a perfectionist.”


“I only wish I had looked into the matter more closely back then or discovered the truth behind this destruction earlier. It is most unfortunate,” Orionae said, sighing.


“No,” Siddhārtha said solemnly. “I believe it was our world’s destiny to walk this long road to ruin.”


“Well . . . let’s continue on then, shall we?” Orionae said, moving the secondary coil deflector to the zero mark, then withdrawing an impressive number of imaginary numeric circuits from the diffraction grating. These he wrapped around another pipe, creating a new induction coil.


“This is a response circuit—a fourth dimensional circuit, you might call it. In an emergency, this should absorb any excess energy generated.” Orionae adjusted the sliding cover, closing off the diffraction grating. “All right, I’ll go in last again, after which I’ll open the imaginary numeric circuit. I’ve set our time window to 0.076 seconds. Now, quickly!”


First Asura, then Siddhārtha, then finally Orionae dived into the darkness inside the coil. A fraction of a moment later, the imaginary numeric circuit connected. The space linked to the coil emitted a tremendous burst of light, turning the icy glacier into a sea of incandescent flames. Quite suddenly, the buildings of the phantasmal city nearest to the blast broke into a million glowing fragments and scattered in all directions. A massive wave of energy crashed into the remainder of the city, and it burned, exploded, shrank, faded, then disappeared altogether. In the wavering blaze, light from the sky pierced through, swirling with imaginary space.


Another city, another civilization destroyed. It was meant to happen, as the three travelers had been meant to come to that place.






Asura stood on a vast plain where blue light fell like a silent rain of death. There was no atmosphere, no air to protect the exposed rocky surface. Though the lack of wind meant that there was minimal erosion, cracks formed over millennia crisscrossed the surface of the rock; some had grown large enough to be called crevices. The trickling of small fragments of rock down into those crevices appeared to provide the only movement in this world.


Everywhere there were signs that this planet had been subjected to incredibly strong radiation over a very long period of time. The radiation alert system on Asura’s necklace had been sounding at maximum danger level since she arrived. The discordant clamor of the alarm shrieked in her ears, an unwelcome call to action.


She took a step, and her foot sank to the ankle as the surface soundlessly crumbled beneath her. All the way to the horizon, the conditions looked the same. In every direction there was nothing but the faint curve of the horizon—no indicators to say which way was north or south. Asura knew that even if she did cross over the horizon she would find no remaining mountain ridges or deep valleys.


Over the long years, the powerful radiation had transformed the very material composition of the rock, grinding down mountains until they were nothing more than dust that filled the valleys and the ancient seabeds.


Even death had no shape in this place.


Peering around, Asura realized that no one else was there. With blue light streaming down across her shoulders, she stood alone at the end of the world.


Neither Siddhārtha nor Orionae had been able to reconstitute themselves on the other side of the conduit. For reasons Orionae clearly had not foreseen, it had taken longer than the coil could withstand for them to pass through the region of space filled with negative energy. Either that, or their transit had used more energy than expected. As Orionae had suggested, it seemed that at the last instant the circuit breaker had tripped, dumping the remaining energy into Asura, who was already passing beyond the negative energy zone. As for her companions—


She remembered Siddhārtha’s prediction of the sea of negative energy and shuddered.


This was what she was witnessing now: utter ruin made manifest.


Siddhārtha’s energy and Orionae’s energy—and whatever was left of Asura’s—had combined to power their last, desperate effort, and now she was left to discover for herself what her final objective should be. I could not have predicted that this would happen, she told herself. Nor could she ignore the terrible loneliness she felt in her heart when she considered her chances of fighting and defeating a transcendent, godlike being alone.


The glacier and the phantasmal city that had appeared within it were gone and would never be found again.


Orionae had mentioned a mistake, but could it be that this devastation was, in fact, what they should have been seeking? Is this our final destination, this small planet in the outer arm of the eighth quadrant of the Andromeda galaxy? With great unease, Asura set out across the crumbling surface, feeling as though she were walking not on matter, but on pure light.


She contemplated the blue light that suffused the surface of the planet and looked up toward the sky to find its source. First she saw the stardust, countless billions of swirling fragments in an endless dance above her. Then beyond it she saw that there was something more, pulsing behind the stars like an aurora there in the remote vastness of space—a great spiral of timeless light turning in the center of the sky.


For a brief moment, Asura stared, the brightness burning into her visual cortex, not understanding what she was witnessing. She felt herself part of a tableau, a tiny figure standing on a devastated planet beneath a white-hot whirling spiral—a perfect portrait of the end of the world.


I know what that is!


An icy tremor passed through Asura’s heart.


It was a massive spiral galaxy, coming from the depths of space directly toward the galaxy of Andromeda. Already the interstellar material of both galaxies were intermingling, each invading the other’s territory, emitting powerful electron radiation. Eventually, the heat trapped in the gradually thickening cloud created by the collision would rise to tens of thousands of degrees, then hundreds of thousands, burning away stars and spewing out vast nebulae. In time, the two spiral galaxies would combine entirely, and release all of their energy at once.


Later, once that energy had dispersed, all that would be left behind would be a faintly radioactive nebula and the slightest dusting of interstellar material. The tremendous volume of heat released into space would radiate in every direction, eventually vanishing into the far reaches of the universe altogether. Existence becoming nonexistence. Being becoming nonbeing. The simplest process of all.


Of course, the dispersed energy would not truly become nothing. But how much effect on the rest of space could such energy have—even if it came from so potent a source as the collision of two galaxies? What could you call its long-term result, if not “nothing”?


The residents of this planet had wrapped their great city in a near-perfect gravitationally sealed space, after creating another such space that surrounded the entire planet—effectively girding themselves in a double layer of protection. And yet, Asura mused, their gravitational fortress relied on a planet to anchor it. How long could this fastness last within the torrent of energy released when two galaxies collided?


The giant spiral galaxy above her was making its final descent, pitching off-balance with the weight of entropic death it carried, raining radiation down on its Andromedan rival.


Asura wished she could show this quiet world to Siddhārtha and Orionae. She now realized the nature of the mistake that Orionae had spoken of. The mysterious blue light shining on the glacier they had visited was filtered light coming through a gravitational barrier constructed around the planet—a barrier that should have protected and preserved its civilization. Yet nothing had been living there. What could live at minus two hundred degrees and below? The mistake had been a faint warping in the gravitational seal, or perhaps a slight error in their gravitational field generators that had allowed heat to leak out over a long period of time. By the time the planet’s residents realized what was happening, it had already been too late, and their home world was lost, buried beneath a thick layer of ice. And so the survivors had acted, raising another line of resistance, an even stronger gravitational barrier around their capital. It was they who had appeared, walking the streets of their phantasmal city. She wondered how long that civilization had lasted.


Did it even really matter? Was there any difference between being trapped in an endlessly reiterating city and being stamped onto a metal plate—the fate the citizens of Astarta 50 had chosen in an attempt to evade their approaching destruction? Asura thought she could hear Siddhārtha laughing somewhere, perhaps inside herself . . . A smile rose on her lips, but it was a pitiful thing with no purpose, not the sort of smile that could be mistaken for happiness. Mankind had first developed civilization less than ten thousand years ago. She wondered how it had gone here in Andromeda. On this planet.


She saw no signs of a transcendent being attempting to stave off the destruction here. Even with his power and his plans, had the three of them not been awakened too late, to find Earth already transformed into a dead planet, nothing but a wasteland to greet them?


We should never have awoken. Her memories went back to that day when she had first met the man of Nazareth in that cold, wasted desert.


Asura.


She heard a faint voice that seemed to come from inside her own body. Asura spun around, looking for the speaker. The surface of the planet was as still and silent as it had ever been.


Asura.


Now it seemed to her as if the voice were coming from somewhere far beyond the surface, carried to her along rays of blue light through the barrier above.


“Who’s there?” she shouted into the distance.


“I have been waiting for you, Asura, but you did not arrive in time. Still, this is not your fault.”


She thought she detected the ring of deep sadness in the voice.


“Who are you? Where are you?”


Asura linked the brainwave detector embedded behind her right ear into her entire nervous system, scanning. She found nothing. The planet’s surface remained as featureless as a calm lake around her. She sensed that the level of the ground was slightly slanted toward the left—perhaps the remnant elevation of what had once been the tallest ridgeline on this world.


“Asura.”


This time it sounded as if the voice originated right next to her. Reflexively she jumped to a spot several meters away. “What are you?” Asura squinted but saw not even a shadow of anything around her, only the suffusing blue light.


“I did not imagine that we would meet in a place like this, in this way. For I am sure the record will show that we have never met before.”


Asura did not know how to respond to that. After a short silence, she heard the voice again:


“Asura. Do you think Siddhārtha understood the meaning of the ‘other shore’—the place to which the dead must pass? I was pleased when he sensed something lacking in the teachings of the Brahmin and harbored doubts about several of their doctrines. Follow the threads of those doubts, and they lead here. I chose you three, placed you in a long sleep, and kept you until such a time as I would require your services. I also placed within your minds several words, several concepts, you would need. Asura: ‘All’ is existence. ‘Void’ is Dirac’s sea. ‘All is void’ means nothing other than the fact that the sea of negative energy is the true mother of all existence. Asura, the ‘other shore’ is none other than a transcendent being or the world where that transcendent being exists. I wonder how you, Asura, understood the sense of separation, that desperate division we hear in the word ‘other.’ Siddhārtha was a signpost along the path. Orionae had memorized the letters written upon that sign. And you—”


“Yes?”


“. . . I regret now that ultimately, I have been little more than a bystander, observing the change passing through this universe, unable to affect it. I wonder how many people paid attention to those words I whispered into the collective heart of humanity, warning them of the destruction that would come? I regret that I was not able to take more decisive action.”


Asura screamed into the blue-soaked waste. “Why didn’t you just come out and tell us the truth?”


“I could not reveal myself, lest those powers who have always manipulated your world with the intent to bring it to ruin should take notice of me.”


“Yet they did notice, and in short order.”


“And so they worked to erase all signs of my warning. It is in mankind’s nature not to believe that misfortune and tragedy are approaching and to forget calamity after it has occurred. Ultimately, my passive strategy did not help prolong their lives by one minute. While the sun shone, they prayed for a good harvest in the coming year and adorned their altars, and when the storms and the floods came they thought only to raise their levees and protect their fields. When plague spread, they nurtured physicians and synthesized ever more medicines. Eventually, the land dried and the desert covered all, so they moved their cities below ground. When there was no longer any place on land or in the sea to support the growing of food, these places became wastelands and passed away, unmourned and forgotten. Humanity spread to Mars, Venus, and beyond, throughout the solar system, yet in the end their productive capacity always failed.


“Eventually, humanity became aware of the coming fall. They crafted robots and enhanced their own bodies with cybernetics—they searched for ways to escape to the outer reaches of the solar system. Yet what came of that, Asura? In the end, those bent on the destruction of the human worlds were victorious. Indeed, perhaps their victory was predetermined from the start.”


Asura stood on the slight swell in the earth that was the ghost of a former ridge, looking out across plains that now appeared to her as a seabed at the bottom of an ocean of blue light. This place seemed a poor destination for someone who had traveled so far, but in a sudden rush of resignation she accepted that she would have to make do.


“Asura.”


Asura shook her head. “What are you? What are you?”


The voice seemed to pierce her chest. “I am the Reincarnation King. I am the cakravarti-rājan.”


It took several seconds for the words to sink into Asura’s weary mind. “The cakravarti-rājan?”


“Yes. That is what the Brahmin monks once called me.”


The cakravarti-rājan—King of Kings who moves the world. Asura had once described the cakravarti-rājan to Siddhārtha. The details of that night were still vivid in her mind.






Siddhārtha had appeared behind Asura where she stood on an outcrop of stone.


“And what is this cakravarti-rājan of which you speak?”


“The Brahmins can tell you as well as I. He is the King of Kings, the master of karma. He stands outside this world and has viewed its life and growth for more than one trillion years.”


“And have you ever met this cakravarti-rājan?”


“My prince. No one has seen the cakravarti-rājan. Nor do we know where he might be. Yet all who know his name know that, not long from now, the cakravarti-rājan will appear among us. And when he does he will rule over all as the one great God, the Creator, he who transcends karma.”






Now she faced not Siddhārtha, but the King of Kings himself.


“My king,” Asura said, “am I to understand that you have existed here, upon this single planet in the Andromeda galaxy, and that from this place you presided over the rise and fall of many, many other planets?”


“My schemes and structures have all crumbled and scattered. I have stood here on this ancient slope, devoid of all life, watching the universe transform into something beyond the ability of my power to contain. I watched those who believed that Maitreya would come to their world and save them . . . I watched them build a statue to their supposed savior within the Pearl Palace, as I watched Maitreya himself assume direct authority over the kingdom of Atlantis. He caused the man Jesus of Nazareth to believe that he, Maitreya, was a god in heaven above, and from here I watched Jesus perform miracles in his name. Asura, even among my best and brightest followers, there were some who believed Maitreya’s words and laid the blame for the ruination of the world at your feet.


“Śakra, Vajra, all fought against the wasting of your world—your universe, believing in the Pure Land promised them by Maitreya. Yet they never once thought to seek that which gives birth to ruination in the first place.”


Asura thought back on the long road she had traveled, the vast span of time during which all of these events had taken place. It all seemed part of an even longer voyage, one with no beginning and no end.


“Let me ask you one thing, my king.”


“Yes?”


“What exactly are these beings that desire the destruction of our universe? From whence did they come?”


“Before I explain, I must ask you whether you have ever thought about the limits of your reality.”


“I have. I would assume they lie at the edge of the expanding universe, where the rate of expansion has reached the speed of light, forming a single, defined space, like an enormous sphere.”


“True—but this is not a complete explanation. If we speak of a finite space, no matter how large, we must also accept a larger, infinitely vast space outside it, of which your universe is only a part.”


The universe encompassed billions upon billions of galaxies. What did it matter if it was expanding or contracting, or doing something else entirely? What was the use of such knowledge?


“Time is the same, you know. The time that defines the reality inside those expanding limits of space is just a part of the time that exists in the infinity beyond. The flow of time began at the origin point of the universe you know, two hundred billion years ago, and its flow ceases two hundred billion light-years in the distance. Yet that is merely a fragment of the transcendent time stretching out into infinity.”


The voice of the cakravarti-rājan was filled with the regret of one who had watched the entirety of the universe’s long journey and knew its eventual fate.


“So, King of Kings, perhaps then you can tell me who Shi is? The absolute being who controls this transcendent time of which you speak?”


A long silence followed. The blue light falling on the bleak landscape around her, the great unbroken stillness, seemed increasingly bizarre, like something that belonged to another universe entirely. If this truly was the place from which the cakravarti-rājan had observed all change in the vastness of space she knew, then here, she thought, even a god would be little more than one aspect of that change.


Again, she heard the cakravarti-rājan’s voice within her mind.


“Once, Asura, I had a vision. Though I do not know if it was a true vision, or just a shadow drawn in my weary mind . . . Perhaps I never saw it at all. I am no longer sure. Yet I remember the contents of this vision quite clearly. I will show it to you now, Asura—I will give it into your mind directly. I’m sure its meaning will be very different for you than it was for me. But that is to be expected. You, who have already traveled so far, will have to choose for yourself whether you will return whence you came or continue along a far more difficult path than any you have known.”


As the words of the King of Kings ended, the vision began:


Wrapped in incandescent light, two spiral galaxies quietly devoured a third. Then the three galaxies became one, advancing toward the heart of another galactic cluster. Radioactive nebulae—the remnants of other galactic encounters—shimmered with light, moving through the full spectrum of colors as they gradually faded.


The scale grew greater and greater still. Now, several thousand galactic clusters swarmed in every direction, drifting at near the speed of light. The radiation they emitted destroyed other clusters billions of light-years distant.


The darkness of intergalactic space gradually lost its hue, as the drifting galactic clusters lost their shape and transformed into flowing bands of light. Coruscating bands of brightness twisted in the darkness, amid occasional blasts of brilliance. Again the darkness and light reclaimed their territories, then all began to brighten rapidly. Still the light was organized into bands . . .


Eventually, the true darkness came. All light was extinguished, making it hard for Asura to tell whether her point of view was in motion or completely still.


An immeasurably long time passed—the kind of time span during which the Milky Way could have emerged from the energy at the center of the universe and formed into a massive spiral galaxy, which then expended all of its energy and faded to nothing.


Asura herself became a spiral galaxy, adrift in the void. She sensed that she had already lost most of her interstellar material, and the vast majority of her stars had released all their energy, subsiding into cold, hard shells.


Suddenly, she felt herself flying through space at a frightening speed. It was unclear whether she was actually traveling faster than the speed of light, or whether the entire universe was moving. She could sense that Siddhārtha and Orionae had joined her in this changed reality.


So they made it after all.


Asura realized that they were watching over her, protecting her.


She heard their voices.


Here is the beginning of all existence.






Asura blinked. She found that she was in a place suffused with a curious thin light, like twilight, and a crystalline stillness that seeped into her heart. Life and death, even the flow of time, were encompassed within her. She understood that while she was still taking part in a change immeasurably vast, she had transcended far beyond that change as well.


Asura realized that now she was the cakravarti-rājan.


It was at that moment that she heard voices talking far off in the distance. The sound was fainter than the wind, yet it crept inside Asura’s mind. Though she had no way of telling whether these voices were actually speaking or communicating by some other means, the words were intelligible inside her.


Asura stilled her mind and listened intently.


“It was a failure.”


“A great failure. In order to destroy an agglomeration of high-energy particles, it is necessary to add another factor—one that enables the collapse that is a necessary part of the process of creation and transformation. Yet because particulate clouds are quick to react to change, and the reactions can sometimes be quite violent, we would have to be doubly cautious how and where we inserted this collapse factor.”


Another voice interjected.


“Yet if we made a mistake in our elimination procedures, the high-energy clouds generated within the reactor would eventually permeate the reactor walls and escape into the world.”


“I did not expect such strange reactive structures to emerge from this cyclical energy state.”


“Reactive structures—should we not call them life-forms?”


“Extremely primitive life-forms.”


The voices grew gradually fainter and more distant until they left Asura’s mind altogether.






“Wait! Who are you?” Asura called out into the streaming blue light. But there was no answer, no sign or shadow of response in that blank landscape as far as she could see.


The cakravarti-rājan too was gone.


She wondered what it all meant. Was all the change she had witnessed just part of a greater change, which was in turn a miniscule revolution in an even larger transformation? It seemed to Asura that no matter what its scale, change had one face only.


A sudden feeling of tremendous loss descended upon Asura. Now she must face the truth of her situation—wherever she turned, however she advanced or retreated, she would be alone. There was no way back to what had been, and in front of her stretched another ten billion days and one hundred billion nights.






Surging and receding . . .


Surging and receding . . .


The sound of the waves rolling in and rolling back out has echoed across this world for hundreds of millions of years, a long reach toward eternity.


Not once in that span has it ceased rocking and crossing this blue world, sometimes gently, sometimes powerfully; stormy as the morning, calm as the deep of night.


Surging and receding . . .


Surging and receding . . .


The sea rolls in and rolls back out. One hundred billion shimmering stars rise between the wave crests, only to sink back into the vastness of the waves with the first dim light of dawn.


Surging and receding . . .


Surging and receding . . .


Time that knows no haste flows over the waves as they roll in and roll back out, through night and into day and into night again.


Ah. Those many hundred billion days and nights.


How I long to return—


The peace and tranquility Asura had known there seemed painfully distant now.


Yet there was no way back to what had been, and in front of her stretched only another ten billion days and one hundred billion nights.