Standing at the shores of the dead, I ask:


To where does one return?








Z aaa . . . Zaaaaaa . . .


Zaaa . . . Zaaaaaa . . .


He focused his gradually expanding awareness on the noise—a simple two-phrase structure, regularly repeated. Already it echoed within him, filling him, pleasantly stimulating the nerve endings of his as-yet unhardened form. Something inside him was changing dramatically, something new becoming something even newer. The rich ripple of sound raised all of his metabolic functions to their limits. As he gave himself over to the experience, something deep within him ruptured with an audible pop.


At the same moment, the lid of the pod flew outward. A massive rush of air bubbles erupted from the circular porthole. The tiny spheres glowed with a silver sheen in the deep indigo of the water, rising steadily toward the surface. The pod was firmly wedged between two shelves of rock, yet it shook so violently that it seemed for a moment as if it might break free.


When the shuddering subsided he considered his surroundings. All of the machinery inside the pod that had supported his life until now had ceased to function, its work complete. The silvery needles, the air pumps, the circulators, were all unneeded now. They hung limply from the interior walls.


He slid out from beneath the framework of metal pipes where his body had been held like an astronaut in a G-seat. A single, dim orange lamp lit the pod’s interior, revealing features that would not have seemed out of place in a sophisticated spacecraft.


A dull pain throbbed deep inside his head, keeping time with the beating of waves against a distant shore. He flailed with ungainly limbs and made his way out of the structure that had sheltered him for so long. The water was surprisingly cold, and he struggled against the temptation to retreat back inside the pod. With every breath he took, a swarm of air bubbles escaped from beneath his jaw, racing upward and obscuring his vision. Far above, slanted light that was neither blue nor gray penetrated the veil of the water. It occurred to him that such dim light wouldn’t be able to warm this ocean.


The water was ice cold, as heavy and hard as steel, and filled with an inorganic cruelty that seemed to abhor life. It took him an incredible amount of energy and willpower just to move forward.


Suddenly, something pierced his mind like a fiery hot needle. The force of the psychic impact made his body go as rigid as stone.


To the land! Out of the water, onto the land!


The voice tore through his mind, reverberating under his skin, echoing back down into his core.


Onto the land? Whatever for? What is “the land,” anyway?


Words crisscrossed through his mind, illuminating the web of his memory from the inside, flashing like half-seen lightning. Within the folds of his brain, complex signals and combinations of meaning became apparent—yet he was not given the time to confirm each one, to explore or compare.


He raised his roundish head, pushing against the weight of the water, blind to and yet still aware of the unknown territories that existed beyond the unreal blue that surrounded him. And still he heard the ceaseless echoes of the waves surging and receding.


Now go! Onto the land! Go forth, and quickly!


The voice again, goading him on from behind. Ahead of him stretched a blue crevasse. He paddled through the water unconsciously, slowly drifting out over the depths. He found that his body did not move as reliably as he wanted. A place in his head was hurting—deep in his inner ears. The pain made him realize that he was swimming downward now; he had already sunk halfway down the crevasse. The pain increased, bringing him fully to his senses. Every nerve in his body screeched with alarm, and the muscles in his four limbs spasmed like springs.


Facing upward now, he pushed with all his strength to regain the altitude he’d lost. Gradually he advanced at a rising pitch, seeing the vast underwater valley recede far below.


At last the surface became visible above. He rose until his head broke through the water, and he took his first, deep breath, his lungs expanding like parachutes. The ionized air had a strong, sharp smell. Its acidity burned his nostrils and his throat and made his eyelids swell nearly shut. His eyes, narrowed to thin slivers, gave off a blue luminescence.


He made his way through a shoal where waves broke against the rocks, spray misting around his head. His round face bobbed along on the surface of the dark water, unable to leave it very easily, or for very long.






The land was low and flat, barely higher than the ocean’s surface. The wind wailed incessantly around him. The sky was painted a solid gray, varying only in degrees of gloom. Beneath its canopy, it was impossible to see where the sun might be, whether it was noon, or evening.


Feet still soaking in the water, he looked out over vast, barren flats. He saw no signs of life. He left the water then, stepped across the wet sand, and headed for the plains that stretched beyond the beach. The wind blew from behind him, whipping past, racing ahead of him far off across the flats. The line of white that stretched between the gray sea and the light brown of the flats, jagged as a broken potsherd, stretched off into nothingness like the line separating life from death. The land beyond seemed strangely featureless, its slight slope almost imperceptible.


Then something caught his eye far off to his left, floating like a mirage. He moved toward it, peering through the stinging air.


Slowly it came into view: a giant walled city, with pointed spires that rose thick as a forest, their tips lost in the low hanging sky. The gray curtain walls that surrounded it, rising from massive foundations, formed a distinctly geometrical pattern, contrasting starkly with the entirely alien sensibility of the complex vertical lines traced by the spires above them.


The city was very far away. For a while, he stood motionless, gazing at it. Gradually, cold fear grew within him. He looked around several times, hoping to find a different goal or direction for which to aim. Primal fear was robbing him of his basic intellectual capacity. Yet in the end, he could find nowhere else to go but toward the city. That, it seemed, was to be his destination.






The sand grew drier the farther he went from the water, until it rose in fine particles like smoke from beneath his feet. Flowing traces had been left on the surface of the land where the waves had once pushed the sand, the spray from long-dried crests frozen into beautiful shapes and curves.


He was surprised when he came to a place where the sand sloped gently upward into a low hill. At the top of this rise, he could see far across the flats in every direction. As he gazed ahead, a violent expression spread across his face and the light of his eyes grew dimmer.


Midway down the other side of the hill, a wide belt of dirty white-colored material covered the ground, extending for a considerable distance before disappearing again into the sea of sand. Beyond, it appeared again, weaving in and out of the sand over and over before reaching the walled city.


He quickened his pace, going down the hill to where the pale swath began. Beneath his feet, the crumbling sand transitioned into a firm, rocklike surface.


He was standing on an immensely wide concrete road. With every gust of wind, thin sheets of sand swept across its flat surface. He wondered where the road came from and where it led. He imagined land vehicles traveling along it and people walking to and fro. Now it lay forgotten, the wind its only traveler, none but the quiet sand seeking passage. Everything else around him—the land and the sky, and even the leaden sea he had left behind—was barren, the kind of barrenness from which no life could ever hope to revive.


Why?


How did this happen?


How did I come to be in this place?


The doubt and confusion that had receded from his newly wakened mind a short while ago now returned with increased urgency, and he had to fight to pull himself back from the abyss of fear.


At last he pressed on down the slope and entered a wide, shallow valley that ran parallel to the shore, forming a broad band of lowland between the ocean and the strange walled city.


He had never seen a valley like it before. He walked along the bottom for some time, moving slowly. The blowing sand had filled the depression of the valley to half of its original depth. Before him and behind him, sand trickled soundlessly down the sloping sides.


Suddenly, a sensation spread like lightning through his chest—a signal warning of approaching danger. For a moment he stopped, taking stock of his situation. It was clear that somewhere in this valley, somewhere in this wasteland, an enemy was lurking. It was also suddenly clear, as he watched the sand sift into the valley, that it would not be long before the lowland was completely filled, which meant that it had not existed for very long.


He paused again, still as a stone. Ahead of him, the valley ended at a tall mound of sand. The wind that blew down the valley collided with the mound, whirling up its slope, whistling as it rose. In silhouette the mound formed a mighty arc, and from its very center a complicated framework of some kind extended upward a considerable distance.


Slowly, he approached the base of the mound.


Two large cylinders emerged at an angle from the sand, extending down into the ground as though supporting the sandy mass above them.


It was now apparent that what he had at first thought was a mound of sand was instead a domed object nearly one hundred meters in height. He guessed that it was actually a sphere, half of which was buried beneath the drifts. Though it might have once been burnished to a mirrored finish, it was now scorched and pitted like a sand-scoured boulder.


He stared at it for a long time, understanding intuitively what this looming object was: a massive spacecraft.


The long, shallow valley through which he had just walked was the path the huge craft had left in the earth as it slid to a fiery stop upon landing.


He approached until he was standing in the shadow of the spacecraft’s hull, the gray curve hanging over him like a part of the sky.


An icy chill came over him—my enemy is here!


His enemy had known he would be coming and had sent searchers all the way here to find him. The immediacy of the threat only proved his enemy’s power.


So where is my enemy now?


He steadied his breathing, trying to hold back the chill that spread through his heart.


My enemy—


My enemy—


Then, suddenly, he shook his head and let his shoulders drop. The breath left his chest and he looked around furtively, like a timid beast.


What is an enemy?


Why do I fear this?


He worried that he might be going mad. Everything he had experienced since awakening ran together, blurring incomprehensibly. He sensed that he had been asleep for a very long time, yet he remembered nothing of the time before he slept. Yet something was now pushing him toward the walled city that sat like a shadow at the edge of the vast flats. This he knew with a disturbing clarity at the core of his being. He turned dark eyes out across the spreading sea of sand, yet found nothing there to console him.


What did I expect? he asked himself.


If I want to go to the city it must be because I am meant to go there. And if I sense an enemy it must mean my enemy is near.


Something was telling him these things, giving him information—controlling him with suggestions that were difficult to resist. He searched the gray lands and sky, his heart closed tightly as rock.


Where is this place? When is this place?


There was so much he wanted to know, yet nothing offered any answers. Again, an icy chill spread from his spine through his chest. It was soundless, painless, and faded in an instant, leaving only an awareness of impending peril in its wake.


He began to move again, slowly, staggering.


First, he would find his enemy’s whereabouts. His sense of danger had grown considerably. He looked around for something that might reveal to him his enemy’s form.


He moved along the perimeter of the giant spacecraft, crawling up the sandy incline. It was difficult going, and he did not learn much. The damage to the ship was more widespread than he had first thought, and in places the hull had collapsed entirely. He found nothing resembling symbols or numbers upon its surface.


He returned again to the flats. Far back along the way he’d come, he saw the thin white line of the waves crashing against the rocky shore. Beyond that, the gray of the sea seemed fused with the sky, making it difficult for him to distinguish one from the other. In the other direction the horizon faded in the distance, with nothing to draw his attention but the city whose walls hovered like a mirage over the sand. Still nothing moved, and there was no sound but the wind.


He wondered if his enemy was hiding inside the spacecraft, or was watching him, lurking somewhere out across the flats. He strained his senses, focusing them until they were needle-sharp, trying to draw something out from beneath the discordant whine of the wind.


His eyes flashed with a blue light.


Keeping close to the massive hull, he made another circuit of the spacecraft. At the tip of its egg-shaped form, just above where it emerged from the sand at the top of the slope, he saw an oval hatch. It was open. The hatch lid had been folded to one side by a mechanism he did not understand; it hung from the hull like a dislodged fragment of eggshell.


The hatch hadn’t been open when he circled the spacecraft before, which meant that either something inside was trying to get out, or it had already managed to escape while he wasn’t watching.


It is neither of these things!


He ignored the voice in his head as he carefully edged up the slope, nearer to the hatch. It didn’t make sense that something would have lingered inside the weathered spacecraft, waiting for him to arrive. Who could have known that he would be passing by here at this very moment?


Though he sensed that the danger facing him had grown even more urgent, he did not interpret the sudden opening of the hatch as the commencement of an attack.


By now he was just below the opening, near enough to reach the hatch that hung above him. There was a green dusting of something like rust where the hatch was attached to the edge of the portal. The hull of the ship around it seemed as thin as paper. He looked at the back surface of the door and saw that it was made of some silvery-white material, metallic and luminescent.


He put his hand on the edge of the opening and took a look inside. The interior of the craft was too dark for him to make out anything. Silence.


Gingerly, he reached into that dark orifice and felt around. He traced a small circle with his hand, then a wider one, yet touched nothing. He swung his arm around, high and low. Nothing.


Stepping back, he continued on to the far side of the spacecraft. From there he could gaze out over the entirety of the gray flats. The shallow valley dug out by the spacecraft began directly beneath his feet. He saw nothing resembling an enemy, neither in the valley nor on the flats all the way out to the horizon.


He wondered if he should leave the spacecraft where it was and continue toward the city. The enemy-presence he felt in his mind had spread across the flats, leaving danger for him in all directions. Could he simply ignore it and continue along his way? Would his enemy allow that? What was his enemy, anyway? It irritated him that he could not recall who or what it was that threatened him now.


He turned to look at the distant silhouette of the walled city. He knew he had to get there as soon as he could, yet he thought it folly to abandon this confrontation altogether.


He turned and made his way back to the hatch. The portal lay open like a dark window. Once again, he gripped the edge of the hatch and stuck his round head through into the interior.


The air inside the spacecraft was as still as it had been before. He flexed his arms, lifting his body up to the opening. Ice-cold air enveloped him. He paused, hanging there for a moment in alarm, then decided it was more dangerous to stay where he was with his arms occupied and pulled himself the rest of the way through the portal.


It was so dark inside that he could see no more than a meter ahead.


Dropping down to his knees, he advanced slowly, exhaling as quietly as possible. His chest tightened with fear. He could feel all the nerves in his body extending like feelers, groping through the darkness.


Nothing! There’s nothing here!


There was no sign of an enemy—in fact the darkness seemed to hold absolutely nothing at all. Like an insect confronted with danger, he stopped, frozen. His breathing and even his pulse slowed until he became like a stone, one with the darkness and stillness around him—and yet his awareness blazed through his nerves.


Though there was no enemy here, there was something far more frightening.


What is going on here?


The oddness of his situation staggered him. Cautiously, he advanced several meters, straining his senses.


Suddenly a brilliant light flashed before his eyes. The beam extended like a bolt of lightning, emerging from a point in the darkness to his right and striking left and downward at an angle through the space inside the craft.


The light burned his eyelids, passing through their membrane to sear his visual cortex. A moment after, another light erupted, crossing the first at an angle. Then the two crossed bars of light began to revolve, hot and brilliant through the darkness. They lit the space around him, first crimson, then orange, then clear green, transforming finally to an incandescent white. Countless particles of light swirled like sparks around him.


In the center of the brilliance, a cloud of light formed into an enormous swirling spiral. As he watched, it extended fingers of light in all directions, mingling with and impeding the movement of another spiral that appeared beside it. The spirals pulsed like living things, revolving slowly, trailing shining clouds of gas.


He stepped back, marveling at the light storm before him, feeling that he had seen it all somewhere before.


The two clouds of light cutting through the darkness were each comprised of billions of tiny particles, and where the two spirals touched, floating bands of deep crimson were overlaid with a silvery radiance.


The light wavered and flickered without a sound, exploding and imploding before him, and the dark void beyond told of the passage of infinite time.


That’s it!


For the first time, he understood the source of his fear. These are two spiral galaxies. They’re colliding.


One is the Milky Way, the other . . . Andromeda!


In his heart, he screamed. Each was comprised of one hundred billion stars, with diameters one hundred thousand light-years across and thicknesses of roughly fifteen thousand light-years. They were massive, and they should have been more than two million light-years distant from each other, but here before him the Milky Way and Andromeda were colliding.


A wave of fear crashed into him, and he reacted. His energy-flooded visual cortex was already overcapacity, but he left it that way, connecting it to a circuit breaker. He withdrew his limbs and hugged his knees to his chest, placing his head atop them; then he ceased to move, as if he were some inorganic object floating in space. His breathing and pulse stopped, his metabolism went into lockdown, and his mind became a void.


The lights burned more intensely, reflecting against the surface of his mind. He activated a tri-D sensor cell antenna array, silently racing to the far edges of the two galaxies—which by now had transformed into surging currents of pure energy. Still, he detected no presence there. Nothing existed in this void of energy and light. He compelled himself to keep looking, searching in between the stars, and still he found nothing.


Suddenly the great whorls of light began to melt, their cores becoming violent blazes that rapidly spread. Their energies formed concentric rings, extending in waves out into the darkness. The deep blue of those waves was so bright it hurt his eyes and made his heart grow cold. Over and over again they swept through the dark reaches of space. Finally, one of the waves broke into several pieces, each piece becoming a giant orb of light. Then the cluster of orbs shifted directions—and stopped, silent.


He wondered for a moment if he was dreaming. It would not have surprised him to learn that he still lay on his side in that pod in the frigid water, asleep. Vague memories of himself before he entered the pod swam beneath his consciousness, yet he had no idea what he might have been, or what he might have done. He could feel his confidence in his own identity slipping away. For the first time, a powerful feeling of loneliness gripped him.


What am I looking at? What does it mean? Am I dreaming?


Have I been flung to the end of worlds, where no other life remains? Is there no one here to fight by my side and no weapons with which to do battle?


What am I supposed to do?


He replayed the movements of the swirling lights in his mind, feeling cold sweat trickle down his skin. The orbs of light did not move; but they began to grow even brighter.


Get out!


Something screamed inside him, the sound echoing through his chest.


You are in danger there. Get out now!


Out? But that didn’t make sense. How would he get out of this confinement?


He felt something, somewhere inside him, despairing.


You are in danger. Get out now, the voice said with rising urgency. Your time is short. He felt his mind dry up like a pool in the desert, a surface crazed with sudden cracks. Death in the form of brilliant spirals of light swelled up from those cracks with frightening speed. The blazing orbs had grown to twice their original size.


It was at that moment that a memory came to him, an instant of clarity that had been lost to him until then. With a dark heart, he stared at the silent orbs of light, understanding that his own destruction was swiftly approaching.


By now, the whirling lights filled most of his vision, spreading ever more rapidly.


I can’t see them moving because they’re coming straight at me.


He was a target. The voice sounded once again in his mind.


Get out now!


The danger was now only an instant away. He turned and saw the hatchway behind him, a white window of light floating in the darkness. He ran toward it, fear swelling up behind him like a great wave. He ran with all his strength, leaping toward the portal.


An unknown force of incredible strength twisted and warped the dark space around him. Lines of light, like a web of occult electricity, pushed against his body. In the fraction of time that remained before the orbs overtook him he closed the impossible distance to the hatch.


He shot through the portal like a bullet, plunging down onto the sand. Then he rolled down the slope, dust rising in a cloud behind him. When he finally came to a stop, he lay there at the bottom of the valley, awaiting the next calamity.


Nothing happened. He extended his tri-D sensor cell antennae as far as he could but detected nothing approaching.


For a long while he lay as though dead, unable even to grasp his own situation. All he knew was that he was driven by an urgent need to reach the walled mirage on the horizon, and that on his way there he had encountered a strange enemy and only barely escaped its trap. That and one other thing. There was a strange voice inside his head that projected warnings into his mind and directed the actions of his body. All of these things were shrouded in mystery.


He picked himself up from the ground. Lifting his sand-covered head, he peered back at the silvery spacecraft. The hatch was still open, small and dark. He could not decide whether this was truly some trap of his enemy . . . or was in fact a vessel that somehow contained two entire spiral galaxies. He wondered if he should investigate its interior again or abandon it as the voice had directed him to do. Either way, he understood that the actions he took henceforth would be largely determined by the strange events he had experienced inside the spacecraft. The flickering presence of the enemy he felt within his mind frightened him almost beyond bearing.


He decided to leave the valley. Cautiously he moved up the slope opposite the spacecraft, irritated that his path had been determined by a mere inanimate object.


He stood for a while when he reached the top, sweeping his surroundings with his alerted senses. He detected nothing new . . . except, just once, somewhere far across the flats, he thought he noticed something moving. Immediately he focused all of his attention in that direction, but by then whatever it was had already disappeared. It did not surprise him that he was being monitored.


He pressed onward then, leaving a long trail of footprints across the faded brown sea of sand, remnants for the wind to scatter and the sliding sand to fill.


He followed the line of the half-buried highway. It did not seem like very long before the spires of the city were towering above his head. The walled city—the mirage he had seen from a distance—was now very real and spread out before him. A collection of yurtlike buildings extended out from the shield wall, and the wall was half covered by a translucent dome that seemed to be half melted, its edge a waterfall of drooping threads and beads of water frozen in place. The yurts spilled out from the walled city in a tangle that showed no order or planning, like intestines from a ruptured stomach. The shield wall above them rose to a height of roughly five hundred meters, he guessed, without a single window or visible seam. It appeared to have been carved from a single piece of some unknown substance nearly ten kilometers in circumference. Above it the spires rose like a tangled forest impossibly high, seven to eight thousand meters above the plain. The spires’ bases were thick enough to form buildings many stories high. Their tips were sharp and narrow, like spears piercing the sky. From their tips and edges bristled antennae and other objects—he guessed them to be radar dishes and laser cannons—in a pattern like some ancient arabesque, their structures seeming to defy the laws of gravity.


He stood and stared.


Though he had not noticed it until now, behind the forest of spires the quarter shell of a translucent dome arced across the sky. And there were other shattered domes beyond it, beyond the city, standing empty upon the sand, some like giant inverted bowls, others with flat mesalike tops. He guessed that the dome had once covered the city in its entirety.


He took in the sight of the great city, storing it in his neural memory web.


At last he moved in for a closer look. The yurts were half buried in sand, making it hard for him to see inside them. On further inspection he found that the buildings were arranged around a long corridor, roughly one hundred meters wide, in which nothing had been built. Both the buildings’ walls and the roads between them seemed to have been made from an incredibly thin, specialized silicon. One part of the yurt closest to him was scorched where some weapon had opened a hole in its side. He approached and looked in, only to find it filled to its ceiling with sand. Then he walked on down the empty corridor, making for the main wall of the city. He guessed that he was walking along an ancient thoroughfare, perhaps the main entrance to the city in the past. If that was true, there was a good chance it would take him to a gate or some other entrance through the wall and into the city.


The forest of spires threw a jumbled shadow across the sand around him. He wondered what had inspired the city’s architects to construct such high towers with such sharp points to scrape against the sky. He wondered if the people who lived here had borne the heavens some great hatred that led them to direct even their buildings upward as weapons, protected though they were by a wall and dome. He belatedly realized that he had been thinking about the city only in the past tense. This was very dangerous. Had he not just entered a derelict spacecraft only to find it functioning perfectly enough to unleash a terrifying attack?


For all he knew, something might be waiting for him in there, buried beneath the rubble and the sand. As long as that was a possibility, there was nothing past tense about this city and the danger it posed.


A giant door opened in the high shield wall. He crouched in its shadow, peering through the gate. The blowing sand had settled in beautiful windblown curves along the edges of the wall. Other than the drifts that gave way beneath his feet, nothing moved in all that space. Through the city’s entry gate a dark tunnel led toward the other, deeper levels. He peered into its darkness, tense. The danger he’d faced inside the spacecraft again came to mind—clearly this was no place to linger. He went through the gate, the sand rising up to his knees.


Though the tunnel way had seemed inky black from the outside, once inside it he saw that it was dimly illuminated, its walls the same gray ash color as the world beyond the wall. He looked for the source of the illumination but was unable to find it. He decided that it must come from the high ceiling or the walls or the floor itself.


The sand stirred like a mist around his feet as he walked. The tunnel was short, opening into a large circular hall with several short radio-tower-like structures at its center, the openings at their tops shaped like the mouths of trumpets. The towers’ circular bases were covered in drifting sand, and though it was apparent these were devices for absorbing radioactivity, it was obvious that they no longer functioned. He imagined the citizens of the city coming in from the outside world, always passing through this hall for decontamination, after which they would enter the city proper through one of several doorways set around the hall. He picked one of them and went through into the ruins of the ancient city.






He walked among fallen, shattered ceilings, cracked walls and floors, twisted electrical conduits and clogged water pipes, and vast quantities of preserved goods that had been stored for so long they were now nothing but mountains of dust and sand. The destruction Fate had decreed for this place had been so thorough that over the long quiet years, the city had marched to its ruination with an impossibly ponderous certainty.


Again, he sensed the presence of some enemy—closer this time. Perhaps his foe had come behind him and was even now standing at the city gates beneath the towering walls.


For a brief moment he hesitated, casting his senses in all directions, and then he continued his advance. He came across a line of large buildings, each about a hundred meters long. Peering into them through the openings at their sides, he saw that they were crossed with metal pipes like those in a rotary kiln, all red with rust. Many cranes and beltways hung from the ceiling of each chamber, their workings covered with thick layers of dust. A manufacturing sector, perhaps, he thought.


He climbed to the upper levels of one building along a beltway that hung loosely, its belt dangling in places like shredded paper. From there he passed through countless rooms and halls of many sizes, including a communications hub filled with electronics and a manufacturing facility that seemed outfitted to produce large quantities of synthesized foods. Everything was rusting, half buried in sand, enveloped in silence.


What am I supposed to do here?


Fierce doubts churned in his chest. He wasn’t sure what he was supposed to be looking for, why he was driven to search.


Feeling empty and alone, he stepped into a small room with a floor buried in sand. There was a large window in one wall, and through its empty frame he could look out on the foundations of the towering spires. He stuck his head out through the window and stared up at the gray sky, then let his gaze fall back down to the dune-crowded streets of the ancient metropolis. There were symbols engraved on the foundation of one of the nearest spires—something commemorating the tower’s construction, possibly. He opened his two foremost eyes wide, trying to read the symbols.


Two nine zero . . .


He directed all the energy in his body toward his visual cortex. The circuit breaker that supplied his scorched optic nerves trembled with the load.


2902 TOKYO


TOKYO . . . Did that mean this city was “Tokyo”?


Though the name did not exist anywhere in his memory, it seemed a suitable enough appellation for a place that had prospered in this sector at some point during the thirtieth century.


But why would Tokyo be in ruins? And what year is it now?


Hoping to find an answer in the rubble, he moved on, following an enormous corridor between massive structures.


Suddenly he spotted a shadow flitting at the edge of his field of vision. An instant after he saw it, it disappeared behind a dark wall. His metabolizer was running at full speed now, ready for the lethal attack that was sure to come. His tri-D sensor cells extended an umbrella antenna, seeking to detect the metabolic energy of his enemy, its strength and direction. Nothing . . .


Fear chilled him to the bone. He dropped to the floor, listening for sounds in the levels below while his antenna extended upward toward the high ceiling to listen for the movement of enemies above.


Still nothing.


What could be here, if not my enemy?


Though the movement he’d detected in the desert outside the city gates had surely been hostile, he had as yet found no sign of any enemy within the city’s bounds.


Perhaps they have not invaded this far . . . yet?


He considered the possibility that he had fallen into yet another of his enemy’s traps.


On a world like this, where energy use was at an absolute minimum, it would be impossible to camouflage any large amount of radiation. Even the hydrogen fusion reaction within the sun that lit the sky had dwindled to only a third of its former strength. The natural world had atrophied, its moisture gone, leaving the surface of Earth a cold and barren desert. Animal life had long since vanished, and even the withered remains of forests had disappeared without a trace. Only the wind moved now, occasionally trailing sand in gray clouds. The cycle of energy had been broken, and the planet lacked the strength to nurture anything new.


He was certain that the lurking enemy had by now detected his body’s energy profile. An energy detector could be used to determine a quarry’s whereabouts with greater accuracy than even a wireless directional finder. He would be defenseless if his hidden foe had managed to conceal its own energy emissions and approached undetected.


Moving quickly, he ran to the corner of the wall behind which the dark figure had disappeared. He found a tiny footprint where sand had been kicked up.


This is not my enemy!


Keeping his breath level, he tiptoed toward a crack between two structures behind the wall. It led into a hole of some sort; there the footprints disappeared.


A trap?


He returned again to the corridor, searching for any signs of approach. He sensed that his enemy was already inside the city, moving steadily through the corridors on the bottommost level, heading toward a broken lift. Whoever or whatever it was probably intended to climb up the shaft.


Which meant that at least he still had the advantage of higher ground.


Quietly, he slipped through a hole in the wall. Beyond it he found a spiral passageway that sloped gently upward.


An old beltway.


The small footprints continued up the passage. He followed, coming to a place where a giant shutter—long ago ruined—had been lowered to block the corridor. Electrical conduits and communications lines were tangled along the ceiling, and air-conditioning pipes hung down like strands of hair. He brushed them aside with one hand, leaning to duck beneath them; the pipes clanged into one another with a dry metallic sound. A moment later, they crumbled as though made of nothing more than clay. The sound of their falling made a quiet echo down the corridor.


Ahead of him, the footprints disappeared into a power plant. Other footprints joined them near the entrance, also going in. He entered the plant.


The only illumination within came from clouded orange panels that looked like indicators of some kind. Beneath the dim circle of light they cast huddled several human figures.


He stood still as stone. “Who are you?” he called out after a long hesitation.


One of those in the group gave a quick, sharp cry he could not understand.


The person shouted again, the sound of it hitting him like a physical blow.


Then he felt something switch inside himself—an automatic voice translation system turning on.


“Who are you? Where did you come from?” the person was asking him.


He peered further into the plant but saw no other figures lurking.


“Who are you?” he responded. “Why are you hiding here?”


Even as he spoke, he marveled at his own ability to converse. He had no memory of any time in which he’d exchanged words with another person. Yet his current situation provided no time to consider this mystery.


“We are residents. We live here,” the people said.


“Here? This is your home?” He looked around again at the ruined plant. It seemed highly unlikely that anyone could live here amongst this wreckage and death.


“You live here?” he asked again, worried that they might think him slow for repeating himself.


“Yes. We are residents of this place. Where did you come from?”


He thought it best not to tell the truth in this instance. Nor did he want to waste time explaining anything.


“This is Tokyo, right?” he asked.


“Yes. This is Tokyo. Capital of the Inner Planetary Alliance.”


Something about those words bore the echo of a former glory, long since faded.


“I see,” he said. “So tell me, what is the solar year now?”


As soon as he asked, he feared that it might not have been a wise question.


“The solar year? I believe, yes, it is 3905.”


Inwardly, he breathed a sigh of relief—it seemed that his question hadn’t raised any suspicions.


“Which would mean,” he said half to himself, “that over a thousand years has passed since that engraving was made on the tower.”


“Of what do you speak?” the person asked.


“What caused the city to fall into ruin?” he quickly replied. “Please understand that I mean you no harm. Come here.”


In response, the group huddled even more tightly together.


“There’s nothing to be afraid of. I am—” he was about to tell them that he came from another place, another celestial body, but then he thought better of it. People living in these conditions would only fear him more if they learned he came from another star. “I came from another city to establish communications.”


Eventually, one of the people stepped out from the huddle, wariness burning in his eyes.


“Another city? There is still another city on Earth?” Hope mingled with a deep sadness in his voice.


“There is,” he said, then stopped, fumbling for his next words until he remembered the lead-colored sea. “It lies across the sea.”


“Across the sea!”


With those words, the group split into fourteen individuals. In the dim orange light, they looked dangerously thin and frail. Their height was, on average, roughly a meter and a half. Their arms and legs were thin and long, their shoulders rounded and slumping, their foreheads protruding. They held their hair with thin metal circlets, just above the ears, and they wore light brown skinlike cloth that covered their entire bodies.


Their expressions were unreadable as they gathered to get a closer look at their visitor.


“What is your name?” one asked.


He would have to answer this one. “S-S-Siddhārtha,” he said, dredging the word up from some back corner of his mind.


“See-darth-a?”


“Siddhārtha.”


“Siddhārtha!”


“You know this name?” he asked, worried that he had made a mistake.


“No, not well. Though perhaps I have heard it once . . . somewhere.”


“Are you the leader of these people?”


The man standing closest to him nodded. “I am. We are all that remain of the city. I am Orionae the Elder, formerly of Atlantis,” he added, lifting his tanned, weathered, and wrinkled face to meet Siddhārtha’s eyes. “Siddhārtha, you are.”


“And you are Orionae.”


The two repeated the names, each certain they had heard the other’s before, that they were joined by some painful memory that neither was able to recall.


Perhaps, he thought, this man had simply done as I had—reaching into the back corners of his mind and picking the first word he found. Not that it mattered.


“Tell me, Orionae. How did this great city become ruins?”


Orionae came solemnly to stand before Siddhārtha.


“I will tell you,” he said. “Strangely enough, the very reason I am here in this abandoned city of Tokyo is because it is my duty to explain to another person the reason and the manner of the city’s fall into decline. You may very well be that other person.”


“You were . . . placed here to do this?”


“Tragedy visited this place in the year 2900. The dimming of the sun in the sky above was the first sign of our impending doom. The average temperature of this city, and across the surface of the earth, fell to minus sixty-eight degrees Celsius.”


“Minus sixty-eight degrees!”


“Indeed. After this, the earth began to dry. All the lands were transformed into deserts; shallow straits and inlets evaporated, leaving nothing but sand and salt flats behind.”


This explained the condition of the world outside—though it was still surprising that all of this could have happened in a mere one thousand years.


“This was planned, clearly,” Siddhārtha said, raising his head. “Orionae. Have you lived here then for these past one thousand years?”


Orionae nodded. “I have. For 1,180 years. I am a cyborg. As I said, I was placed here for the very purpose of recording this information and transmitting it to another.”


“Yes, your story. Might I hear it?”


Orionae’s companions, flitting like ghosts, had formed a circle around Siddhārtha and their leader while they talked. Siddhārtha wondered whether they were listening. Whenever they moved, their thin clothing gave off a faded luster that seemed to fit their ruined surroundings.


“Listen,” Orionae said. “The Inner Planetary Alliance—”


Suddenly, an alert system embedded in the artificial ear shells at either side of Siddhārtha’s head began to sound. Automatically, his metabolizer went into overdrive, preparing to pump oxygen and enzymes through his body. The supplementary processors embedded in each of his shoulders began scanning his surroundings. Finally, his tri-D sensor cell antenna indicated the presence of a dangerous enemy beyond the shattered wall directly behind him.


For a second, he regretted letting his guard down. It had been a mistake to divert his attention from his persistent follower, if only for a moment.


Orionae was a decoy!


In one bound, Siddhārtha leapt to the corner of the huge room to await the enemy’s arrival, taking cover beneath a giant metallic cylinder, red with rust, that resembled some sort of electrical rectifier. A moment later, silent beams of deep crimson light struck the wall on either side of him. Where they hit, the shattered wall was reduced to incandescent steam, leaving nothing but scorched holes behind. Siddhārtha narrowly dodged the attack, leaping up to hide himself in a large crevice between the wall and the ceiling. The room was filled with swirling flames and rising dust, reducing visibility to less than a meter. Out of the dust and confusion came fragments of the screams of Orionae’s people.


Siddhārtha gingerly extended his tri-D antenna from the crack in the wall, searching for his foe. He found him standing near a protrusion in the wall on the opposite side of the room. Orionae and the others were rapidly moving away, running down the corridor in a group. Though it would be a loss to let Orionae escape now, he could not risk exposing himself to his enemy in order to follow.


After what seemed like an interminable amount of time, the standoff ended when his enemy became tired of waiting and began to move.


Siddhārtha connected his tri-D antenna to his visual cortex.


A man was standing by the protrusion in the far wall. He wore dirty white cloth loosely wrapped around a thin, suntanned frame, and in his right hand he carried a short, strangely shaped weapon. It seemed odd to Siddhārtha that this man should be his enemy, in possession of such fearful technology. And yet he sensed a burning hatred directed toward himself.


His enemy moved suddenly, and another beam of crimson light erupted from the weapon in his hand, illuminating the corridor down which Orionae and his people were escaping. Siddhārtha sensed the group divide, separating into its individual members. Some of them vanished entirely.


Before the beam of light had ceased its cutting blast, Siddhārtha launched into motion. Energizing the micro-reactor embedded in his waist, he activated the discharge panel on his left wrist, propelling a large ball of yellow flame toward his enemy’s position. The fireball struck the wall behind the man, exploding into hundreds of thousands of sparks that scattered in all directions.


As his enemy ran silently beneath the spreading blaze, Siddhārtha let fly a second fireball. The room was suffused with pale light and the air trembled as though electrified. Even as the flames surrounded the stranger, he ducked into a side corridor through an opening in the wall. A smile appeared on the man’s chiseled brown face the moment before he disappeared, his eyes darting in Siddhārtha’s direction.


Twice crimson beams blasted holes in the corridor ceiling. Then there was silence.


Siddhārtha extended his antenna to find that his enemy had retreated to the lower levels of the city. He had not abandoned his attack entirely . . . but it would be some time before he found his next opportunity to strike.


Siddhārtha went down into the corridor to look for Orionae. He found three bodies beneath fallen sections of ceiling, as well as several large holes with singed edges, which he took to indicate people who had been evaporated along with the floor and walls around them.


Orionae was lying on the floor some thirty meters down the corridor.


Siddhārtha hurried to him, picking him up in his arms. “Orionae! Awaken!”


The cyborg’s eyelids fluttered open. Siddhārtha saw his own round head reflected in Orionae’s brown eyes.


“Ah yes, Siddhārtha. I had not finished my story. In the year 2902, the Solar Alliance determined that the energy loss within our solar region was part of a greater energy loss affecting the entire Milky Way galaxy.”


“You mean the entire galaxy was deteriorating?”


“Yes. Then, in 2905, at a summit of astrophysicists called by the Solar Alliance, an emergency committee formed to investigate the matter announced that a reduction in potential energy, its cause unknown, was affecting the entire known universe.”


“Orionae, stay with me,” Siddhārtha said, lifting the slumping cyborg off the ground. “You must tell me what happened next.”


“I’m all right . . . They soon discovered that every spiral galaxy in the visible universe was showing a rapid red shift.”


“Which would either mean the Doppler effect or a rapid reduction in potential energy.”


“It is as you say. However, we knew it was not the Doppler effect, for indeed all the energy in the universe was beginning to fade measurably.” A ragged cough sent spasms through Orionae’s body.


“But couldn’t it have been a diffusion of energy caused by rapid expansion?”


Orionae shook his head. “No. If that were the case then the Doppler effect would be sufficient to explain the red shift. But observe these drastically cold temperatures. Water and air are both rarefied, and nothing but a cyborg can even hope to survive on the planet’s surface. I wonder how they fare on other planets . . . whether any humans remain.”


The strength left Orionae’s body. Panicking, Siddhārtha shook him. “Don’t let go! You have not yet fulfilled your duty!”


Orionae barely managed to open his lightless eyes. “Siddhārtha. I have seen this with my own eyes: strange life-forms came from beyond our universe to develop this world—this was seven thousand years ago already.”


“From beyond our universe, you say?”


“They said this: ‘By the reckoning of the Twin Suns, from Blue 93 to the summer of Yellow 17 in the New Galactic Age . . . ’ ”


“ ‘ . . . the Planetary Development Committee on Astarta 50 received a directive from Shi to attempt a helio-ses-beta development on the third planet in the Ai System,’ ” Siddhārtha said, continuing the words that Orionae had started. “Orionae. Did you see these life-forms yourself?”


Orionae nodded slightly. It would have been dangerous to force him to speak any further, so Siddhārtha used his supplementary processors to extract the memories from him. The platinum electrodes implanted in Orionae’s skull activated his cerebrum with a shower of ultrashort waves. Then the extraction stimulation circuit from Siddhārtha’s supplementary processor fused with the remaining gray matter in the cyborg, converting his distant memories into faint electrical patterns, which it then transmitted into Siddhārtha’s neural web. Siddhārtha continued to walk quietly down the corridor, holding Orionae’s body in his arms.






His enemy was on the move again. Siddhārtha knew that if he were attacked now, both he and Orionae would be killed. He had to stall for time. With Orionae in his arms, he moved as quietly as possible along the corridor, following its sand-strewn slope downward. Fortunately, it seemed that his enemy had not reacquired their position.


“Yellow 17 in the New Galactic Age, the Planetary Development Committee on Astarta 50 received a directive from Shi to attempt a helio-ses-beta development on the third planet in the Ai System . . .”


The words left a strange echo in Siddhārtha’s ears.


“What does ‘Shi’ mean, I wonder?” he asked out loud.


In his arms, Orionae suddenly whispered, “Shi is the absolute being. Shi exists outside this universe, causing this universe to be. All things and people in this universe, and the way and direction of all things, are according to Shi’s will.”


Siddhārtha listened with part of his mind while another part thought furiously.


“Siddhārtha. If it is Shi’s will that the energy in our universe fade, what will you do?”


“Orionae. Might I assume that this absolute being of which you speak is what the ancients called ‘God’?”


Orionae raised his eyebrows. “I was placed here merely with the purpose of transmitting what I had seen with my own eyes to future generations. That is all.”


For a long while, Siddhārtha carried his burden in silence. At last he reached the long hall that led to the city gates. Through the dark arch of the gates he could see the vast desert beyond. The air was as cold as ice and bore the faint metallic smell of ions.


Just a little farther and we’ll be free.


At that moment, Siddhārtha spotted a single figure standing as still as a statue in the darkness beneath the arch of the gates. The dirty white cloth in which the figure was wrapped made an audible sound as it slapped against his bare legs in the wind.






Siddhārtha’s enemy had known he would have to pass through the gateway. Already the man was taking aim.


In an instant Siddhārtha thought of a plan—but it had one drawback. He could do little holding Orionae, and abandoning him here would be tantamount to murder. Quickly he shuffled backward, burying his heels in the sand. He was left with no choice. Placing Orionae in the shade of the wall, he prepared to make a decisive counterattack.


“Siddhārtha,” Orionae whispered. “Be careful. Your enemy is a very dangerous man. He has already waited here five hundred years for your arrival. He is the very hand of Shi.”


“Wait, Orionae. Don’t tell me that he is what you saw—was he the destruction of the city?”


“Siddhārtha. What I saw was a great host of angelic beings—but now I wonder if they were not merely a phantasm.”


“A phantasm?”


His enemy slid forward across the sand.


With sudden clarity, Siddhārtha understood that his foe was not merely trying to kill him, but Orionae as well. Of course—clearly the man had known well ahead of time that Siddhārtha would attempt to escape with Orionae. He had left Orionae alive so that he might catch them together.


My enemy is not this man before me.


“My enemy is Shi!”


Siddhārtha looked around in desperation. It seemed that the world around him had grown dim, and within that gloom a certain death was waiting. He had no time! No time to remove the electrodes from Orionae’s head and switch his supplementary processors to full battle mode. Nonetheless he began to do what he could, slowly removing the electrodes, adjusting the circuits connecting his processors.


His enemy was taking his time, observing Siddhārtha’s every movement, waiting for the right opportunity to let that crimson flame burst from the maser in his hand. He grinned as he drew nearer, revealing yellowed, rotting teeth; Siddhārtha heard him muttering, but all he could make out was the sound “. . . zareth.”


At exactly the same moment, Siddhārtha and his enemy sprang into action, each taking a sudden leap to reach a better position. An instant later Siddhārtha noticed a girl with clear eyes standing directly between them. Her body was lean and supple, like a young boy’s, and a glow like that of the evening sun suffused her face and form.


His enemy shouted something. A crimson beam of fire from his right hand pierced the girl’s body. She laughed soundlessly.


“You have heard the name of Asura?” the girl asked. “She stands before you. Now tell me: where is Shi?”


Again, the beam of fire sliced toward the girl. She extended her hand, and the beam veered off sharply, vaporizing a section of wall behind her.


Siddhārtha’s enemy shouted something and retreated several paces as swiftly as a shadow retreats before the sun. All expression faded from his chiseled, bearded face. His eyes, blue as shallow water, gazed without emotion at Siddhārtha, then shifted back to rest upon the girl.


“So it is true after all,” the man said, nodding. His dirty rags slapped noisily against the bare skin of his thighs.


A gust of wind rose and the girl leaned into it, letting it support her. “What do you mean?” she asked as the wind dropped again.


The question seemed to shift the balance of their enemy’s mind back toward aggression, and he began sliding to one side, moving into position for another attack.


“I recently received word that in addition to my primary target, I might find two other enemy elements waiting for me. Until this moment, I had no idea who those two might be. But now I see it is you and the cyborg.”


Hatred darkened the man’s sunken eyes. His toes flexed, and he moved forward. Then he stopped, raising one finger to point at the girl.


“A-A-Asura. Why have you come here?”


She fixed him with a glare. “Jesus of Nazareth,” she addressed him, ignoring his question. “How long have you been waiting for us?”


“Ah . . .” He nodded slightly, considering. “Since I began my vigil for you in this barren desert already eight hundred years have passed. Yet I have been waiting for my moment since three thousand years before that. It has been a very long time.”


His words rang with expectation—clearly he foresaw a swift end to his long, arduous duty. There was confidence in his look even as the dark shadows deepened over the man’s small eyes.


“You—” Jesus jerked his jaw toward Siddhārtha. “Siddhārtha, you called yourself? It seems that you’ve unconsciously chosen your old name again. Fascinating, that.”


“My old name? What are you talking about?” Siddhārtha asked, rashly turning to face his foe full on.


“Look out!”


The air split in two, and a deep red luminance painted ground and sky. Dust burst up in lines across the sand. Then the sand itself became steam, and the ground began to shimmer like a mirage. Asura flitted into the air like a feather, but the crimson beam followed her in a boiling column of fire that pierced the sky. A blast wave erupted, striking the desert like a giant hammer.


Several of the lofty spires above them broke and fell down into the city below. Where they landed, new plumes of sand rose in mushroom clouds. The faded red sky shifted to lurid orange, clogged with numberless whipping particles carrying death and destruction. The chances of escape from that apocalypse dwindled rapidly to almost nil. Their enemy’s assault was as perfect as it was complete.






Siddhārtha lay half buried in sand, still as a lump of stone. His tri-D antenna opened slightly, shedding a tiny stream of dust.


He could sense his enemy nearby—everywhere, it seemed.


No—there he was, not more than a hundred meters away, moving from left to right across Siddhārtha’s field of vision.


I wonder what he’s up to?


He resisted the temptation to fully extend his antenna. In the quiet that now reigned, even the slightest movement could draw attention from a considerable distance. The release of kinetic energy was one of the easiest to detect. It would be far too dangerous to reveal himself; the last attack had proved beyond the shadow of a doubt his enemy’s hideous strength.


So what is he doing?


Unable to restrain his desire to know, he let his antenna push another ten centimeters above the top of the sand.


Unthinkingly, Siddhārtha tensed every muscle in his body.


A thousand meters ahead of where his enemy slowly made his way across the flats was his destination—a small black shadow atop a dune. Asura.


Jesus of Nazareth was moving slowly, leaving footprints in the sand. The flames and explosions had singed his already tan skin to such a brownness that he threatened to disappear into the desert landscape altogether.


Jesus was almost out of Siddhārtha’s range when his path began to curve as he headed directly toward the top of the dune where Asura was standing.


The sky and land were lit with scarlet for a moment. Then as Jesus began to climb the dune, the world faded again to its former monotone, and an icy wind blew in between the swirling flames. The brightness of the flames waxed and ebbed. Even the rapid energy shifts and massive discharges generated by the Nazarene’s weapon lost much of their power in this world near death.


Siddhārtha searched around for any sign of Orionae, but could not detect him anywhere. Finally, he fully extended his antennae, reasoning that his enemy’s attention would be fixed on the far-off dune where Asura was standing.


As he did so, he felt a terrible and urgent need to act. I have to distract him!


Siddhārtha struggled out of the sand to stand. “Hold! Jesus of Nazareth!” he cried, yet his voice only traveled from the top of his throat back down his neck into his own body, reverberating up into his ears, but never reaching the outside air. Siddhārtha panicked, realizing that if he did not draw at least half of his enemy’s firepower in his own direction, Asura would not be able to withstand another of Jesus’s attacks.


Jesus of Nazareth stopped abruptly, then slowly lifted his right hand.


Suddenly, the far edges of the flats erupted toward the sky without a sound. Higher and higher they rose into the gray atmosphere, creating a valley with impossibly steep sides, while at the same time the edges of the sky plunged toward the ground. At the limits of Siddhārtha’s field of vision, sky and land joined together, fusing into a single curved wall. Lighter than shadow, more indefinite even than the void, the flats and the gray sky formed a giant cylinder, as if the very laws of geometry had broken. Far out in that vertiginous space, like a fragile image in a kaleidoscope, he could see Asura looking very small.


The howling of the wind had ceased entirely, leaving a sickening emptiness in its place.


“Stop! Do not do this!”


Siddhārtha sprinted through the deathlike silence, lacking the time to consider why Jesus of Nazareth grew no nearer no matter how much he ran.


As Siddhā rtha sped across the sand, the battle structures in his body prepared for combat. Palisade tissues—resembling those in a plant, but more closely akin to the electroplaques of an eel—linked his processors and his core reactor to his weapons units; discharge panels on his shoulders opened like unfolding leaves. Automatically, his metabolizer revved up to maximum capacity as the circuit from the reactor connected to the roots of the panels. In an instant the leaves were ready to unleash their deadly stores.


Siddhārtha did not hesitate. Still sprinting, he released the high voltage inside his condensers in a single blast.


With a flash sky and land turned ghostly pale. The electromagnetic waves pulsed toward their target, tracing a circle of pure blue ions around Jesus of Nazareth.


Less than a breath later, Siddhārtha struck again. This time, the gray sky turned a dark leaden color. Seen from within, all the objects inside the great cylinder lost their individual colors, becoming translucent. Then, a circle of ultramarine light began to spread, enveloping all.


Siddhārtha watched as his attack ran its course.


The shining ring of the electromagnetic wave was rapidly spreading in all directions, losing its coloration as it went. It dispersed like a broken circlet of chain links, some sections clinging together, others severing completely until all had disappeared. Siddhārtha spotted Jesus’s emaciated back standing just beyond the fading circle of light.


He shook his head and resumed his mad dash across the sand.


While he ran, the gray sky and the vast desert ground into motion, moving with increasing speed until all was rotating around him. Gaping vortices formed in the sky, while the flats transformed into a faded spiral that spun at a frightening velocity. The only things not carried by their motion were Siddhārtha and the man from Nazareth.


Siddhārtha’s thoughts raced. Why, when everything around us is spinning at such a furious rate, am I and Jesus alone still able to stand? He felt cold sweat trickling down his back as understanding slipped from his grasp.


Then suddenly he understood: he had been pushed into a separate space from the one where Jesus and Asura stood—a fold in space-time, or a separate plane entirely.


“Let me out!” he shouted with all his strength. “Let me out of here!” But all his voice accomplished was to vibrate the air that closed around him.


Yet Siddhārtha’s shout reached across the swirling tumult like a single ray of light, piercing Asura’s ears.


WHEEEEEEEEN


A high-pitched vibration, too high for even Asura’s sensitive eardrums to detect, caused a slight stirring in the air. It pressed in on Asura’s body, shimmering like a mirage, assaulting the cellular structure of her body via the sensory cells at her nerve endings, causing her nucleic acids to begin to ionize. Now the space around her began to revolve at a frightening speed. Outside that whorl, Jesus shone like a primary star with a comet tail of streaming light.


Gradually Asura’s form grew more transparent. The spinning sky and land and the brilliantly shining form of her enemy were as light that coursed through her body, spreading beyond her as she dissolved.


Stretches of the rapidly spinning flats erupted in incandescent fire; fragments of molten magma rained down, trailing tails of white smoke.


Satisfied with his attack, Jesus flicked a switch on the ultrahigh frequency generator in his hand.


Deep silence returned. Several meters ahead of where Jesus stood, a number of wide, shallow trenches radiated out through the dunes toward the horizon, scars where the sand had been evaporated by the high temperatures of the ultrahigh frequency vibrations. Wisps of white smoke still rose from the trenches in places.


Ultrahigh frequency vibrations had the power to neutralize cellular activity, scramble nerves, and destroy cellular structure altogether. It seemed highly unlikely that Asura had been able to escape the attack.


Jesus of Nazareth strode across the flats, crossing a kilometer of scorched sand. When he reached the top of the dune where Asura had been standing moments before, the ashen dust lifted around his feet like smoke into the wind. No trace of Asura’s presence remained. Along the horizon beyond the dunes, the lead-colored sea spread out flat and fallen. Behind him, the ruined city stood like a giant gravestone over the flats.


An ice cold wind cut through the man’s heart. Of his appointed tasks, he had completed the first, which was also the most difficult. Yet he was left feeling a slight dissatisfaction that it had ended so easily. His dissatisfaction mingled with an uncomfortable awareness in his mind that his enemy was hiding out there, somewhere. Doubts assailed him. Surely such a long wait could not be rewarded with such a short battle. And it had been such a one-sided fight, besides. He wondered whether this was really the end of it, whether his victory was truly complete. With some effort, he restrained himself from plummeting into despair and made for his second target, heading toward the place where the waves broke against the shore.


Sand drifted like smoke, and the wind whistled like a flute around him. The sea was pressing toward him—baring its white fangs at him. The spray wet the long shore, turning it black, and drifted in a fine mist onto his tattered garments.


His enemy had hidden here, beneath these waters. He had known for a very long time that his enemy would likely come from here.


And yet, contrary to his expectations, his enemy had come all the way out of the sea and into the dying city.


Far-off to his left, he spotted a massive, angular object resting atop the sand.


“There you are.”


He quickened his pace as he approached. The object was at least fifty meters to a side. It appeared wider than it was tall, though that was likely because its base was buried under the sand. Long years of erosion had left countless fine cracks and pockmarks on its surface. It looked entirely out of place on the vast, unbroken land beneath the flat gray of the sky.


An oval hatch was open at its upper end. From this orifice a cocoonlike cylinder of silver extended to the ground, supported on two metallic rails.


Jesus took one look at the silver tube and realized it was a free-form lift. Whatever had been contained within this giant structure had passed outside via this lift.


“So for five thousand years, you waited here. Perhaps this was once a mountain or an island. The sand covering your incubation tank was washed away, blown aside, until nothing remained but this flat land, and your vessel was revealed.” Jesus of Nazareth shook his head. “We both waited for so long.”


He was overcome by a strong desire to look inside the strange vessel.


He wanted to see what sort of technology, what sort of devices had kept the life-form that called itself Asura alive and growing for five thousand years—the processors and power sources, the memory inserters, the oxygen generators, and all other such devices. He thought briefly on the vast amount of oxygen and nutrients a life-form would need to consume over such a long period of time. Of course, none of these necessities could be gathered along the way during a journey through the void, and attempting to store and transport that much material would be an inelegant solution, to say the least. Which left only one option: the designers of the vessel had used some sort of atomic compositing device to manipulate matter and create the needed stores from the air. The devices that controlled that process would be extremely delicate, allowing for no margin of error whatsoever; managing them would require a processor’s judgment, guided by a powerful neural memory web. Which was how his enemy, the destroyer, had managed to wait here for so long.


His second task was to ensure that this incubation tank was never used again. He turned the beam filament of the ultrahigh frequency generator toward the towering object in front of him. When he squeezed the trigger, the atmosphere around him twanged like a slender piano wire. Ripples spread on the surface of the object, quickly becoming rapid waves. Moments later the giant object vanished altogether. A faint mirage shimmered in its place for a moment until that, too, disappeared. It all happened without the slightest sound.


Another incubation tank was surely out there, somewhere beneath the waves, but he had no way of finding that.


The sea stirred, pushing toward Jesus’s feet. It drenched the edges of his tattered robe, and he disliked the feel of the cloth clinging to his legs. But for a long time Jesus stood unmoving, looking out at the sea.


He had done all that Shi wanted. The realization of God’s will must always be done to the fullest, and it gave him great honor to have played even a small part in bringing God’s designs to fruition. It was, in fact, the entire source of his own volition to live.


Jesus of Nazareth knelt in the driving wind.


“Great Shi. My Father who art Heaven. I have done as you commanded. Please, forgive the sinning Samarians. Summon them to you. Shi, the world is tired, blind, already moving toward a funeral procession of its gods. Shi, Father who art in Heaven. Already there are none who live upon the land, none left to worship you. Shi, will this world never again know her former days of glory?”


The words of his prayer were lost in the wind. Gradually, shadows deepened across the sky and land, while the wild white waves danced and sprayed.


“Shi! How can it be that man never earned your forgiveness? I know we are sullied by evil and sin, that our hands are stained with blood, and yet . . .”


The direction of the wind shifted, and an icy cold breeze struck the back of Jesus’s neck.


“Shi . . .”


All that was left to him was prayer now. Yet he swallowed his words as he felt the presence of something behind him in this wasted world of wind and surf and sand.


Who’s there?


The presence was almost inorganic in its absolute stillness. Whoever it was was not even breathing.


Who are you?


Drops of cold sweat trickled down the Nazarene’s back like tiny insects made of ice. He could feel his mouth grow as dry as the sand beneath his feet.


He realized he was in a place of absolute death. Were he to stand, his life would surely end.


So what do I do?


His metabolizer was running at maximum capacity. He felt the tingle of the insulin as it spread through him, thinning as it reached his hands and feet. Each passing second brought him closer to death.


The wind ceased. All sound vanished. In that instant, he ran, swift as a shadow. Something in Jesus’s chest felt hot, as though he had been burned. He still had two small cylinders in his pocket; he fished them out and tossed them over his shoulder. Then he pulled off the magnetic field generator wrapped around his left arm, pressed the switch, and threw it on the ground beneath his feet.


Can I escape this?


He was not entirely without hope.


The ultramarine light of a lithium nuke suffused the flats. A massive white ball of flame expanded with hideous speed, boiling the sea and fusing the sand beneath it. Nearly five hundred meters in diameter, the fireball suddenly inverted behind Jesus as he ran, becoming a crater in the ground, swirling with energy. Like a giant wave crashing against an iron seawall, the fireball surged and swelled, trying to break through an unseen barrier.


Glumly, Jesus admitted to himself that his attack had probably failed to destroy his enemy. His opponent was clearly as well protected as he was. Ensconced within his own barrier, he would make his way through the sea of flame created by the nuclear explosion and launch an assault on the barrier that Jesus had erected on the flats. Still, even if his enemy had not been defeated, his assault would surely be slowed by the blast.


It was only another five hundred meters to his own pod—suddenly a despairingly long distance.


A small black object slid through the sky, white flame ejecting from its anterior: a hand-fired missile. He waved toward it with the laser gun attached to his wrist, and a brilliant arc of light split the sky, swallowing the missile entirely.


My enemy lives!


The black hatch of his pod was open before him. Something exploded behind his back, sending crimson flames streaming over his head. Stinging particles of sand followed, searing the air like glowing embers, but even as they began to strike around him he made it through the hatchway.


The hatch slammed shut automatically behind him. As his eyes adjusted to the dim interior light, he saw two silhouettes in front of the pod’s luminescent xenon wall.


“Now, you will take us to Shi.”


The figures’ cruel smiles turned Jesus’s despair to loathing. Trying to keep his spirit from crumbling altogether, he peered furtively around the inside of the pod. His two enemies slid forward from either side, their expressionless eyes glittering like stars.


They have me, Jesus thought, and his confidence guttered like a candle flame. Then, in his moment of greatest terror, he spotted something—there was still a way for him to escape! Leaping several meters in one bound, he reached out to the subspace positional circuit on the far wall.


In an instant, Jesus of Nazareth had vanished.


“Where’d he go?”


“He’s escaped!”


Siddhārtha and Asura exchanged bitter glances. A moment’s hesitation had cost them their advantage. There was only one thing left for them to do. It would be highly dangerous to pursue their enemy now, yet with every second they delayed, their ultimate victory became increasingly distant and less likely.


Siddhārtha reached out through the hatch to pick up Orionae and drag him inside. The cyborg’s protruding forehead cast a deep shadow across his largely featureless face.


Asura was focusing, expanding to her full height, as though listening for some far-off sound.


There was a panel near the ceiling on one of the side walls from which a transparent case extended, housing three multifaceted electrodes. On the floor below it sat a turntable platform large enough to support several humans. The cylindrical space above the turntable glowed with a faint reddish light. The rhythmic sound of a rotating scanner emerged from the structure nearby.


Asura nodded to Siddhārtha, who thrust Orionae’s body into the reddish light upon the platform, then jumped onto it himself. A fraction of a second later, Asura joined them. The sound of the revolving scanner increased in speed until it sounded like a storm.


Immediately before Siddhārtha lost consciousness, the image of a great galactic spiral burned with incredible brilliance inside his mind. The swirling light was made up of two distinct parts, one horizontal, the other vertical, and the waves of fusion energy erupting where they met soundlessly swallowed the darkness.


Unthinkingly, Siddhārtha screamed, and the sound of his voice held his consciousness for the briefest of moments. He remembered having seen this sight before.


One of the spirals is the Milky Way, the other is Andromeda.


He wondered briefly how he knew those names, yet decided almost as quickly that it did not matter. All he understood was that something terribly destructive was happening to these two galaxies, and that this destruction was not a natural phenomenon, but something caused by an external power.


. . . Yellow 17 in the New Galactic Age, the Planetary Development Committee on Astarta 50 received a directive from Shi—


Siddhārtha’s waking mind melded with the void around him, and he was lost.