As from dust ye came, so to dust ye do return.








It was another hot day in Sais, parching winds whirling across the white cobblestones of the street. Red pitch oozed from a structure of thick pine logs that had been set to shore up a broken arch, its scent mingling with the smell of baking salt.


A small donkey laden with a mountain of woven baskets plodded over the stones, panting and shaking its head. A horsefly with huge blue eyes perched on the beast’s sweaty neck like a dangling jewel. Unguided, the ass turned at the corner and passed through another arch into an alleyway.


Now the donkey’s master appeared from behind it and gave the reins in his hand a sharp crack.


It was hot. Unbearably hot. Plato clutched at the robes he wore—white ankle-length robes, in the style of the Arabs—and hiked them up to let in a breeze. “Is that priest’s house far, Gladius?”


His follower, an Arab, answered through brown whiskers. “It is off to the side of the courtyard you will find at the other end of this lane, Master. Just a bit farther.” Plato had hired the Arab as a servant upon his visit to the island of Rhodes four or five years earlier. He had been invited there to help the local nobility set up a pre-academia and had been so impressed with the breadth of the fellow’s knowledge—quite uncommon for a member of the lower classes—that the man had swiftly become Plato’s most trusted personal assistant.


Plato squinted in the blazing sun. “It’d best be close,” he grumbled. “And this venerable priest best have the collection they say he does.”


“The magistrate in Rhodes, Telypolius, said he’d seen a stack of the scrolls himself.”


Plato wiped the sweat off his brow with his sleeve.


They passed through the cool shade of the arch, entering a narrow courtyard where an unusually large tamarisk grew, lending shade to the uneven cobbles beneath. The sunlight passing through the leaves made countless spots on the road, tiny versions of the round orb hanging above them in the sky.


“It will be over this way. There, see the mark of the priest upon the wall.”


Beside a low doorway of white stone, a piece of wood in the shape of the sun god hung slightly askew. The baskets stacked in the entranceway were open, and one contained a mostly empty bag from which a couple grains of wheat had spilled.


“I will see if he is home,” the Arab said, setting down his pack and leaving Plato by the tree. His leather sandals slapped across the cobbles toward the house. “Is the venerable Plikton within? My master, Plato of Athens, is here to see him.” Gladius’s voice echoed in the courtyard. Windows opened in the modest stone homes surrounding the courtyard, and people looked out to see who was speaking. Some pointed and shrieked with alarm when they saw the Arab. Standing there in his grave-colored hempen tunic, sheepskin shoes, and skirt studded with copper rivets, a silver band across his forehead, he looked far more regal than Plato, who idled in the courtyard behind him, the picture of a servant with abandoned baggage at his feet.


The curtain of plaited reeds that hung in the priest’s shadowed doorway was pushed aside, and an old man stuck his head out and exchanged a few words with the Arab. Gladius turned and beckoned for Plato to follow.


The interior of the dwelling was so simple it might well have been mistaken for a storehouse or stable. The two visitors passed through the stone entrance, only wide enough for one of them at a time, into stifling darkness. It took some time for their eyes, accustomed to the blazing sun outside, to adjust. And it was frighteningly hot. Plato staggered under the assault of the scalding air and the reeking scent it carried. The Arab took his master by the hand and led him forward a few halting steps.


“Here, please sit.”


Having no other choice, Plato did as he was instructed, finding a spot upon a small round stool woven from tamarisk branches. Belatedly, he realized the low muttering voice he could hear was being directed at him.


“. . . distant relative to Solon the wise . . . distinguished family of Athens . . . son of Ariston . . . Master Plato . . . the scrolls I have . . .”


The words came to him in fragments. He nodded in the direction of the voice two or three times, then gave up trying to listen and instead peered around the dim room. As his eyes gradually adjusted, the details of the small residence became clear. In the middle of the stone-tiled floor a square hearth had been cut; a weak flame flickered upon it. Something bubbled thickly in a kettle above the flame, and it was from this source that the horrible stench and hot vapor came. Along the edges of the floor stood a haphazard assortment of jars and pots. In one corner, wooden boxes and baskets stained black with soot had been piled precariously atop slanted shelves.


Plato noticed that the muttering had ceased. He turned his attention back to the crouching figure that had addressed him.


“You are Plikton the Venerable, he who possesses the scrolls of Atlantis?”


The wizened man muttered something again, too low for Plato to hear.


“Gladius,” Plato spoke, “our gift.” He held up one finger. “No, wait.” Plato held up two fingers and shook them a few times for emphasis.


“Yes, Master.” The Arab produced two sacks of gold dust from his bag and offered them to Plato, bowing his head as he did so.


“Venerable one, please accept this trifling gift.” Plato set the two small yet bulging sacks upon the floor before the old man’s knees.


“A gift! This is most unexpected,” the man said, his voice rising clearly for once. Reaching forward, he undid the strings on one of the sacks and pinched the gold dust between his fingers with obvious satisfaction.


“Venerable one, let me explain the reason for my intrusion upon your honorable solitude—” Plato began. Then his lips curled into a frown and he withdrew his hand into his tunic, reaching around to his back. Something living had crawled in there, and he could feel it unsettlingly heavy upon his skin. He plucked it off with his fingers, threw it to the ground, and crushed it beneath his heel.


“I know well the reason why you have come,” the priest said.


Plato contemplated the venerable Plikton. Among priests there were officiants who played a role in governance and celebrants who served only at the temples. In the past, many celebrants had gone on to become ministers or generals, but the king had strongly discouraged this in recent years. With their prospects for advancement curtailed, both sorts of priest now tended to direct their efforts chiefly toward the accumulation of wealth. In particular, it was an open secret that regional legates often purchased a priest’s august opinion to help smooth over their own mistakes, lining the pockets of the clergy in the process.


The old man crouching before him did not seem to be this kind of priest.


Perhaps he left the temple due to poor health?


The old priest rose slowly to his feet and disappeared into a room in the back.


“Curse this heat,” Plato muttered. “I won’t be able to read in here either.”


He pushed away the round mat and sat his naked posterior directly on the cool stones.


A moment later the old man reappeared, dragging a small bundle of slender, woven tamarisk branches behind him. Peering closely, Plato saw that the bundle contained dust-covered scrolls of parchment inside narrow tubes.


“Master Plato, the records of the Kingdom of Atlantis.”


The philosopher’s eyes shone. Pushing back his sleeves, he drew out one of the scrolls and spread it open on the floor, heedless of the cloud of dust and grit that rose around him. But it was too dark to see. Rising to his feet again, he snatched up the parchment and hurried nearer to the small hearth in the middle of the room. Along the way, he knocked over something with one foot, making a terrible noise and splashing liquid across the floor. But he paid it no mind. Thrusting the parchment toward the flickering light of the fire pit, he could see lines of writing in the language of Etruria.


From Atlas came many lineages of famous houses. They possessed wealth uncountable, such as no kings or nobles before them ever held and none will likely hold again. So vast was their empire that many of their possessions came from far beyond the borders of their own land. And yet to the good fortune of the people, everything that was truly necessary could be procured from their own great island.


Plato read on, forgetting to wipe the sweat from his brow, ignoring the line of insects that had begun to march along his calf.


The orichalcum mined within the kingdom’s borders adorned the edifices of the city of Atlantis, making their walls more beautiful than gold and stronger than bronze—


“Orichalcum!”


Plato pulled his eyes away from the letters upon the parchment and stared at the weak, sputtering tongue of flame in the pit. The name of that legendary metal was mentioned in the few stories of Atlantis, that great continent to the west he had heard about upon his visit to Fayum the year before.


Those had been nothing more than muttered rumors, but this document in his hands right now spoke of that lost city with supreme confidence.


Countless bridges spanned the canals that ringed the metropolis in concentric circles. Spurs connected each canal to its neighbor, so that the king and queen were able to use the network to travel anywhere within the city. The canals led withal to the open seas, and even those most central were deep enough for three-decked sailing ships to navigate. The sides of the canals rose high, allowing tall masts to pass beneath the arching bridges without hindrance. Where it was not possible to build the walls so high, the bridges were devised to open that the ships might pass. The island in the center, where the palace was built, was a near-perfect circle, defended by tall towers set with mighty gates. The stones used to build these towers were taken from surrounding islands or from the subterranean recesses of the inner and outer rings of the city. One of the towers was white, another red, and yet another black. The quarry pits beneath the city were made into safehouses, armories, and wine cellars. These cavernous holds had roofs lined with stone and double walls all around. Some buildings were made a single color, while others were speckled and mottled with different hues. The walls of the outermost ring of the city where it faced the waves were made of stone with copper reinforcement, and the inside face was covered with silver and tin, while the acropolis was constructed of flamelike orichalcum.


Plato repeated the strange metal’s still-unfamiliar name to himself. It stuck in his mind; the more he thought about it, the deeper seemed the mystery.


After a long moment’s thought the philosopher rolled up the parchment and tied it with a leather string. He gave a deep sigh.


“Perhaps we could bring these scrolls back to our lodgings for tonight,” Gladius whispered from behind him. “. . . Master?”


Plato looked up for the first time. “Yes,” he said softly, as though waking from a dream. “A good idea. Gladius, send word to the legate’s villa.”


He stood. “Venerable sir, I would impose upon your favor and borrow these Atlantean documents. I will be staying several days at the legate’s villa, and I promise they will be guarded most carefully.”


The ancient priest muttered something too quietly for Plato to hear and bowed his head low.


Rising and gathering up the scrolls, the philosopher walked out through the curtain into the courtyard without so much as a glance behind. The midday light stabbed at his eyes so painfully he felt as though he were emerging from a cave.


Plato wobbled into the shade of the tamarisk like a man intoxicated. His mind was filled only with thoughts of meeting the Atlanteans who were said to be still living in villages along the western coast of Mauretania, that land facing the Isles of Hesperides. He had heard of these villages from both Phoenician and Tyrrheanian sailors. The hints of the priest he had visited the year before in Fayum returned to him now, burning like a torch within his breast.


He had first heard the word Atlantis from his grandfather Critias. Critias had told him, in that way the elderly have of over-explaining themselves, that he had learned about Atlantis when he was still young from Solon himself—one of the legendary Seven Sages.


Critias’s description of Atlantis had taken on an incredible weight within the young Plato, sinking deep inside him. He had thought, even as a youth, that one day he must see the lost city with his own eyes and hold its artifacts in his own hands. The young Plato had been no prodigy. He had been more interested in learning how to sail a boat and experiencing the products and customs of other lands than in his formal academic studies. One day, he had decided, he must venture to the Sea of Marmara, beyond the Straits of Hellespont and to the Argo Sea beyond that, then past the Pillars of Heracles to the end of the world where the great ocean falls like a waterfall.


And the stories of the great kingdom of Atlantis that once existed far across the western sea—the realm that had sunk to the ocean floor in the space of a single day—were enough to stir excitement in his soul.


It was at the age of twenty-eight, when his name was becoming known in the larger cities such as Athens, Mycenae, and Terinth, that Plato first set foot in the town of Sais. There he learned that the stories that Solon the Wise had told were common knowledge. It was then that the name Atlantis had quite suddenly taken on a new degree of verisimilitude. He wrote of his excitement at that time to his friend Tethys of Terinth. Then, three years later, the philosopher-adventurer once again made his way to Sais. This was when he first heard the rumor that a venerable priest of that town possessed a trove of parchments in which much about Atlantis was written. Unfortunately, his official research duties interfered, and he was obliged to return to Athens empty-handed.


But his interest in Atlantis only increased.


Some who came after Plato interpreted his yearning for Atlantis as a facet of his quest for the ideal state, but this couldn’t have been further from the truth. The thing that drove him westward was his passion, undiminished since youth, for adventure in unknown lands.


After the sentencing of his teacher, Socrates, Plato had gone to Megara, homeland of his elder Eukleides, and there he had first learned of other peoples—barbarians—living within the Greek world. Humanity, went the common opinion of the day, was a distinction reserved only for the Greek; to educate a barbarian was to welcome him into the fold of civilization. Yet many barbarians proved intractable, unwilling to participate in the glory that was the polis —the Greek city-state. Persia threatened from the east and Carthage from the west. At times, Plato felt as though the non-Greek world would overrun the world he knew. To a citizen of Greece such as himself, the downfall of Greece meant the collapse of the polis, and there was only one way to save his society from fading away altogether—to realize a strong and resilient “ideal state.” Yet, rather suddenly after their inception, Plato’s political dreams turned down the path of pessimism.


The age called for empire. It was already being said among a certain segment of the cognoscenti that the uniform rule of a single archon over all Hellas was preferable to the chaotic polis society of independent city-states.


In later years, Plato visited Archytas, who was serving as director of a Pythagorean school in southern Italy. Then he went to visit Dionysos the First in Sicilia, where he first made the acquaintance of Dionysos’s brother-in-law, Dion. He made no small number of friends there and returned later, at Dion’s request, during the reign of Dionysos the Second. There he was subjected to a scathing counterargument to his theory of the ideal state from actual politicians. A shadow passed over these thoughts in his mind. During this time, he also traveled to many other lands: Crete, Carthage, Algeria, and even as far as Judea and the Sinai Peninsula. It would be difficult to sum up all he saw in those travels, but it is clear that his solitary drive toward the unknown kept him far better company than the rapidly fading patina of his ideal state. For Plato, all roads led toward Atlantis.


That night, Isus, the legate of Sais, held a great banquet for the famous scholar of Athens. Isus’s villa was a magnificent affair constructed of slick polished rock, white with deep brown speckles, that faced the central courtyard in town. It was decorated all about with lit sconces, and even the two hundred or so slaves who bustled about the grounds seemed an insufficient number to carry all of the wine jars up from the cellars.


Plato found himself holding a silver goblet filled with retsina as he peered at the fires that burned atop the elegantly carved pillars. Long blue flames wavered from three saucers of oil on each capital. Meanwhile, a warrior in the middle of the courtyard moved through his forms in a demonstration of skill. He was a large man with a brown beard—a foreigner from the East by his appearance—and the two swords he swung around him danced like waterwheel shadows. As the man moved, the long scar that ran from his shoulder down his back seemed to stretch and contract upon his skin like a living thing.


“Master Plato?”


Isus leaned across the table. His light blue eyes peered at Plato’s face. A good man, by his bearing and demeanor, the philosopher thought. Plato took a sip of wine while his free hand went to a nearby saucer, plucking out an olive drenched in sheep’s milk.


“I’ll need Gladius and four others,” he said quietly. “And donkeys.”


The journey Plato was about to undertake would make any other he had experienced seem like an afternoon stroll by comparison. His sister’s child Speusippus would look after the Akademia in his absence. He would have to skip the fall seminar this year, but he could always make up for it with a special session the following spring.


Plato’s face tilted upward as he sank into his thoughts. For a long moment his expression was as vacant as that of a fever victim, until a slave poured fresh wine into the goblet in his hand and its weight brought him back to his senses.


“Master Plato, I have a request—a small request,” Isus began, his voice hesitant and quiet, as though he had been waiting for this moment for some time.


“A request?” Plato said without turning to look at him. “How could I, your guest at this sumptuous reception, refuse you anything?”


The man’s face broke into a broad smile. “Isus is honored by your words,” the legate purred. He twisted around to give a hushed command to an old retainer who hovered behind him.


In the courtyard a woman was now dancing, having replaced the foreign warrior some time ago. She plucked a lyre even as she moved with windlike grace.


The old retainer led a tall, younger man up to the table.


Isus spoke. “Master Plato, this man is Eamos, head instructor at our college in Sais. He revealed to me some time ago his great desire to learn from you, the great philosopher, the true heir to Socrates. If you would be so kind as to oblige me by fulfilling this, Eamos’s one wish.”


The tall man bowed his head low before the seated philosopher.


Plato cursed inwardly. More than anything, he felt deceived. He knew it was popular, especially in places such as this where Eastern influences ran deep, for provincial legates to establish a so-called “college” in part of their villa where they kept pet philosophers and poets and the like in order to show off the refinement of their own noble education. This legate Isus would doubtless be thrilled to boast that his own resident scholar had studied at the foot of none other than the great philosopher Plato.


Plato turned his eyes away from the man and took a spoonful of honey-stewed lamb from a pot on the table.


“Go on, Eamos, go on.” Isus gave his own fledgling philosopher a shove on the hindquarters, pushing him toward the suddenly grim Plato. The poor fellow was rigid with nerves, and his limbs trembled violently.


“Ask your question.”


Plato’s thick brown beard framed his face harshly; in the glow of the flickering sconces, his sunken eyes seemed to burn with an unearthly light, and the lines of a weary frown across his brow made his visage suddenly fearsome. Isus’s philosopher startled at his look, staring like a hare in a trap, and he reddened with embarrassment. His eyes jumped to the courtyard beyond the table, as though trying to avoid the older man’s gaze. Plato looked down at his stew and said quietly, “You do have a question, do you not?”


His voice was gentle. He saw no point in shaming the man or spurning him. If scholarship is what this man has offered in exchange for receiving bread and board from this provincial noble, then he has done very well for himself, and who am I to judge another’s livelihood? Besides, I am sure there is Truth to be found even within a man such as this. He brought another spoonful of stew to his mouth and favored the scholar with a smile. Whatever he’s going to ask, he’d better ask it quick or his employer will fear his money wasted.


Suddenly, Eamos lifted his head. “A-are ideas unchanging?” he asked, thrusting the words out like fists.


There, that’s more like it.


Plato shifted in his chair so that his body was now facing Eamos. “Ideas have an objective existence. They are not the material of thought, but the object of thought, outside the thinker. The world we experience is a phenomenal world, a reflection of the world of ideas. The vicissitudes of life merely suggest that all things are in a state of flux because of the inherently unstable manner in which this world receives the Truth of ideas. Thus it falls to us to endeavor to see through that fluctuation to perceive that which is universal—that which exists objectively,” Plato explained, his voice deliberately assertive.


Eamos muttered something, but the words failed to pass his own lips. He looked up again. “And the ideal state?”


Plato noisily sipped at his stew and reflected on how this was the first time he had lectured in quite this manner. Of course, he often found himself pontificating on Truth and Beauty while drinking wine or soaking in the baths, but this game he played now followed an entirely different set of rules. In this game, not only was he expected to inform, he was furthermore obliged to award his participant a medal.


“The ideal state holds as its governing ideology a philosophy based upon the fundamental concepts of Truth, Goodness, and Beauty. In other words—” Plato took a swig of some pungent goat’s milk to wash down a lump of meat from his stew. “As reason is illuminated by the lens of wisdom, so does it develop from something experiential into something universal. Only with universal reason may we perceive the fundamental Truth shared by all things.” He cleared his throat. “Truth, mind you, is not some thing existing in a solid, unchanging state; it is universal objectivity itself. Now, while ‘will’ is the sum of the choices we make by virtue of our courage, the fundamental concept of Goodness is none other than the universal will. As for Beauty, that beauty which we perceive is limited, a mere projection of the phenomenon of a greater, limitless Beauty. Within men this quality manifests in the form of the passions and the moderation of arbitrariness. It is only by achieving harmony between these three fundamentals that the entire soul may take on the virtue of righteousness. This is a basic qualification for one who would rule, as it is for those who would aid him and, indeed, for all citizens of the ideal state.”


Plato spoke succinctly, one word after the other, as though he were speaking to a student at his own Akademia. Eamos stood with his head hanging low. He remained quiet as Plato finished, leaving his teacher unsure whether he had understood any of what he said. A sudden weariness came over Plato and he lifted his wine goblet. But Isus sprang to his feet, jumping like a boy at play, thanking him repeatedly. It was at that instant that Plato knew with certainty he would leave upon his journey to the west the next morning. He wanted to be alone. And he felt a longing for that great continent, touched by the wrath of the gods, alone in Poseidon’s endless sea, as though it were his own homeland.


It was a very long time before Plato forgot the events of that night. In fact, that banquet marked the last time he spoke on philosophy to another. Contrary to popular opinion, Plato did not write Timaeus or Critias himself. These were compiled by his followers in later years. What he began writing shortly after that night in Sais was an account of his long journey from Libya to Numidia and farther west, past the Atlas Mountains into Mauretania. It was these writings he sent in a great volume to his prized disciple Aristotle—though it remains doubtful whether his able pupil showed much interest in them.


In the face of pressure from Persia in the east, Carthage in the west, and the newly risen Macedonia in the north, mounting strife had worn away at the freedom and independence of the Greek polis. The evening bells of Greece were ringing when Speusippus—heir to the Akademia—and others of Plato’s disciples collected their master’s scattered writings into new works, ten of which remain to this day. Of these, Timaeus and Critias held but fragments of the records of his travels.


In 347 BC, in a chamber within his Akademia, built within the sacred grove of Akademos, Plato passed from this world. This is true. But there are few who know the other truth about Plato’s later years.


Gladius, Plato’s follower upon his journey to the West, who became Plato’s shadow and trusted assistant, spent his last days in solitude in Biskra near Carthage. For the most part, he avoided the company of others, yet there were times when, lips loosened by drink, he would tell stories. At these times he would claim that he had seen the hero Atlas from ancient myths with his own eyes. That Atlas was indeed a titan who held up the world from his glorious country of Atlantis. And that his master, Plato, had gone on to heaven in search of the true titans.






Plato’s entourage left Sais and headed west beneath the blazing sun. Thanks to the enthusiastic support of Isus, legate of Sais, the philosopher had been able to acquire a total of eight slaves and four donkeys. Plato rode one of the animals, Gladius another; the third carried their food and water, while the fourth was kept in reserve. Behind them followed the slaves, laden with a variety of goods purchased in Sais. They spent just a short while on the road before turning aside to the coast, where they hired a ship. Only twelve days after leaving Sais they arrived in Carthage.


The king of Carthage was pleased to have such an esteemed guest in his domain, and he prepared extra supplies for them to take on the next phase of their journey along the main road south of the Atlas Mountains. In the town of Capsa, Plato sent back the slaves he had borrowed from Isus and took on three hardy youths the king had supplied. They headed southwest along the foothills, following a dry riverbed from Biskra to the town of M’sila. From there the road passed through a vast wasteland of desert, heading toward Iguidi. They had already reached the farthest outlands of Carthage. Now they made for Elcasia—a small oasis in a corner of the desert, and Plato’s first major goal.


The journey to Elcasia was a hard one. They split their baggage between the four pack animals, and Plato, Gladius, and the youths leaned on their walking sticks as they treaded across the shifting sands. Eight days out of M’sila, Plato climbed up a tall dune from which the sand spilled in a soundless torrent and spotted the tiny village in the distance. It was little more than a few low roofs huddled beneath the meager shade of two or three barren tamarisks.


“Elcasia,” the philosopher said simply.


The traveling party made its way straight down the far side of the dune toward the houses. Passing through a barren valley, they were startled by an unfamiliar bird taking wing. By the time they had climbed to the top of the next dune, the village was directly beneath them.


As they approached, several men emerged from the dwellings. They wore short tunics tied with leather belts and shallow hoods on their heads. Plato noted their clothing with interest—this was nothing like what the people of Persia or Egypt wore.


“We mean no harm,” Plato called out. “I am Plato of Athens, and these are my men.” It was doubtful that these people had heard of the philosopher of Athens, though it would certainly make things easier if they had.


An older man stepped out from the crowd. He said something to those around him and they formed a line with him at the head and came closer.


“Plato of Athens, long ago it was that we first heard your name. I am Seim the Elder of Elcasia. You are welcome among us.” The man opened his arms wide in a gesture of greeting. “Indeed, we have been expecting you for some time now.”


Plato frowned. “Expecting me? How is that possible?”


The old man paid no mind to Plato’s muttered question and led them into the village. Low houses squatted in a circle around a spring where the meager tamarisks grew. Their walls were made of deftly carved limestone, with large windows and doors set at regular intervals. The philosopher spotted several people peering out from the windows, some looking and then ducking out of sight. Seim told the three from Carthage to wait outside and led Plato and Gladius toward one of the stone buildings.


“It’s a temple,” Plato whispered. “See how ornate its decorations are.”


The door was open, revealing a few small flames lighting the dim interior. Before the open door, the old man reached out his right hand and made a gesture as though he were pushing something away from the entrance, though there was nothing there for him to push. He stood to one side and ushered the two of them in.


How curious.


Plato looked down at the old man’s hand as he walked through the doorway. It appeared he was still pushing something back toward the wall with it. Plato stared at the old man and the wall, making no attempt at subtlety. The old man grinned.


“Looking for this, perhaps?”


The old man relaxed his arm and Gladius jumped back with a yelp.


A large panel of something transparent—perfectly transparent—had come swinging out, pivoting on an axis set flush with the stone wall. When it had swung out all the way, it closed the entrance with a perfect seal.


“Glaes. This is glaes.” The man tapped the translucent panel with one finger. It made a hard, clear sound, like metal. “Not even an arrow from the tallest bow wielded by the strongest man may pierce it.”


Plato stared at the swinging door, speechless. He had never seen anything like it. He had heard once from a Persian trader of a material that allowed light to pass through as though it were water, but he never imagined it to be so wonderfully transparent. He realized that the people of Elcasia must be using the same material in the windows in their village. How else could they possibly admit light to their homes in the middle of a desert such as this? Plato recalled the many windowless houses he had seen in Egypt and Carthage.


There is knowledge here of a level not seen in Persia, Egypt, or any of the lands farther east. This is of a different nature than anything I have encountered—an entirely different nature.


Plato stepped silently through the entranceway. The room beyond was filled with brilliance and splendor enough to dazzle the eyes. The wall reflected a beautiful orange image of the setting sun, painting Plato’s outstretched hands and illuminating Gladius’s stern features.


“Orichalcum!” Plato gasped. In one corner of the shining wall stood a large square window where scintillating waves of green light rippled. “And what is that?”


The old man glanced over at the window, then motioned for Plato to take a seat at the table. “That is the window of the suzerain.”


“The suzerain?”


“You will meet him presently.”


As Plato watched, the rippling of the light seemed to slow, until he could look past its brilliance to see the silhouette of a man’s head. He gripped the edge of the table convulsively, with such strength that his knuckles cracked.


Now, framed by the clear green light, a large head and broad shoulders appeared. The light shone painfully bright, washing out any detail in the man’s full silhouette.


“Master Plato, our suzerain.” Seim the Elder made a short bow to Plato, then another to the silhouette.


“This man is the leader of your tribe?” Plato narrowed his eyes and stood, taking a step toward the figure in the light. It was quickly becoming unbearable to him that he could not make out the suzerain’s features, though something did give him the impression that this man was slightly more advanced in years than himself.


“Master Plato of Athens, I welcome you. I have always had a great admiration for the depth and breadth of your theories. It does the people of Elcasia much honor to receive you.”


Plato could not have cared less about pleasantries. One question weighed upon him—why, if the Elcasians were so truly honored to receive their guest from afar, did the suzerain choose to speak with him through a window? The philosopher turned to Seim and whispered. “Elder, why does the suzerain not leave his chamber? Will he not come out and sit across the table from me that we might talk? I do not call him impolite. If this is his custom, so be it. I would merely know his reason.”


Seim the Elder did not respond, instead drawing back, away from Plato and the suzerain, as though in deference to them both.


“Master Plato,” came the suzerain’s low but resonant voice. “I know you have a deep interest in the kingdom of Atlantis. I am sure that your present journey is, at least in part, to ascertain the truth of that which you have read in the ancient records maintained by a certain priest of Sais.”


“You are well informed.”


“Master Plato. For five thousand years we have protected a past glory and a great legacy that would otherwise have been lost. We have protected it because it is worth our protection, and it teaches us the truth that mankind must never forgot. Yet we find our own words too poor to relate the meaning of that memory, and our attempts at comprehension fall short. Nor are we even sure that men today would listen were we to relate that truth to them. That is why, Master Plato, we have chosen you to carry out part of our great and difficult work. We have placed much faith in your wisdom—the wisdom of the Greeks.”


Wariness spread across Plato’s face as he listened. “Faith? What do you expect of me?”


“Master Plato. You must go west. You must go to the lands where the tribes lay in hiding, the remnants who protect the fading light of Atlantis’s glory. You must observe carefully the reasons for Atlantis’s demise and the particulars of what followed. Then, you must tell the world what you have seen.”


Plato leaned forward. “Indeed, my calling upon the venerable priest of Sais was but my first stop upon a longer journey that led me here, to Elcasia—and will lead me further beyond, past the Atlas Mountains, to the seacoast that looks out upon the Isles of Hesperides.”


“And you do this without even our asking.”


Seim slipped quietly from his chair and made his way to a corner of the room. He busied himself there for a moment, then returned to the table bearing two large goblets of silver atop a tray. The goblets let off a brilliant light. A serving youth who had entered the room a few moments earlier stood waiting behind the elder, the jug of wine in his hands.


“Master Plato, please drink.”


Plato’s and Gladius’s goblets were filled to brimming with crimson wine. A rich, fruity aroma suffused the room.


Fig, perhaps? Plato flared his nostrils.


Seim tilted the jug, pouring some of the wine into his palm. He sipped it carefully. Then he bowed and returned to his seat. The youth holding the wine jug quietly left the room.


Goblet in hand, Plato stared at the dark silhouette of the suzerain.


“Well then, Suzerain. There are two or three things I would like to ask you.”


“What would you know?”


“I have heard that in antiquity, when the gods divided up all lands to give to their children, the sea god Poseidon desired a great island floating upon the ocean, which he bequeathed to the descendants of his human wife. Poseidon’s eldest child Atlanta, with his tribe, ruled this island that had been left to him by his father, and many dozens of islands around it besides. His realm expanded until he considered all lands from Libya to Egypt to the warmer seas, and the mountains and oceans of Tyrrenia, Syria, and Hellespont, to be his domain. Furthermore, he counted another great continent, one as yet uninhabited by man, that lay far across the western waters, to be part of his territory. Suzerain, I have long harbored a great interest in the tales of this kingdom of people with divine wills, who never warred, who loved beauty and music—their courage, their nobility, their honesty, and their hearts that shirked no labor.”


Plato stared at the dark silhouette of the suzerain, who stood unmoving, as though affixed to the green light behind him. He continued. “I have heard furthermore that the kings who divided this country amongst themselves never took up arms or rose against one another, but instead followed the teachings of their forebears, and did only good for their people, while the house of Atlas, King of Kings who stood above them, worked only to realize the divine will on behalf of those kings and their people. Is this not true, Suzerain?”


“It is.”


“And I understand that the edicts of Poseidon were, for the people of his kingdom, like the edicts of Heaven which none might disobey. For the rule of Heaven was the rule of the people, and the hearts of the people were the hearts of their kings, and the heart of the King of Kings as well. So closely entwined were the people and their God that to observe the sacred rites was, in fact, to practice government. Is this not true, Suzerain?”


“Indeed, it is so.” The suzerain nodded deeply.


“Then let me ask you this question: if these people of Atlantis followed always the will of Heaven and received within them only that which was good and beautiful, and carried always Truth in their hearts as a guide, why then did they perish? If the laws were created to bear forth the divine will, and the people never hesitated to do their utmost in the pursuit of Goodness, what brought them to ruin? How could it not please the gods to watch over them for eternity?”


Plato stared at the suzerain floating in his window of green light with unblinking intensity. “So it should have been . . .” the philosopher continued after a moment, his voice filled with pain. “Yet it was not to be! I have heard that iron fire erupted from the earth, scorching the land, and a great stinking cloud of sulfur engulfed the sacred land entirely, dragging it down beneath the waves. They say that hardly any escaped the destruction. Why? How did such people warrant the wrath of the divine? What possible reason could the gods have for burying their own children?”


The suzerain’s form was like a black shadow, unmoving. Behind him, the brilliant waves of green light had begun to swirl violently. At last he spoke, his deep voice even and low. “You have every reason to wonder at the justice of these things; yet if you would have the answers you seek, you must find them with your own eyes. Then you must tell your world what you have seen. You must tell all of your people—that is your duty. Understand that it was a destiny that brought you to this place. And as you love your world, I would have you accept my request and treat it as your obligation. Do you understand? According to your own words, a great philosopher must at the same time be the best of all politicians. It is you who must lift the shadow of misfortune that lies across your world.”


“Wait. What is this shadow of misfortune of which you speak?”


“To tell you that would require explaining from the very beginning the reason why the Kingdom of Atlantis disappeared from the face of the gods’ waters; why it had to disappear. Know that the manner of this world’s creation, the manner of its maintenance, is connected to the laws and permissions we have received in the name of the gods. An end such as that great kingdom’s end is not part of this process; it is no mere worldly change.”


“Then you mean to say that no reason whatsoever exists for Atlantis’s destruction that can be explained in terms of the apparent world?”


“It is better perhaps to say that such a reason cannot have existed.”


“Wait!” Plato shouted, standing. “So the reason for Atlantis’s destruction lies outside of this world?”


The suzerain did not speak. Instead, his black silhouette quietly dissolved into the waves of rippling green light.


“Master Plato. The audience has ended.” Seim the Elder’s head hung low. Plato blinked, suddenly aware that the green light had faded. The suzerain’s voice still echoed in his ears, an oddly metallic sound that seemed to ring from within his own head.


Dazed, the philosopher reached out for the goblet he had unconsciously set down. Holding it in his hand, he let his eyes lose their focus as he reflected on his strange audience from its beginning.


Who was the suzerain? Why had he not revealed himself entirely? And how had he anticipated Plato’s arrival? The questions left an unsettled feeling in his breast. The one thing that was clear to him was that the suzerain expected him to act. Plato had planned this trip to satisfy his own personal curiosity; now he was astonished to find that it might hold a far greater significance altogether.


“What is the meaning of this, Elder? What your suzerain said troubles me deeply—in truth I am quite confused. For it seems that your suzerain has placed upon me a very weighty mission the likes of which I never before imagined.”


Seim the Elder shook his head in deference. “Master Plato. You must do only as your will bids you. If you wish, you may forget all our suzerain has said. It can be as though you never heard him speak—”


A thin smile came to the corner of Plato’s mouth. “Indeed,” he muttered, staring at his own reflection in the orichalcum wall. But there was no laughter in the philosopher’s eyes—his smile seemed to throw his face out of balance. “Forget it all? Pretend I heard nothing?”


Those who did not like Plato—especially those who had met him in debate—privately resented his peculiar smile. He was quite aware of this, yet it was not something he chose to care about.


Plato tilted his goblet, returning it empty to his host. The wine left a bitter residue on his tongue.


“Gladius. We go west. Prepare for our departure.”


Gladius lowered his head in silence. Plato rose to depart without a glance at the window behind him.


“Elder. I do not remember the words of your suzerain—in fact I did not hear them. My journey from here to the west of the Atlas Mountains was already decided upon my departure from Athens. I continue on to my original destination.”


The old man lowered his head, his face expressionless. “Very well, Master Plato. Yet I insist that you spend tonight here with us. From the look of the sky, there will be a sandstorm coming. Tomorrow I will send a youth with you who knows the road west of here well. However, he is currently in a village to the south, with the merchants.”


“Of course. One more night will make little difference on a long journey such as this. Then, Elder, we will presume upon your hospitality. You agree, Gladius?”


“Aye, Master,” Gladius replied, his relief evident. The suzerain’s words had filled even the stalwart Arab with a deep unease. He had not been eager to embark on a nighttime desert crossing, and it showed in his face.


“Come this way, please.”


Plato and Gladius followed Seim from the building. Outside, twilight had already begun to spread across the vast desert beyond the village walls. Far across a sea of burnt yellow sand, the fading sun had set halfway, sending its rays upward to paint the high clouds blood red. Crimson spread out across the darkening sky even as night seeped from the eastern horizon toward the vault of heaven, reddish gray melding with crimson-blue. The wind was completely still, and the twilight pooled like heavy oil upon the sand. There was not a sound. Plato wondered what the people who lived inside the stone houses of the village must be doing for such silence to reign—not a single spoken word, no faint echo of evening song. All was filled with the barren quiet of the sand sea and the silence that comes with the death of something long forgotten, unchanged for thousands of years.


Gladius hunched his shoulders. “The sunset here chills the heart, does it not, Master?”


Plato did not answer. He turned his broad brow to the evening light in silence. He felt as though something momentous were about to begin . . . Yes, something was beginning. The light held a strange tension and unease—a chilling sensation the philosopher had never felt before: the sense that something unknown, something that could not be known or truly seen—something unspeakable—was quietly creeping closer.


“This way.” Seim the Elder stood across the central courtyard, beckoning for Plato to follow.


“Let us go, Gladius.” Plato began to walk across the sand.


“You may sleep in here tonight,” the old man said, indicating a small stone house flanked on either side by two of the largest houses in the village. “I’m afraid I cannot offer much in the way of comforts, but please, if there is anything you need, do not hesitate to ask.”


Inside, the house had but a single room. In the wall facing the courtyard was a panel made out of the rigid, translucent material Seim the Elder had called glaes. A square fire pit had been cut in the center of the floor, atop which had been set a metal washbasin, also square. The fire beneath it was unlit.


Seim lingered while Plato and Gladius settled in, and after a few moments several women entered with food for the visitors. The women were not young, but they wore long skirts down to their ankles fastened at the waist with belts of linked metal that shone with a golden luster. On their heads they wore the same shallow hoods as the Elcasian men. The women moved like shadows, setting up a table and laying out various dishes. Finally, one of them set down a large water jug that she had carried on her shoulder; then all vanished as silently as they had come.


“It is not much, but please eat.” Seim the Elder bowed low at the waist and departed, but no sooner had he walked out than he reappeared in the doorway. “Should you require anything, press the button you see there upon the wall. I will come immediately.” The door closed without a sound.


The meal consisted primarily of mutton and vegetables, and despite their host’s modesty, it seemed quite a feast to Plato. Though neither of the travelers had been particularly hungry, they found the food to be the most delicious they had ever eaten, and they partook with relish. Surely, thought Plato, these people possess wondrous talent in the culinary arts. Many strong spices had been used with skill; clearly the cuisine of this village was both rich and refined. It might even surpass the food eaten by the wealthiest nobles of Egypt and lesser Asia.


As the philosopher continued to eat, a doubt grew in his mind. “Gladius. It cannot have been a simple matter to prepare such a delicious variety of victuals out here in the middle of this barren, sandy waste. Even assuming that they prepared this especially for us as their guests.”


Gladius lifted a piece of food from his dish between two fingers and showed it to Plato. “Look, Master. This mutton was fried in the fat of some other animal, then wrapped in a barley mash that was dissolved in water and kneaded before being baked again. Master, the fat they used to fry this mutton is something I have never eaten before. Nor was it made by any process with which I am familiar. The taste is very unusual. Usually such a thing would taste much more sour. And they used something most unusual to heat this food. I would very much like to see their oven. Look—this morsel has clearly been cooked through, yet nowhere has the surface been burnt.”


Gladius was well traveled, and his knowledge of foreign cuisines was startlingly rich and, Plato had found, largely accurate.


“Master,” the Arab continued, “do you not find their cooking style and this refined flavor to be different from anything else you have ever tasted? It is practically not of our world!” Gladius frowned even as he stuffed his mouth with food.


Plato contemplated Gladius’s words. It seemed to him that the astonishment his servant felt toward this food was no less impressive than that which he himself felt toward the suzerain’s window. Clearly, Gladius sensed the strangeness of the feast better than Plato, if he wanted to see the oven. Together, they ate every last bit of the meal without further conversation.


“Allow us to clear the table,” a female voice said. The women who had served them before had reappeared as quietly as shadows. In a matter of moments they had taken away the empty plates and vanished once again.


The room was now so dark that Plato could no longer see Gladius’s face. “Would that we had a candle,” he said, peering at his friend.


That instant, his eyes filled with a brilliant light as the chamber brightened like a courtyard lit up by the noonday sun. Reflexively, he lifted his hands to cover his face. In that flood of blazing illumination, he saw Gladius draw the short sword at his waist.


“Master!” the Arab shouted, moving quickly to stand before Plato, shielding him from any danger.


But all that happened was that the room remained bright. Nothing else.


“What in Zeus’s name is that?”


An impossibly bright sphere of light had appeared in the middle of the ceiling. Its light fell upon them like a shining curtain, casting wavering shadows on the wall at their backs.


“Master, outside!”


Squinting against the light, they began to move toward the doorway. Still, nothing happened. Plato paused, keeping one eye on the room around him while he focused his attention on that bright sphere of light.


It did not seem dangerous. In fact, it seemed to be nothing more than what it appeared: a light source. The fear left his face.


“Gladius, I believe that sphere is intended to light this room.”


“Like . . . a torch?” Gladius hesitated, short sword gripped at the ready, and glared fiercely at the sphere on the ceiling. Plato walked over until he was directly beneath it. He had noticed the circular porcelain umbrella that hung overhead when he first entered the room, but he had not been aware of the small light-producing sphere within it. Now as he stared up at it, it seemed to him that the light was somehow trapped within a container made of glaes. Looking closer, he could see threads of light suspended inside the container. That was where the illumination came from.


“Look, Gladius! It is like a reservoir for storing light. Though by what means it captures the luminescence I cannot say.” Until that time, the only indoor lights he had seen were saucers of fish oil and the rock water that burned in Syria. Compared to those things, this was sorcery. “It is like a tiny sun.” Plato pointed at his own shadow cast upon the wall and heaved a sigh. “It is becoming increasingly clear with each new marvel that Atlantis possessed a culture of the highest order.”


Gladius quietly sheathed his short sword. Then he turned and peered out the window into the darkness with eyes that seemed to gaze across a great distance. In his profile, Plato saw lines of age he had never noticed before.


“Master, I cannot help but feel that this journey is a mistake. Though I know there is no way my words could stop you once you have decided on a course.”


Beneath the bright light, Plato considered the deep sadness upon Gladius’s face. “Why would you have me cease this journey?”


The Arab said nothing. His fingers twisted around the decorative rope tied to the hilt of his sword.


“Why, Gladius?”


Gladius looked up. His gray eyes met Plato’s, then looked away. “I can give you no reason. It is merely how I feel.”


“I see. Gladius, you know how much I admire your intuition. And I think the fear that grips your heart and leads you to advise me against continuing is not misplaced. Perhaps it would be better if we heeded it. No, for certain it would be better. But, Gladius, do you really think that I, Plato, could turn away after the events of this truly extraordinary evening? No. Even should I never again take the podium at the Akademia, even should I never pass east along this road again, I must forge onward. This is what it means to seek knowledge, Gladius! No, where is the sense in posturing? I do this out of curiosity. It is a fancy, nothing more.”


Plato waved his hand at the glowing sphere on the ceiling, pointing at it as if to confirm that it was still there.


“But, Master, your pupils at the Akademia await your return. You could not come back one day too soon in their eyes.” Gladius’s words came without conviction, as though he knew their ineffectuality before he even spoke them. “The lady Cassandra too.” He shook his head—the slightest gesture.


“Cassandra . . .” Plato looked at his servant with eyes suddenly weary, as though he were just awakening from a long night of drink; and in his mind’s eye he pictured that quiet girl of Lesser Asia. As always, something pricked at his heart. She lived in solitude deep in a villa covered with vines that stood facing the Square of the Warriors’ Well in the northwest of Athens, where it had been his habit to visit her in the night once a week or once every ten days. That now seemed a lifetime ago.


Cassandra was the widow of Peloponteus, a general of Athens. The young, talented general had been mortally wounded in the endless war for control of the Greek peninsula and had fallen in battle, and so it was the duty of his pure, young, and beautiful widow to preserve his glory and his honor. This was a source of great unhappiness for both Plato and Cassandra.


The philosopher pushed open the door of the house and stepped outside. The moon had come out, making the sand in Elcasia’s central square shine white. Beyond the houses, an endless sea of sand palely glowed. Light spilling from many windows made broad streaks of color through the pools of moonlight. Plato saw a figure walking in his direction. Presently it came close enough for him make out the features of Seim the Elder.


“If you would retire, allow me to arrange for bedding. Is the taub not too bright?”


“Taub?”


“Ah, it is the light in your room.”


Another curious word. Plato whispered it to himself, trying to master the unfamiliar pronunciation.


“As it happens, tonight is the Night of Silence.”


“What is that?”


“An old tradition in our village. It is . . . a night when we remember our ancestors.”


“I see,” Plato replied. “It is a good thing to remember one’s forebears. In this village in particular, I would think. Often one can find Truth hiding in the sayings passed down to us. Yes, I find your Night of Silence most appropriate.”


The silvery light upon the desert grew gradually brighter, bathing both of them so completely that it seemed to weigh upon their skin.


“Excuse me. I will prepare your beds.” The elder disappeared, his feet making no sound on the sand.


Presently the serving women arrived again, carrying mats and blankets of the finest quality. Seim accompanied them, carrying a jug of water, and he inspected the beds, adjusting the lay of the sheets and the positioning of the pillows.


“If it is too bright for you to sleep, I recommend extinguishing your taub. Twist this knob here and it will go out.” The elder indicated a black button set into the wall. When he touched it, the room fell dark in an instant. Plato could hear Gladius’s quick breathing as he leapt like a bird to get his back to a wall.


“Merely turn it gently, like this,” the elder said quietly, and the room returned to its former brightness. His face hard, Gladius returned his short sword loudly to its sheath. A silvery metallic echo trembled in the air.


“Now, I bid you good night.”


Seim bowed low and left without looking back. Plato watched him leave, then lay down on his bedding, feeling as though he were sliding into a deep sea of fatigue.


“Gladius, put out the light.”


Darkness fell upon the room again, softened by the silvery moonlight spilling in at the window; the floor of the chamber shimmered like the bottom of a shallow pool.


“You should rest, Gladius.”


The Arab remained sitting, back to the wall, sandals on his feet and sword strapped to his waist.


“What is it? You should sleep in your bed.”


“No. I must remain ready. Here is best.” Gladius spoke as if to himself. He was particularly adept at feeling the tremors of someone approaching through floors and walls. No matter how deeply he slept, he could awaken at the slightest footfall of a burglar or assassin, springing to consciousness quickly enough to strike the first blow. When Plato was attacked the year before in Sicily by an old retainer of Dionysos the Second, it had been Gladius’s sword that saved the philosopher in the nick of time.


“As you like.”


Plato rolled over and shut his eyes. Though he knew Gladius remained against the wall, he heard not a sound. Plato drifted fitfully toward sleep. Each time his eyes fluttered open, the moonlight fell across the room at a different angle. He let thoughts of all that had befallen him since leaving Sais play through his mind. There was a strange momentum to the cascade of events. He was aware of his own headlong plunge into something from which there very well might be no egress. With each passing day, he could sense his own self waning, being swallowed by the specter of Atlantis. He did not require Gladius’s warnings. He had already passed beyond the point of no return. Neither his seminars at the Akademia, nor any of his disciples, nor the debates with Aristotle that could move his spirit as well as his mind, nor the woman who lived by the Fountain of Warriors held any purchase on his heart. Nor did this stir the slightest sadness within him.


Before long, he was deep asleep.






How long have I slept?


Plato awoke to a noise that came from outside the building. For a moment, he felt as though he were on board a ship. Then he sat up, and the memory of the previous day came back to him.


A sandstorm was blowing outside the window. The little stone house trembled with each buffet of the wind. The sand on the window and door made a gritty roar as it swept from right to left, from left to right.


“The elder was right about the storm,” Plato muttered as he listened to the howling wind. “This will bury the road for sure. I do not look forward to our journey tomorrow.” He pulled his blankets up over his head.


When next he woke, the sandstorm still raged. Dawn would be close now. The chill air of night had begun to stir in the room. Then Plato thought he heard another sound under the roar of the storm—a basket left outside, tossed by the wind, perhaps.


He tried to return to sleep.


The door shook under a blast of wind. Now he was sure he heard a different noise.


“What could that be?”


He lifted his head and pricked up his ears.


Wrrrrrrrr . . .


It was a low sound that cut beneath the sandstorm. It was coming from outside.


“It sounds like something spinning.”


Another blast of wind shook the entire house. When it receded, he heard it again: Wrrrrrrrr . . .


“That is no trick of the ears! There is something out there.” Now the whirring noise mixed with the clamor of the sandstorm, sometimes sounding high, sometimes low, now far in the distance, now right outside the door. Plato sat up in bed. Slipping on his sandals and his sheepskin tunic, he made his way to the door and swung it open.


The storm hit him with its full force. He shrank back as the sand blasted his nose, mouth, and eyes. Clinging to the wall for support, he lowered his face and listened.


Wrrrrrrrr . . .


It was coming quite clearly from the village square. Staggering into the gale, Plato took one step, then two steps into the dark, swirling cloud of sand. When he had gone a dozen or more paces, he could stand against the wind no longer, and he fell to the ground, choking on grit.


To his ears came that sound—


Wrrrrrrrr . . .


He could hear it louder than ever before.






Plato lifted his torso off the ground, struggling for purchase in fine sand that gave way at the slightest touch. His scrabbling hands reached out until the tips of his fingers found the flat surface of a large stone. Getting both hands on the solid mass, he was finally able to push himself to his feet. No sooner was he upright, however, than a wave of dizziness swept over him.


Someone’s hand on his back steadied him.


“Lord Orionae, how weary you must be. You have not had a moment’s rest for two or three days.”


Orionae? Who’s that? The melancholy question drifted through Plato’s mind, but a moment later recognition came—


Ah, of course. I am Orionae. Plato nodded inwardly. And I am rather tired.


He had the unsettling sensation that his feet were not his own, and it irritated him greatly. “We must hurry, Europa. The Council will begin shortly.” Plato-who-was-Orionae looked back at his Minister of Finance. Europa was a trusted advisor, his chief counselor when it came to all matters of money. With the kingdom facing such danger, Europa’s arm was one of the few things that Orionae could rely upon.


There were stairs ahead, stone steps leading downward. Orionae descended, entering the shadow of the high gables of the palace. The great bulk of the edifice hid the night sky. Soldiers stood guard before the giant four-paneled golden doors; they snapped to attention, then immediately bowed and moved aside.


As he stepped into the Grand Corridor, Orionae turned to look back upon the night city. From this vantage point he could take in the entire sea of lights spreading beneath the palace hill. White lights. He was able to make out the individual windows of houses all the way from the base of the hill out to the banks of the first canal. Beyond that, the lights became an indistinguishable flood of brilliance that stretched unbroken to the Sea of Atlantis beyond. In the daytime, he would be able to see the shining blue of the ocean, but now all was cloaked in darkness. The city looked as it had looked every night for the past several decades. Nothing changed, nothing out of the ordinary at all. Nowhere the slightest hint of sorrow or tragedy. Only the good life, and the elegant music, sculpture, poetry and song to which that life gave birth. The night was adorned with quickening glory. The hours just after the sunset were the city’s happiest, and Atlantis was enjoying them to the fullest.


Surely it would remain this way—for one hundred, one thousand, even ten thousand years; the nighttime sea of light never faltering, never failing. Every citizen believed this, and Orionae himself had accepted it as an incontrovertible fact upon which he could rely.


“Let us go, Lord Orionae.” Europa’s voice sounded softly behind him.


“Europa. Have you ever imagined the moment it ends? The moment in which the city of Atlantis—Poseidon’s metropolis, in all her glory and prosperity—will crumble?”


Europa made no reply, but turned to look instead at the giant mural upon the corridor wall.


Orionae shook his head. “Forgive me, Europa. It was an unfair question. I myself would never have given such terrible thoughts any consideration until three or four days ago. And yet, I feel as though this is something we should have thought about before, and deeply. I believe we have let ourselves get carried away with our rich life and its many pleasures. We have been careless.” Orionae cast his eyes once more upon the sea of light below them, then turned, robes swirling, and strode into the building.


The many kings had already assembled in the great council chamber on the first level. Dozens of light projectors set along the walls cast several layers of illumination upon the floor, leaving the vast vaulted ceiling in shadow where it hung high above their brilliance.


When Orionae entered the chamber the kings turned to look at him with desperate pleading in their eyes. He moved to the table in the center of the open space, feeling the weight of their collective gaze upon him. How well he understood that he would not be able to give them what they wanted. He took his seat, feeling something leaden fill his breast, and he placed the dossier Europa offered him upon the tabletop. An oppressively heavy air hung in the council chamber. Not a word was spoken between the assembled.


For the first time since the kingdom’s birth, there was no hope to be found in this meeting of the highest council.


A bell rang. The sound shook the air in the chamber; several of the kings broke out in a cold sweat.


“His Majesty King Atlas the Seventh and the king’s father, Poseidonis the Fifth,” the voice of Privy Counselor Ilias sounded over the loudspeaker.


Two large golden panels adorned with an engraved map of the kingdom stood at the front of the chamber. Now they opened silently, revealing a large stage beyond. In the center of the stage were two chairs, each as large as a small house. Fashioned of solid silver, the chairs seemed even larger for their simple, unadorned lines. Now another wall behind the stage slid soundlessly open and two figures appeared, swaying like tiny trees beneath headdresses so large they seemed as if they might scrape the very ceiling. Simultaneously the two figures lifted their bronzed faces to gaze across the council chamber, eyes like flame burning into the hearts of the assembled kings. With utmost serenity they took their thrones, one in the center and one slightly behind.


The king in the forward throne addressed the throng. “I would now hear your final plans. I have already revealed my thoughts to you in writing. What I consider most important is this: that we move the base of our economy and the functions of our government and citizenry to Atlanta, land of our forebears. My method of rule, though experimental, has shown tremendous success over these many years, for which I have your unfailing cooperation to thank. The success of my kingdom will serve as a very important guide for future planetary development. So, you see, remaining here is not an option. Let us hear your plans for the exodus now. Legate, speak.” The king’s sonorous voice betrayed no hint of hesitation. Rich and textured, it rolled across the chamber like a thick carpet unfurling.


Orionae stood, taking a deep breath to still the fluttering in his breast. “I hereby pledge anew my ever deepening fealty toward Your Majesty Atlas the Seventh, King of Kings, and to the king’s father, Poseidonis the Fifth. With your leave, I would speak on Your Majesty’s proposed move to the kingdom of Atlanta . . .


“Your Majesty,” he continued, “we have thought deeply on this all day and all night, and though as your humble servants it pains us to say this, we feel that, given the current circumstances, the exodus you propose is not realistic.”


All present in the chamber froze. So still were the gathered kings that it seemed they had ceased even to breathe. A long silence passed as they felt that stillness weigh upon them. At last, the clear tones of Atlas the Seventh rang out.


“Legate, I know well the realities of the situation. As I said the other day, I wanted you to consider my plan despite the circumstances. I’m not unaware of your struggle. But you must realize that this is all part of a very detailed development program laid out by the Planetary Development Committee. All we do is informed by their larger design. The proper steps must be taken at the prescribed times! Assembled members of the Council, this is Heaven’s will—and when I speak of Heaven, you know I do not refer to some abstract concept, some artifact of the human psyche. That is why, Legate, I asked you to consider with all haste a means by which we can make this exodus a reality.”


Tiny beads of sweat glistened in the deep wrinkles running across Orionae’s brow.


“Your Majesty,” he began after a moment, “we are able to live in this rare paradise solely due to your overwhelming benevolence, and for this we are immensely grateful. Yet so perfect is this paradise that I fear the people will not be able to understand why we must leave it to move to an unknown land. Our orchards are filled with bountiful fruit, our factories work tirelessly, our merchant ships, our hospitals, our schools, all bring happiness to our people. But our citizens are conservative in the extreme, Your Majesty. All the more so because their lives are so blessed. They are well satisfied with the bounty of their homeland. Were we to tell them they must leave their home for another, that we must move our kingdom entire, it would bring chaos. Please, Your Majesty. We beg your understanding in this matter. With all our hearts we beg it of you.”


Orionae felt the strength in his body rush out through his pores. He had managed to fulfill at least a part of his responsibility by relating to the king what had been decided over the last two or three days in the provincial assemblies.


“Legate.” Atlas the Seventh spoke again, his voice devoid of compromise. “You have not answered my question in a satisfactory manner. I asked you to describe to me your plans for the exodus of the Kingdom of Atlantis.”


“Your Majesty.”


King Dominica, minister of the province that lay along the western coast of the kingdom, rose to his feet. He wore an elegant linen shawl and a beautiful shell necklace. His thick brown whiskers were trembling. “The moment the people hear the extent of this plan, their shock, sadness, and rage will lead swiftly to violence. There are many examples of this to which I might refer; suffice it to say, that even should this great plan be the direct provenance of Your Majesty’s benevolent will, that is not how it will be reflected in the hearts of the people. It is a certainty that they will turn against the royal house of Atlas, saying that we have replaced the kind rule of yesterday for an outrage today.”


As King Dominica once again took his seat, King Ajax of the central mountainous highlands stood.


“Your Majesty. We have moved our kingdom in the past, yet only in response to long years of drought or to escape the predations of barbarian tribes—we’ve moved only as a last resort, when it was the express will of the people.”


“I say this to you again!” came the voice from the throne, and it shook the room like a crash of thunder. “I am King of Kings. I have received the will of Heaven and devote myself to its promulgation alone. You will heed my words and devote yourselves to the divine will.”


Poseidonis the Fifth, silent until then, opened his mouth and spoke, the tone and character of his voice almost indistinguishable from that of Atlas the Seventh. “Legate and assembled kings. What has happened to the reverential loyalty you once showed to the Royal House of Atlas? I can still hear the oaths you swore to our House when I passed the title of High Officiant on to my son. Your words ring fresh in my ears. Take care that you do no injury to that loyalty today, for your devotion to the Royal House of Atlas reflects in turn the loyalty of the House of Atlas to the Planetary Development Committee.”


The assembled kings sat still as a forest of stones.


“Legate, assembled kings. I ask you, who was it, one thousand years ago, that took his first steps upon this barren continent as it drifted in an empty sea? Who harnessed the atom’s power, carved the mountains and the plains? Who planted groves of trees and taught the people how to gather their fruit and cultivate their seeds? Who built roads and towns, waterways and aqueducts? Who showed the people the art of metallurgy, the smelting of iron, and made chariots that ran on electricity? Who taught the people how to build and sail their ships? Tell me.”


“The founder of our kingdom, Poseidonis the First.” The voices speaking in unison echoed through the council chamber.


“Now, Legate. Tell me the founding ideological construct of our kingdom. Speak!”


Orionae stood as though possessed. I know the ideology. I know it all too well. But what has that to do with us here, now?


“By the reckoning of the Twin Suns, from Blue 93 to the summer of Yellow 17 in the New Galactic Age,” he intoned, “the Planetary Development Committee on Astarta 50 received a directive from Shi to attempt a helio-ses-beta development on the third planet in the Ai System. This required that a religion be engineered for the indigenous peoples whereby the influence of the Planetary Development Committee could be ascribed to divine will —” Abruptly Orionae stopped the flow of words spilling involuntarily from his lips. Then with a wrenching act of will he shouted at the towering shapes upon the stage, his voice so loud he felt as though his mouth would split all the way back to his ears: “Why did you tell them there were gods and not tell them about the Planetary Development Committee?”


A rustle passed through the assembled kings like a breeze through rushes, and their faces went white as corpses.


“Why didn’t you tell them?!”


A great dizziness came over the legate and he crumpled to the floor.


Why did you say nothing of their existence? he wanted to yell again, but he could not summon the strength. Only his lips quavered weakly.


Then the sky fell and all was lost in primal darkness.






He heard the occasional clink of metal objects coming from somewhere down below his feet, mixed with the voices of several people engaged in stealthy conversation. A strong, medicinal smell stung his nostrils.


What are they doing?


Where am I?


He tried to turn it over in his dark, soggy head, but the thoughts mischievously slipped away from him. In a wave of fatigue, he abandoned the attempt altogether.


Without warning, a sharp pain ran down his arm. He groaned and tried to sit up, but all he could manage was to move his shoulders slightly.


“I think he’s coming to,” someone said.


Coming to? What did I—? All at once the memory came back to him. That’s right. The council chamber . . .


Orionae-who-was-Plato sat up in the bed.


“You should lie down a little longer. The neural stimulant we gave you is still working—if you stand you’ll lose your balance.”


Orionae frowned at the scent in his nostrils.


“What happened? I remember falling in the council chamber.” As soon as he said the words, he had the strange sensation that his own memories were not to be trusted.


“Wait . . .” he muttered. “I mean, I was in the desert on a journey. There was a sandstorm at night, and stars, many stars, and a bright light spilling from the window . . . When was that again?” The legate put a hand to his forehead. He couldn’t have been traveling in a desert. So what was this strange feeling in the pit of his stomach—this conviction that he was somehow in the wrong place?


A man dressed all in white stared at Orionae’s face. The stranger’s dark silhouette, framed by the light on the ceiling, stirred up a memory long buried in the sediments at the back of Orionae’s mind. But no sooner had the recollection risen than it too drifted away. The dark silhouette disappeared without a sound, leaving the bright light to shine down on Orionae, hurting his eyes. For a short while, Orionae slept.


When he awoke again there was no one around. He sat up and slid his legs over the edge of the bed, searching with his feet for something to wear. He found nothing but stood anyhow, broad shoulders swaying, and drew his hospital robe more tightly around him.


Orionae was in a fully equipped medical chamber. A variety of surgical instruments sat on metal shelves running along the wall, and a wheeled medical cart held boxes with syringes and vials, scalpels and long needles, all giving off a cold gleam in the bright lights. He looked around, but no one was to be seen.


“Who would abandon a patient like that?”


Careless! Orionae frowned and gave the door to the room a push.


He was clearly in the palace’s medical ward. It occurred to him that he had never had occasion to visit here before.


Beyond his room, the ward was in chaos. Physicians and assistants ran back and forth, all of them practically steaming with activity.


“What’s going on here?” Orionae wondered aloud.


It occurred to him that the chamber he had just vacated also showed signs of disarray. There were empty spaces in the lineup of medical devices on the shelves, as if the most important items had been removed, and one of the vials from the cabinet had toppled, its powdery contents forming a small pyramid on the floor. Whoever had been in there gathering supplies had left in a hurry.


Orionae began moving quickly toward where he thought the exit must lie. There was an elevator with its door open to the corridor that appeared to have been stopped or stuck in place. It was full of wooden boxes stuffed with an incredible assortment of medical supplies. Just beyond, an electric-powered gurney lay on its side.


“What’s going on? What happened?” the legate called out to a physician headed in the opposite direction.


The man saw Orionae’s face and stiffened.


“Tell me what has happened.” Orionae stared the physician in the eye. The man returned his stare, then lifted a hand and pointed down the corridor.


At the end of the passageway was a large sunroom with windows of glaes stained a beautiful crimson.


“What about the sunroom?”


Orionae’s gaze shifted back to the physician, then back to the colored glaes. He noticed that the glaes was shimmering, brighter and darker, like a fluttering flag. For a moment he stood there watching, then ran toward it.


As soon as he entered the sunroom, Orionae realized that the giant windows there were not set with colored glaes—they were reflecting the light of a vast fire outside.


A carpet of raging flame was spread over the entire city below the hill, rolling in waves toward the heights. There was a strong wind blowing; Orionae could see shreds of flame flying up from the edges of the inferno, dancing like phoenix fledglings into the sky. Wherever they fell back to earth new fires sprang up. A dense layer of smoke roiled above the city, glowing eerily with the reflected light of the blaze beneath. He saw a huge golden column of flame burst up through the smoke and then explode in a shower of sparks, and guessed that it had risen from somewhere beyond the second ring canal. A sudden sound of gunshots came up from somewhere below the palace walls.


Orionae ran down the line of windows. The fire had spread in a semicircle along the ring canal and was pushing further inward toward the center of the city. From his current vantage point it was difficult to see the entirety of the damage.


Again, a brighter burst of flame erupted from the middle of the blaze, and this time the city around it—both the buildings and the earth itself—clearly lurched skyward. He saw people fleeing in a dark stream down the road away from the flames. They looked tiny.


Orionae ran farther. Something that he could not even begin to comprehend had pushed this great city to the brink of destruction, and he had been completely unaware.


What could possibly have happened?


Why had the city watch done nothing?


Where were the ministers and the pages?


He lurched from window to window like a wounded beast. At last, halfway around the arc of the sunroom, he saw something that gave him a sliver of hope, and he breathed a deep sigh. From this vantage point he could see the other half of the city, and it was still dark. The flames had not reached there; nor was the wind blowing smoke in that direction, for he could see stars twinkling in the sky above.


The people will have a safe haven.


There would be squads of firefighters and rescuers organizing in the dark side of the city, away from the flames. Despite the chaos, much could be salvaged. The palace medical ward alone was capable of saving many wounded. Orionae felt that he should go down, into the city aflame. He desperately wanted to know what had happened in the council chamber after he collapsed, but the fire was clearly a far more pressing matter.


The fact that the lights in half the city were out was a sure sign that the nuclear reactor had been damaged.


We will have to get that back online as quickly as possible.


In the face of such an unprecedented and unforeseen disaster, Orionae felt the urgent need to return to his duties as legate—he had never felt such distress at being away from his post as he did now. Cursing under his breath at the frozen elevator, he found a stairway and sped down it. At its bottom he found a series of hallways that twisted and turned like a labyrinth, and he raced along, looking for a way out into the undamaged part of the city. He ran fast—faster than he had ever run before.


Three hundred feet ahead, the well-lit hallway plunged into darkness.


That must be where the blackout starts.


A large section of the vast palace belonged to the side of the city that wasn’t on fire, so it followed that it would suffer the same fate as the streets below.


Orionae ran, gritting his teeth in frustration at his own sluggish legs. The darkened part of the corridor opened before him like a cavern.


Wait! There’s a separate nuclear reactor inside the palace. A blackout in the city shouldn’t affect us—and the medical ward was well lit.


Then he saw points of light in the darkness ahead of him, so many they were uncountable, so many he could scarcely even gaze at them all. A chilling premonition rose inside him, and he forced his already faltering feet to stop.


There, not more than two or three yards ahead, the floor gave way to the void. The lights he saw in that darkness were the fires of one hundred billion stars.


The corridor opened out onto a vast, empty space that cut the city clean in half.


Putting a hand on one wall for support, he stared out at the sea of twinkling stars like a child staring at the night sky. His head hurt so fiercely he feared it might split; thick beads of sweat ran down his cheek and chin. He felt as though his brain was on fire, and the rest of his body had gone cold as ice. Unable to grasp what had happened, he knew only that everything had changed.


So what do I do now?


Could it be that I am dreaming?


He stood, swaying, repeating these questions to himself. But the sea of stars that spread out before him was not the stuff of dreams or illusions. Some of the stars seemed close enough to touch with an outstretched hand, while others were so distant they proved the vastness of the void of space.


Slowly, he made his way back along the corridor.


His vision of a safe half of the city, dark and free of flames, had just been torn from him. All that remained was a raging pyre.


Orionae descended another stair, walking mechanically like a marionette, emotionless. The corridors below were silent, save for the sound of an automatic cannon firing from somewhere in the far reaches of the palace; he saw no sign of the other palace inhabitants.


Where has everyone gone?


He passed another line of windows that looked out over balconies reflecting light from the blaze below and arrived at the steps down to the central hall on the first floor. Now he could see people—refugees—in the darkness beneath the tamarisk in the central courtyard, and he hurried outside. Making his way across the cobbles, he spotted a six-wheeled autocarriage lying on its side beneath a marble wall. A ragtag group of soldiers, their faces drenched in the light of the fires, rounded the guardhouse and approached him through an arch in the castle wall.


“Do not leave the palace,” the leader said. “The mob has broken through the outer perimeter.”


“The mob?” Orionae stopped at the unfamiliar word. “You mean they’re rioting?”


“Yes, sir.” One of the soldiers recognized the face of his own legate. He quickly held his automatic gun at attention and bowed.


“You mean rioters are responsible for this conflagration?”


The fighting men stared at him, suspicious that the highest of all ministers in their government had no clue as to what was going on.


“Th-that is,” Orionae stammered, “I’ve yet to receive a full report.”


“The proclamation from King Atlas was met with unrest from nearly every quarter of the city. The offices of administration were attacked, and before we could properly respond, the mob had taken over half the city—and us with no way of putting out the fires.”


The soldier shifted the weight of the heavy ammunition bandolier on his shoulder.


“Your name?” Orionae motioned with his jaw to the man directly in front of him.


“Heracletos, gunner with the Royal Honor Guard Light Infantry.”


“How many are you?”


“Seventeen, plus one wounded, so eighteen, sir.”


Orionae nodded. With every word he spoke, he could feel himself regaining his authority. “Good. Hold this position. Don’t let a single one of that mob inside the palace proper.”


Without waiting for a response, Orionae stepped out onto the wide thoroughfare that ran along the front wall of the palace. The fire had already engulfed the large building across the roadway, the regional ministers’ quarters; now the blaze was spitting golden tongues of flame out onto the road.


A violent gust of wind crossed the city like a cresting wave, picking up a fireball of wood and debris and hurling it against the offices of the guard that stood imposingly at a corner in the road. For a moment, the city was hidden from Orionae’s view behind a swirling river of flame.


Then he saw shapes, people staggering through the wall of fire like lost souls. They reached out toward the edifice of the palace behind him, hands dripping molten flesh, shouting incoherently. Their bare feet slapped down upon the smoldering bricks like swollen water skins.


“Here, quickly!” Orionae shouted, running out from the shadow of the palace walls.


He heard a long chatter of gunfire; a few of the shapes running toward him were plucked up off the road and thrown back into the flames.


“Hold your fire! Hold your fire, I said!” Orionae shouted up to the top of the high palace wall above him, but in the wind and roaring of the fire there was no way he could be heard. He ran along the bottom of the wall, no destination in mind, only a feeling that, as legate, he must do something. His feet moved of their own accord and he heard himself shout, “To the harbor! To the sea! We’ll find boats!”


The people ran in a group behind him now, making their way from patch to patch of open ground beyond the reach of the flames. Orionae found himself on a narrow side street, where he could hear the weeping of women, the crying of children, and the shouting of men echoing loudly off the high brick walls to either side.


A government autocarriage, marked with the wide horizontal yellow stripe of an official vehicle, came careening at breakneck speed around a corner, then slammed directly into a wall without slowing. The body of the car split in half, its batteries erupting in a shower of blue incandescence. Several corpses—some of them children—rolled out of the shattered vehicle onto the street, the stench of their blood mingling with the ever-present choking cloud of dust and smoke.


Dozens of people were huddled or sprawled in the dark courtyard of Oriental Chariot Square. Orionae stepped over several men and women who lay on the cobblestones, making his way to the small fountain he knew stood in the middle of the open space. He knelt and drank eagerly from the basin. Though much of the cool water slipped through his cupped fingers and spilled onto the stones below, what reached his mouth was the most delicious he had ever tasted.


As he drank the legate became aware of two human shapes engaged in a hushed argument behind a rose thicket not far from the fountain.


“We must go to the harbor. The boats will leave us behind.”


“What’s the use of running? We should follow the king’s orders. I don’t care where he wants us to go. We’ll go.”


One of the voices sounded like that of an old man; the other, young.


“What are you saying?” the older voice demanded. “There is fertile land enough over the sea. We can go there, begin anew. My son, we are not horses or cattle. Must we follow meekly along when we are told we must leave this land our forebears cultivated to go off to some distant sun across the starry sky—some ‘planet’? Are we slaves to do our master’s bidding?”


“But, Father,” the other voice said, “how will we get through this wall of fire to the harbor? You heard what they said—the bridges over the second ring canal have all burned and fallen. There are so many corpses floating there, one cannot even see the surface of the water. Please, Father.”


The voice of the older man was hoarse and tired, yet it still had not lost its strength. “Get up. If I’m fated to serve the House of Atlas, those men who are not men, I’d rather toss myself into the boiling stewpot of the canals.”


“Father!”


“Bah—a curse upon the House of Atlas! They are not humans in truth! They are avatars of evil. How long they must have waited for this day to come. Yes, they gave us treasures, priceless things beyond measure. All to buy their absolution in advance for this day of days!” The raw pain in the old man’s voice stung Orionae’s ears. “Get up, my son! We must get on that boat. We must tell the people of the world what happened here this night.”


Orionae crawled through the smoke, making his way toward the two debaters.


“Who’s there?”


The legate could feel an icy hatred stabbing at him through the darkness.


“I am the legate Orionae.”


“The legate?”


The two huddled figures craned their necks to look in his direction.


“He tells the truth.”


“And what is the legate doing here?” the old man asked, his voice harsh and suspicious.


“I lost consciousness during a meeting of the council and was carried to the hospital ward. When I awoke, it was to this chaos. Tell me—what is the darkness that has swallowed half our city, and what caused these fires?”


The old man whistled in his throat. “That star-filled sky appeared at day’s end, quite suddenly. One moment the western half of the capital was basking in the evening sun, the next moment it was gone. The fires came afterward.”


“Do you know how they started?”


“I do not,” said the old man with a shake of his head.


The youth continued where his father had left off. “Poseidonis the Fifth announced that he intended to move the kingdom. He proclaimed a great exodus. When the other kings didn’t follow his command, Poseidonis borrowed the power of the gods and judged them. Legate, some of the people took up arms. Others protested with words, begging their liege to change his mind. But it was all too late. The heart of Poseidonis the Fifth no longer lies with his people, if it ever did.”


The true shape of what had happened was finally becoming clear to Orionae.


The old man’s wiry hand grabbed him by the arm. “Legate, we’ll give back our hospitals, our schools, our autocarriages, our nuclear reactor. We’ll give back everything the House of Atlas dangled before us as bait. All of it! We can return to the primitive age of a thousand years ago for all I care. It’s better that way. We never asked the royal house for their assistance! They came of their own accord from who knows where.”


“But, Father,” the son cut in, “can we really just return to our primitive ways? Do you even know how to make a flame? Are you going to twirl a stick or pound two pieces of flint together? Will you hunt your food with a bow and arrow? No. I want no part of a life with no food—a life spent waiting to die of some trifling illness.”


Orionae put a hand on each of the men’s shoulders. “Both of you, you must get to the boats. Stay here and we’ll all die in flames. To the harbor!”


“Legate! Have you not heard a word I’ve said? We were like animals in a laboratory! Always given newer and tastier delicacies to distract us, while our reactions and changing lifestyles were monitored. To hell with this exodus! To hell with the king’s orders! Can’t you see? The only thing one thousand years of rule by the House of Atlas has proven is that our happiness, our bounty, everything about our lives was an illusion.”


Orionae pulled the old man up off the ground. “I know. All the more reason why you should get on that boat and go to the land across the ocean and tell people what you have just told me. Tell the people the meaning of happiness and a rich life. Tell the world of the bitter defeat we of Atlantis have tasted. You must do so—or this kind of tragedy could very well occur again.”


The old man shook in Orionae’s arms.


“Now go!” the legate said.


“No! I’m going to the palace!” the son shouted, turning to dash across the courtyard.


“Wait, no!” The old man jumped as though he’d been electrocuted.


“I will find your son,” Orionae said, giving the man a push in the direction of the quays. “You must go ahead to the harbor. Quickly!”


There was no one to be seen on the stair in front of the palace; the great edifice itself sat like an abandoned ruin, distinct in its darkness from the brilliance of the fires below. From halfway up the stair, one could look down on the raging sea of flame and the starry sky where the other half of the city had been.


The layer of smoke that rose from the fires stopped where the starry sky began, as though blocked by some invisible wall. Any flames that reached that dark divide were cut off there, their flickering tongues bending down and spiraling upward, searching for some egress.


What could have happened to an entire half of the city? Orionae wondered as he had many times already. Still no answer presented itself.


The great ringed metropolis, populated by four hundred thousand souls, and forty kilometers across until today, had been reduced to rubble. What had been home to so many was no longer a fit place for human survival.


I must meet with Poseidonis the Fifth. The need for answers threatened to burst Orionae’s heart. From whence did the House of Atlas come—and who were these people?


Bizarrely, this was the first time he had ever thought to ask this question. The story of the founding of the Kingdom of Atlantis, told in tales by his forebears and recorded in the ancient texts, was already legend. It seemed that the people of the kingdom didn’t actually wonder, even out of plain curiosity, where the House of Atlas had actually come from.


One day, they came down from the sky.


That was all they had—the beginning of everything—and that was enough.


One day, they came down from the sky.


As long as everything was going well, who needed more? But when the time of peace had passed and the people began to feel uneasy about their welfare—when tragedy struck, and they looked for the causes and origins of their unhappiness—every doubt led back to this one question: from whence did the House of Atlas come? A question for which it was no longer possible to claim an answer.


The corridors of the palace shone brightly with cold light. These giant passageways, built to accommodate the massive frames of Poseidonis the Fifth and Atlas the Seventh, rose almost twenty meters from floor to ceiling. But the only living being moving through all that space now was Orionae.


The legate hurried along the angled slidewalk that led up to the second floor, a vast conveyor that crept along like a giant annelid. Enormous doors stood in pairs on either side of the passageway. The doors were equipped with sensors and would slide open to admit any who stood before them. Some of the rooms were familiar to Orionae—the council chamber, the offices of the Privy Council. He passed them all by, running from the second floor on up to the third.


The third level also appeared deserted. The palace was said to have sixteen or seventeen floors in all, though even the legate Orionae had never been higher than the sixth. He had only a vague conception of the work that went on within the palace and had never really thought to find out more. He knew that Chief Secretary Iras and his dozens of aides took care of most of it, though Iras himself was rarely seen in public.


“Your Majesty!” Orionae shouted down a vacant corridor. “It is I, the legate Orionae! Where are you?”


His voice drifted down the passage, fading into the distance. After an instant’s hesitation Orionae continued on, his pace wavering slightly, following the receding echoes of his own voice. He hadn’t the slightest idea whether he was headed deeper into the palace, or making his way toward an exit.


“Your Majesty! Orionae has come! Your Majesty, where are you?” he shouted in both directions.


“I’m here.”


A tremendous fear struck Orionae, and he braced himself so he would not collapse on the spot.


“What do you want, legate?”


He looked around but saw no sign of Poseidonis the Fifth—only his own shadow wavering in the bright, cold light that fell upon the metal of the corridor floor. And yet with his entire body Orionae could sense the presence of Poseidonis the Fifth looming powerfully above him.


“Your Majesty! You must tell me what this means. Why do you strike down your own people?”


“Legate. I will soon report on my failure to the Planetary Development Committee. Yet understand that this failure is only one of my results. Legate, you saw the fire? It was that fire that foiled my plans, the greatest barrier to the designs of the committee, and our final answer.”


“Your Majesty!”


“It is likely that we shall never again appear before you or the people of this city.”


“Your Majesty—wait! Where did the other half of the city go? How did it disappear? Will it come back? Please tell me, Your Majesty! What is the starry sky I see outside that has appeared in place of the lost city?”


There was no answer. Orionae felt the towering presence of Poseidonis the Fifth grow gradually weaker, fading into the distance.


He could smell smoke in the corridor now. The fires must have reached the palace walls. It was all over.


Everything was over, headed for an ending beyond the reach of his hands to save.


What would come next? A primitive society, such as the one the old man by the fountain had described? Would darkness visit the hearts of men?


Or would everything be consumed by that dark sky and those mounting flames?


Everything—






The storm had blown its last.


Plato lay sprawled across the stone, half buried in sand.


The quiet wind of dawn gently brushed the sand from his body.


By the time one of the village women came out to fetch water and found him there, the philosopher was already dead. The woman ran to inform Seim the Elder, and within moments a crowd of Elcasians had gathered. They carried Plato back to the small dwelling he had been given for his night’s lodging. Gladius was still there, leaning up against the wall, fast asleep. He awoke with a start.


A physician of the village stuck silver needles into Plato’s arms and legs. The needles were connected to tubes; into these the man poured liquids from several different bottles of glaes. Then many strange and curious devices, the purpose of which baffled Gladius’s imagination, were carried into the house. They made whirring and burbling noises such as those heard when air and liquid mix. Gladius stood rigid in a corner of the room, watching the hurried yet precise movements of the men and women who encircled the sickbed. When the sun had risen quite high in the sky, Plato moaned suddenly, and the men and women slowed their activity.


“There. He will be able to stand in two or three days,” the physician told Gladius. “We must not rush him. He was entirely dead, you see, and needs time to recover.” The Elcasian busied himself picking up the various medical devices that had been placed around the bed. His assistants left the room in silence.


The physician closed the curtains on the windows, straightened the blanket over Plato, and then departed, a wooden box filled with vials of medicine and small surgical instruments tucked under his arm.


The philosopher slept with his head pressed into his pillow, barely moving. At times Gladius feared that his master might yet be dead. His eyes filled with tears as he watched over the old man.


What siren beckoned you out into that raging sandstorm, he wondered, and what did you see there?


The Arab was painfully aware that their great journey had now begun in earnest.






Plato spent the next several days drifting somewhere between wakefulness and sleep. Gladius tried speaking to him, but the old man never responded. When Seim visited, the sight of Plato lying there seemed to give him a great deal of pain.


“Elder,” Gladius asked him during one of his visits, “could there be some connection between that custom of your village, the Night of Silence, and my master’s sudden illness?”


Seim gave no reply but stood solemnly, gazing down at Plato. The philosopher was sitting up in bed, his back against the wall, but his eyes stared off into space, seeing nothing.


“Ahem. Master Gladius. The Night of Silence, as I have told you, is a ritual in which the people of our village receive a revelation from our suzerain. Yet not all of us receive this revelation. Only a select few glean anything from the Night when it comes—and those who do are forbidden to speak of what has been revealed to them. Thus, no one knows who in the village has received such enlightenment—not even myself.”


“Hrm,” Gladius muttered. “I suppose that’s fitting for a Night of Silence.”


“In days long past, they say, everyone in the village received revelation from our suzerain. Through the ritual they would learn firsthand about an event in our past. This knowledge brought us closer together in mind and spirit. Now, such togetherness is beyond our grasp. Master Gladius . . . in truth, I have begun to lose confidence that Atlantis, our suzerain, and the revelation ever existed at all.”


“If you seek enlightenment, you’re talking to the wrong man.”


Seim turned to leave the room.


“Elder—” Gladius called out, and the older man hesitated at the door. “Before entering the service of Master Plato, I lived among many people in many lands. Over the course of those earlier years, I adopted the customs and ways of numerous people, different tribes . . . too many to count. I could not have survived otherwise. One thing I discovered is that in the tales and legends told by all of these peoples, there are always stories of destruction and salvation. I’ve wondered why this is. Why would there be so many tales about a horrific destruction and the salvation that followed when no one alive could possibly have witnessed either? The tales seemed too close to truth to be mere fancies, and too inevitable to deny.”


Seim the Elder stepped out the doorway and vanished, leaving Gladius to wonder whether the Elcasian had even heard him.






Three days later, a rare rain fell from the muggy morning through to the night, moistening the desert sands.


“Gladius. Today we head west,” Plato announced, standing suddenly.


“M-Master,” Gladius stuttered. “How do you feel?”


“How do I feel? I’m fine. Should I not be?”


“I . . . when did you wake?”


“Gladius,” Plato said, a bit testily. “This rain is the sort of opportunity that comes but once or twice a year. The journey to the west of the Atlas Mountains would be brutal under any other conditions. We must hurry. Prepare for our departure!”


Gladius could hear in his master’s words the obstinacy and sudden passion he knew well. There was no better indicator that Plato had returned to full health. The Arab nodded. “Very well. I will get ready at once,” he said, thinking that all he really needed to do was to fill their donkeys’ water skins and the two would be ready to depart. “Master, do you know which route we will take?”


Plato peered out through the window at the misting rain, seeming lost in thought. “Four days to the northwest of here, west of the Sawai Valley, lies the village of Tovatsue. He awaits us there.”


“Awaits us, Master?”


“Indeed.”


“Ah—who awaits us? When was this appointment made?”


Plato turned to his servant, lifting an eyebrow. “How unlike you, Gladius, to forget such things.”


“I beg your pardon, Master.” Gladius bowed his head, desperately trying to make sense of the old man’s words. Not only had he never heard of any village named Tovatsue, but the name sounded so unfamiliar as to be meaningless to him. What people speaking what language would name a village so? He also wondered who might be waiting for them there—he could recall no such arrangement.


Still milling these questions, Gladius went to call on Seim the Elder to announce their departure.


Three donkeys were laden with food and water skins, and they borrowed a fourth, upon which Plato rode. In the writings that Plato sent to his friend Tethys of Terinth, it is noted that when the philosopher made his farewells, he invited the elder to call on him, back in Greece.


Plato and Gladius left the village in the misting rain alone, Plato having refused Seim’s offer of a guide. The people of the village gathered and stood watching the two travelers depart.


The dampened desert spread out, vast and barren, before Gladius’s eyes. He wondered what was waiting for them on the other side. He cared not whether Tovatsue meant life or death for him; the distinction hardly seemed important.


After they had gone a short distance the two men paused and looked back. Elcasia seemed sunken and faded, far off in the sea of sand behind them.


“Master?” Gladius pointed. “What do you think that might be?” Though he had not noticed it when they entered the village, he could now see a curious structure like a large bowl set on its side, towering a short distance from the houses. It appeared to be fashioned of some kind of thin metal framework.


“That is the suzerain’s tower.”


“Whose tower?”


“Are you quite all right? We met him just the other day.”


I fear you are the one who is not all right, Master, Gladius thought as he chuckled bitterly to himself.


Plato, his thick beard trembling in the desert breeze, stared at the strange bowl looming over the village. It was not the first time he’d seen it, of that he was sure. It was familiar to him, even—yes—surely it was something he had seen dozens upon dozens of times before.


But where?


Plato wracked his brains for some memory of the thing, but every time he felt as if he were about to succeed in dredging it out of the depths, it would slip away, back down to the bottom. With a sigh, the philosopher abandoned his fruitless mental efforts and turned to Gladius.


“Let us go.”


Lost to Plato was the memory that he had seen a bowl-shaped dish tens of times the size of this one over the royal palace of Atlantis—and that he was Orionae, the Atlantean.