Prajñāpāramitā








The weather was unbearably hot from the moment the sun rose that morning. A steamy wind blew through the vast fruit orchards down from the Buddṣāli Hills to the west of the city of Kapilavastu, clinging to the skin like hot syrup. The cicadas chirped in a cacophonous drone so omnipresent it seemed as if the sky itself chirped on a regular cycle, now high, now low—a relentless background noise that usually went unnoticed but that every now and then could rise suddenly in the awareness and swiftly grow overwhelming, like the roar of the sea in the ears. Once this happened, it was very difficult to cease being aware of it.


That was how it was now for King Śuddhodana. He wrinkled his persimmon-colored brow and turned to the captain of the guard, old Uddaka, standing behind him.


“What a racket those insects make!”


Old Uddaka nodded silently. Several beads of clear sweat trickled down the violet-tanned skin of his broad, bare chest. He was the most loyal, trusted captain of the king’s honor guard, and it pained him that he lacked the words to soothe his monarch.


I should have cut down those Brahmin monks when I had the chance.


That was all Uddaka could think. With fingers like gnarled branches, he toyed with the tassel upon the hilt of the crescent-bladed kora that hung on the leather belt at his waist.


I should have cut them. All four of them.


He’d had the chance many times. Yet he knew of the king’s deep-felt love for the prince, and it was this that had stayed his hand. The four Brahmin monks the prince had welcomed as teachers had given several sermons in Kapilavastu at the prince’s request. Uddaka had himself sometimes gone to listen. Yet the abstruse philosophies the monks purveyed held no meaning for him. To the simple, loyal captain of the honor guard, these monks’ plan to take Prince Siddhārtha—heir to the rule of Śākya—away and show him the “path to salvation” or some other fanciful thing made them the enemies of Śākya and a danger to Kapilavastu.


“Where could they be?” King Śuddhodana said, his voice betraying a mounting agitation as he gazed down on the thoroughfare that passed beneath the palace gates.


On either side of the white stone road, a great throng of onlookers had gathered to see off their young prince as he left Kapilavastu to live in the wilderness—together with the four vaunted Brahmin monks he had taken as his teachers.


“My king,” whispered Kabahla, Exchequer for the south of the kingdom.


“What is it, Kabahla?”


The king frowned as the minister leaned in. Kabahla’s stern features looked strained; he was wearing a cloth on his head against the heat, and his cheeks glistened with sweat.


“A Kosala elephant regiment has entered the eastern part of Bashi Valley, Your Majesty.” Kabahla spoke softly so that the other ministers standing nearby would not overhear his report.


“What?” King Śuddhodana gripped the armrest of his chair and stood halfway. “Uddaka! Why have you said nothing of this?”


The captain of the honor guard made a sour face. “Perhaps the Minister of Markets would care to explain why I have not received this report and he has?”


“Indeed,” the minister said with a hasty bow. “I sent an inspector to the valley not ten days ago so that he might properly estimate this year’s cane harvest from Zamba Village and surrounding fields. My inspector returned this morning quite early. He rode his horse fast some eighty li to bring me the news.”


“So their elephants are in Bashi already.” Śuddhodana’s face flushed, and he turned to Uddaka and whispered, “We won’t be able to fight the Kosala troops there . . . How many elephants can you field?”


The captain of the honor guard shook his head. “Eight at most.—No, seven. And about forty foot soldiers.”


It wasn’t enough. Kosala was Śākya’s neighbor to the southwest, and the skill of their elephantry and armed retinues was without equal amongst the sixteen mahajanapadas of the Indus Plain. The invasion was certainly more than the tiny and poorly armed Śākya could hope to face. Never had the armies of Kosala moved into their territory so boldly.


“And on this day of all days!”


Uddaka gritted his teeth and ran his large hand down his face as though weeping with regret. Something—a bead of sweat, or a tear—shone as it traveled down the ridge of his nose. Nothing troubled the old soldier more than to see his own kingdom’s frailty revealed.


“If Kosala is truly invading—” Uddaka began calculating in his head the troops he could muster. Whichever way he counted, the numbers fell short. He couldn’t afford to levy soldiers from the villages either. It was far too close to harvest time to empty the fields.


“My king, we should meet them near the second confluence of the Sawa River.”


The king did not respond. His gaze was fixed upon the five palanquins now entering the palace gates.


Uddaka swallowed his words.


On this day of all days . . .


The old captain felt then that he had lived just a little too long.


Even though the kingdom was poor and her warriors largely untrained, Śākya’s four thousand two hundred troops had a chance of driving back the armies of Kosala if a great general would lead them—and that general was none other than the young Prince Siddhārtha who was, on that very day, to leave Kapilavastu forever.


“My king!”


Uddaka would have sat down on the spot to draw up plans for attacking the armies of Kosala, but all the king’s attention was taken at that moment by the imminent departure of his son. So the guard captain stood as still as stone, his hand gripping the hilt of his beloved sword.


The procession of palanquins, guarded before and behind by several dozen śramaña, moved slowly across the stone-tiled courtyard. On each palanquin, symbols resembling a feathered golden sun sparkled in the light, dazzling the eyes of the onlookers.


From the balcony where the king stood, it was impossible for him to see the prince standing directly below; he could only watch the palanquins approaching for him. The javelins of the honor guard in the courtyard shone like a field of tall rushes in the sun.


One by one, the palanquins stopped. Then their hanging mats of woven wisteria lifted, and the four Brahmin monks stepped out onto the courtyard, casting pools of shadow on the sun-drenched stones.


King Śuddhodana sighed deeply, struggling to maintain his royal demeanor.


From beneath the balcony, the prince appeared, clothed in simple robes. He faced the monks, bowed deeply, and then began to walk in silence toward the resting palanquins.


“My prince!” Uddaka leaned out over the balcony railing and shouted. “Do not go!”


The prince lifted his thickly bearded face to look up at the guard captain and said something. Uddaka could not hear his words, but having known the prince since he was a young boy, he could tell from his posture and the way he moved his arms that they were words of parting.


“My prince! Kosala’s elephants are in Bashi! It is an invasion!” Uddaka exclaimed, though he was painfully aware that nothing he could say would stop the young warrior.


From the high balcony, Uddaka couldn’t see if the prince’s expression changed at all. The prince moved across the courtyard, getting into the centermost of the five waiting palanquins.


For the first time, a burning rage pierced Uddaka’s chest. The kingdom faced threats from without and within, Kosala was invading this very moment, and their own prince was leaving them with no means of defense. If he wants to save people from their unhappiness, he should start by dealing with the realities of the day! How can there be salvation otherwise? Uddaka scowled. Damn your enlightenment!


Then he knew with great clarity what he had to do. Bowing to King Śuddhodana, he quietly left the observation area. Walking slowly across the luxurious carpet of woven peacock tail feathers, Uddaka made his way down to the hall on the first floor. The scene outside beneath the blazing sun was painfully vivid when viewed from the shade of the dark stone hall.


Uddaka steadied his breath, then stepped out into the light-filled courtyard. A number of unfamiliar, strong-looking men were in the process of hoisting the five palanquins to their shoulders.


Uddaka thought he heard the sound of women weeping.


A strange, quiet smile came to his battle-worn face—so deeply split with scars that it was hardly a face at all—and he put his hand upon his kora.


“Hold, Brahmins!”


The naked steel of his blade cut an arc through the sunlight, leaving a rainbow trail in the air.


“What’s this?”


Shouts went up from the crowd.


“Uddaka!”


Quickly, the palanquins were returned to the ground. The monks slid from their seats to stand upon the cobblestones.


“What is it, Old Uddaka?” the prince asked in a quiet voice that made the blood boil in the guard captain’s ears.


“My prince. I know you may not have the ears to hear my words now—”


“Wait.”


“No. You must hear me out, my prince. I do not understand the teachings of the Brahmins, and I do not understand how to save the people, but I understand all too well the plight that Śākya finds herself in this day.”


“Old Uddaka, please.”


“Listen. Saving the people from the hardship and pain of this world is the duty of the king, and you are the one who will become king of Śākya in time. I understand why you want to sort out your personal troubles, but what about the troubles of your own poor? It is all well and good for you to seek the path of enlightenment, but what of the many who seek safety in your strength? Your people suffer!” Uddaka said.


Siddhārtha shook his head. “That is where you and the other ministers must help them. My father the king has asked you to be his hands and feet, has he not?” The prince’s eyes were like perfectly still pools of water, while Uddaka’s eyes burned like flames. The old captain understood the workings of the prince’s heart as though its design were inscribed upon his own. Yet now was not the time for sympathy or compassion.


“My prince, if you will not remain of your own free will, then you leave me with no choice but to end this journey with steel.”


Uddaka realized then for the first time that he would, in fact, be able to cut down his own prince if it came to it. He lifted his sword, its crescent blade as slender as the branch of a willow tree. The prince smiled sadly—the smile of someone who suffers that particular kind of agonizing loneliness one feels upon losing the friend who knew them best.


Uddaka placed the point of his blade on the prince’s chest.


“Now, my prince, will you leave with these Brahmins? Will you abandon us?”


Siddhārtha laughed like a summer breeze. “Old Uddaka. If cutting me down will solve your problems, then please, end this life now. I care not.”


Uddaka felt the color of his face fade like a wilted leaf. “My prince. I have been appointed chief of the honor guard that serves you and your father. Though it is perhaps not my place to say this, I am the most loyal of your subjects. Do you say these words to me thinking that there is no way I could possibly bring harm to you?”


A sudden hardness came over the prince’s face, and a strong light shone in his eyes. “Old Uddaka,” he said, “it seems to me that life and death are as one within that kora you wield. Should you swing it down upon my body, you may end my life, but you will never cut my heart. My heart is here in this stone-tiled courtyard, and in those red flowers blossoming over there—it is everywhere within Kapilavastu, it fills this land. Tell me, Old Uddaka, how will you cut that?”


The old captain was at a loss for words, now that he was faced with the very situation he had feared might come. In silence, he steadied his grip on his sword. “My prince.” Uddaka lifted his blade.


“Wait!” called a voice from where the four Brahmin monks stood, as silent as wooden statues until now. Uddaka could not tell whether one of them had spoken, or all had spoken in unison. The sun blazed on his upraised blade, paused at its zenith, and Uddaka felt as if he himself might fade in its light.


“Great warrior,” the monk farthest to the right spoke. “Your prince does not abandon Śākya.”


“Explain what you mean.”


“Great warrior—”


Udakka took two strides toward him. “I am Uddaka, captain of the honor guard to King Śuddhodana.”


The Brahmin monk faced him directly and pressed his hands together, elbows out to the sides. “I am Maudgalyayana, Brahmin of Dowa Mintaka Temple.”


The next monk spoke. “And I am Subhuti, of the same.”


“Mahākāśyapa.”


“Pūrna.”


The four Brahmin monks looked startlingly alike. All had large angular heads, thrusting jaws, short necks, broad chests, wide noses, and deep-set eyes rich with shadows. Uddaka had always thought they looked rather countrified and dull, and he thought no better of them now.


“The prince goes to meet Brahmā.”


“What did you say?”


“Surely you know of the God of the Brahmin?”


“I know that Brahmā is Heaven.”


Subhuti stepped forward. “Warrior. Brahmā is the highest reality. Brahmā is the procession of the sun, moon, stars, and constellations; the birth, growth, destruction, and death of all things. Brahmā is the existence of all and the negation of all. Brahmā is the divine basis of everything in the universe.”


“So the prince is going to meet this Brahmā? Is he even a person? I have a hard time understanding how something could be both all of existence and a man of flesh and blood.”


“Warrior.” Pūrna made the abhaya mudrā, the gesture of no fear, with his hands and bowed to Uddaka. “Brahmā holds this vast universe in his hands and meditates upon it. That all things change form is Heaven’s will, the will of Brahmā.” A bead of sweat left a shining trail down the side of Pūrna’s wide, flat nose.


Uddaka shook his head in silence, then finally spoke again. “Monks. Let me ask you this. In Śākya last year and the year before the crops withered so badly we collected hardly anything in taxes. In Kapilavastu, the mending of the waterways has failed. The farmers abandon their fields, the merchants have left the markets, and entire families line up every morning to receive alms porridge. And a terrible illness has been affecting the poorer folk, leaving many severely crippled. Monks, if this truly is the will of Brahmā, then Heaven is not here for the sake of man, and it never was!”


Uddaka glared at Maudgalyayana with the eyes of a wounded hawk. His gaze went to Pūrna, and Subhuti, and Mahākāśyapa, finally coming to rest on Prince Siddhārtha.


The prince bowed deeply to the four Brahmin monks, then stood before Uddaka.


The sun beating down upon the courtyard felt hot enough to sear the flesh of the six men standing there. Sky and earth were filled with the resounding sound of the cicadas, and yet in the space before the palace a quieter sound held sway, a low twilight hum. The crowd surrounding the courtyard waited like a shadow.


“Old Uddaka.”


“My prince.”


Such tension ran across the three paces of air between the two men that they might have been joined by ribbons of steel.


“The will of Heaven does not serve man. All laws flow and change by the workings of mutual dependence, relationships, and karma. Man is the same. The changing of relationships determines the form of existence. Reality is not a fixed entity within the cycle of life and death, reality is change. Existence is impermanent, form is empty, emptiness is form.”


“My prince, tell me. Is the suffering of your people the will of Heaven?”


A look of deep pain came over Siddhārtha’s thickly bearded face. “I believe this is but another face of the world. Heaven includes all things. That is why it is called Brahmā. However, Old Uddaka, I cannot say this with utmost heartfelt conviction, for there are many questions to which I have not yet found answers.


“Hear me, Old Uddaka. The continuation and sustenance of an individual’s life is a temporary manifestation, subject to the strict laws of constant change. There can be no rigid, unchanging self. We find that if all men cling to the self and do not allow themselves and others to change, it leads to the great misfortunes of unhappiness and interminable social evils. Yet if we accept this basic truth that all is in motion, what of Heaven? Must we deny the existence of Heaven? The existence of the gods? The existence of the self? And what of love? These are the matters I wish to contemplate. No, I must contemplate.”


He spoke softly, yet long years of anguish showed in his voice.


“If that is so, my prince,” said Uddaka, “if there is no unchanging self in this cosmos and the body must perish . . . then I will be the agent of that change!”


Uddaka’s kora swept from the brilliant sun down onto the prince’s head.


For a moment, the stone-tiled courtyard, shimmering in the heat, flattened like a painting. Nothing moved across the sun-baked stones save the hot wind that blew oily thick through the railings on the serpentine stone stair, stifling the onlookers.


Old Uddaka was frozen, every muscle rigid, as if he had turned to hard clay; the naked blade in his hand was stopped a hair’s breadth from the prince’s forehead. Only his keen eyes looked as though they might erupt with flame.


“We should be going, Prince Siddhārtha,” Maudgalyayana said with a wave of his hand. One by one, Mahākāśyapa, Pūrna, and Subhuti turned and walked toward their palanquins.


Yet still the prince could not depart, for a beautiful woman was now clinging to his leg. Her abundant black hair tumbled in disarray, and from between its flowing strands, two eyes like deep lakes stared up into his face. This was the prince’s wife—the Princess Yaśodharā. The golden beaded necklace that hung upon her breast sparkled by the prince’s feet.


“My prince! Why must you leave us? Why must you leave me?”


It was often said that the Princess Yaśodharā most resembled Siddhārtha’s birthmother, the king’s first wife, Māyā. Māyā had been a princess of Koliya, Śākya’s neighbor to the east, and a famed beauty. During her pregnancy, following the custom of the day, she had left Śākya to return to her home village for the birth. Yet the prince had come early, in a place called Lumbinī halfway between the two kingdoms, and seven days later, the mother had died.


A carven stone monument marking the spot—one that stands to this day—was erected in later years by King Aśoka. Bereft of his birth mother, the prince had been raised by the king’s second wife, the princess Maha Pajapati, who was Māyā’s sister. Though both father and mother showered the prince with their affection and spared nothing in his education, he had not grown up to become the cakravarti-rājan—the universal sage-monarch to unify and rule the world—his father had wished he would become. Had the prince wanted such a role for himself, he might very well have succeeded in becoming that great ruler. Yet his grief over the loss of his mother Māyā and his understanding of the unhappiness and destruction fated for all men had led him ever further from the expectations and the passions of those around him and toward a life of solitary thought.


Even though there were times that the prince looked upon Yaśodharā and saw in her face the image of the late Māyā and felt himself saved not once but twice, the love of the princess was not enough to keep the prince from leaving.






Siddhārtha was twenty-nine years old. He already had a child with the princess, a boy named Rahula. As it was the primary obligation of the head of the household in ancient India to ensure that the bloodline was continued, one could say that the prince had already fulfilled the most essential part of that duty. In truth, there was nothing in his heart that held him back from leaving the palace. He had been waiting for this day for a very long time.


“Be well, my princess. And take good care of Rahula. And my father, as well—he is nearing the age when his legs and back will pain him. He will need your help.”


Siddhārtha leaned over and gently pried Yaśodharā’s fingers from his foot. The princess’s hand was as soft as an infant’s to the touch. Then he lifted her up and hugged her close. She wore a thin, silken gown and her breasts were warm against his chest.


“I will always be beside you.” He gazed down at the clinging princess and, suffering a pang of worry, he caught his breath and looked up to the sky.


Subhuti called out to the prince, asking him to make haste, and joined Pūrna in making a vajra mudrā, the mudrā of thunder, with his hands.


Then the sharp voice of a woman rang out behind them, and to Siddhārtha, it felt like a blow to his back. “My prince! Wait!”


The prince stopped and turned around to see the wet nurse Vamsa running toward him, her footfalls upon the stones breaking the hush in the courtyard. She was dressed in finery but her hair was disheveled, and the jeweled crown she wore as a sign of her nobility was hanging from one ear. She carried an infant in her arms, and she laid it at the prince’s feet.


“Why, this is Rahula!” Siddhārtha exclaimed.


“My prince, you must tell me why you would abandon your only child in this way!”


Siddhārtha sighed. “The time for such explanations has passed, wet nurse. I entrust his care to you.”


Vamsa bit her lip. Below them on the stones, the young Rahula was now sitting up, crying.


“My prince! If you will insist on leaving us, then tread upon your own son as you leave.”


Vamsa stared directly into Siddhārtha’s eyes. A stillness sharp as glass filled the courtyard. Uddaka still stood, his kora frozen in the air just above where the prince’s head had been, while Maudgalyayana and the other Brahmins did not move so much as an eyebrow as they watched beneath the blazing sun. The only noise came from the surging sea of cicadas.


Without a word the prince strode forward. In his heart he felt only the vastness of the void. When his foot touched Rahula, the child screamed as though burned.






The five palanquins passed through the ornate gates of the palace like a shadow before the throngs of onlookers.


The prince, gazing out through the wisteria hangings, saw a flower growing off to the side of the road, its large yellow bloom swaying wildly despite the lack of a breeze.


“To Tuṣita,” he heard Maudgalyayana say from one of the palanquins ahead of him. The bearers quickened their pace and turned at the next corner.






“To Tuṣita.”


The voice reached Siddhārtha deep in his clouded consciousness.


At this very moment, he was on his way to meet the world’s ultimate being, and the thought made him shake like a child with anticipation.


Could this be the fear that comes before attaining enlightenment?


Gingerly, the prince put his hands together.


Snow was falling all around.


It fell endlessly whirling, soundlessly filling the land around them with pure white. With every breath of wind, he caught a glimpse of vast plains, visible only as a dim, bluish shadow beyond the thick white curtain of snow. The sun was out somewhere between the snow and the ice that seemed to cover both heaven and earth—he could see its brilliant light reflected in one part of the storm.


“The Eight Cold Hells!” Siddhārtha muttered, and he moved to draw his robes more tightly together at the neck. This was when he noticed that he seemed to have no arms. And not only did his arms appear to have vanished, but he also lacked a chest to cover with robes, a waist to tie with a sash, and legs below . . . in fact, his entire body seemed to be missing.


Perhaps I am meant to face the world without form?


Lose the self, and you destroy suffering. All that is left is the barren snow and ice. Strangely, he felt no pain. Though there was thought, there was no sensation—even though he had always assumed there could be no consciousness without the five senses.


“What I don’t understand is, how can I see all of these inanimate things around me without having returned to my body?”


Next to him, Maudgalyayana nodded. “We are in the Trayastriṃsa, my prince. Already we are 320,000 yojana distant from Jambudvīpa, the island of man.” Maudgalyayana said the numbers as though he were reading them aloud.


“Jambudvīpa, as I understand it, floats in the seas to the east of Mt. Sumeru,” said Siddhārtha, his voice echoing too loudly. “This is the world where men live. I did not expect the heights above that, the Heaven upon Heaven—this Trayastriṃśa—to be such a desolate place.”


“My prince, we are currently on the second level of the Six Heavens of the Realm of Desire, those being Cāturmahārājika of the Four Heavenly Kings, Trayastriṃśa through which we currently pass, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāñarati, and Paranirmita-vasavartin. Here we find our paradise. Alas, in no more than eighty thousand years, it will perish.”


“But why is this, Maudgalyayana? Where in this second of the Six Heavens, this celestial world beyond the realm of man, do you find this shadow of destruction?”


The four Brahmin monks were standing in a circle now with Prince Siddhārtha at its center in the ice and snow. The wildly sweeping flakes passed both within and without their bodies.


“We believe the origin of the problem lies in a warping of the space between imaginary coordinates two and three in the Delta quadrant, just above the Cāturmahārājika.”






Two suns burned in a copper sky overhead. One was large and somewhat oblong and gave off a dull orange light. The other was small and possessed a brilliant white incandescence at its core, ringed farther out by a silver corona. Large eruptions of reddish gas flowed from the surface of the orange sun, swirling through the void at a frightening pace, extending toward the smaller, bluish white sun. The flowing gases painted land and sky in startling colors, and whenever the gases wrapped entirely around the smaller sun, the void between them filled with an incandescent brilliance. The light cut the long flatness of space in half, sweeping aside all other illumination and shadow. Then the crimson gas flow would spiral inward and vanish in the blink of an eye, leaving the two suns to shine in the copper sky once more.


A silence, like death, came next, followed a short while later by another plume of gas that rose from the waves of flame rimming the dusky orange sun, then extended into space. So the two suns traveled through the black sky, alternately emitting flaming gases and brilliant flashes of light, a symphony of brilliance that washed away all the other stars in the sky. When the two finally passed out of sight, another pair came racing up from the opposite horizon, one of them a giant fireball, ringed with silver, with a long tail of burning gas that stretched far off into the void.


Two pair of suns made four suns in total that burned in the vast solar region of Trayastriṃśa.


The blizzard had disappeared, as though a blanket had been removed from the world. Now everywhere Siddhārtha looked was a barren icy plain. Not even the four suns burning in the void seemed to have any warming effect on the frozen ground. Nothing moved in that bluish expanse, nor was there any sign of life; everything was frozen hard as steel. Even a portion of the atmosphere had crystallized into a translucent remnant scattered across the surface.


The temperature was minus 272.8 degrees Celsius. If any civilization had once existed here, there was no trace of it now.






“Even with all the energy to be had, there is hardly any heat movement on this world. The level of heat entropy is extremely low. My prince, it is only a matter of time before Trayastriṃśa is lost.”


“Why can you not warm it? Or prevent the loss of what warmth it has? I am sure it would require an enormous amount of energy, but surely that is preferable to losing a world entirely,” Prince Siddhārtha said, struggling to understand.


“It is an insulation phenomenon,” Mahākāśyapa explained, a pained expression on his face. “With the expansion of Trayastriṃśa’s space, we are witnessing a rapid dispersal of its heat energy.”


“But why?”


“My prince, this region has been cut off from the rest of space by a fluctuation in its gravitational field. Through our efforts, we have been able to free a small portion of it, but it is not enough.”


“What did you mean by . . . Trayastriṃśa’s space expanding?”


“Even as Trayastriṃśa is sequestered by the local gravitational field, it grows larger.”


“But why here? Why only Trayastriṃśa?”


“Sadly, it is not only Trayastriṃśa’s space that is affected. All of the Six Heavens of the Realm of Desire are showing similar, fatal changes. We cannot afford to be optimistic about this. It may come to pass that we are forced to stage a mass exodus from this space altogether.” Maudgalyayana’s words were heavy with the weight of his sorrow.


“We had hoped for a solution in the past, but nothing has improved in the slightest,” Mahākāśyapa added.


The five now rode in a large translucent sphere that contained them and them alone. Beyond its confines, uncountable twinkling stars formed a sea of light all around them. Siddhārtha saw the monks only as vague shadows against that starry backdrop.


Gazing out into the vast expanse of star-studded darkness, he could see a giant torrent of light filling a third of all that was visible. It cut across the darkness, and the colors spilled from it like a waterfall: navy blue, deep green, indigo, and all the way across the spectrum to a brownish red. Bands of color split the darkness in half, seemingly in mid-explosion—yet no matter how long Siddhārtha watched, the light stayed perfectly still, neither blinking nor ebbing. That great field of light seemed stuck against the dark sky, frozen still as death. Which, he realized, was exactly what it was.


“My prince, there are over a hundred billion spiral galaxies here in Yāma, yet the warping of space has begun dispersing them, or collapsing them, or eliminating them entirely. Look—” he pointed—“that spiral galaxy has been gravitationally sequestered. See how its nucleus contracts and releases its energy. We call this a quasar, but it is only a name. We do not understand what is actually happening.”


Pūrna pointed with a finger toward the unmoving light. “That spiral galaxy is roughly 3,800,000 light-years distant from us. It was once comprised of one hundred billion stable stars—but I fear that most have already been lost. Here in Yāma, we have already lost ten billion such galaxies.”


Prince Siddhārtha stood in silence, looking out on that glorious light of death.


“Maudgalyayana, we should transport the prince to Tuṣita as quickly as possible,” Pūrna said quietly.


“Yes. I’m sure that Brahmā awaits his arrival.” Maudgalyayana turned to Mahākāśyapa beside him. “Make for Tuṣita with all haste. We’ll be traveling from coordinates 713.081 to 429.993 . . . through imaginary space, but I don’t think that can be avoided.”


“Is there a particular danger in keeping to normal space?” Mahākāśyapa inquired.


“Yes. I’ve received word that slight warping has been detected in the vicinity of coordinates 799.341. If this should happen to be a typical relativity-theory gravitational field I see no problem, but if it is an engineered field, going there would be tantamount to plunging headfirst into the abyss.”


Mahākāśyapa raised an eyebrow. “Does their reach already extend so far?”


“One can never be sure with that phantasmagoric lot,” Maudgalyayana spat in a tone most unbecoming an enlightened holy man.


The bubble that held them passed through the blackness of space like a shooting star.


Maudgalyayana and the three other monks stood still, hardly seeming even to breathe. Alone, Prince Siddhārtha turned to watch the brilliant veil of light recede behind them into the distance.


Three million eight hundred thousand light-years.


Whatever he was seeing there at this moment was probably already long gone at its point of origin. The brightness that reached him now was nothing but an avatar—the temporary likeness of what was in reality, nothing. Powerful radiation would soon reach the nearer regions of space, bringing true death to the darkness around them.






An edge of crimson crept along the border of the indigo sky. The blending of colors cast a deeply unsettling glow upon the vast sea of sand that spread in all directions. The landscape was so flat that the rising and falling of the dunes was almost imperceptible—and yet, incongruously long shadows stretched out, as though drawn by an unseen hand into long tracks across the plain.


Here and there, brown objects thrust from the dune sea like fallen branches. Their surfaces had been polished to a shiny luster by the moving sand, yet it was impossible to tell of what substance they were made. Siddhārtha judged that they had been lying here buried for a good hundred thousand years.


“My prince, here is where Tovatsue, capital of Tuṣita, once stood. Now it is nothing but desert. The only signs that anything was here at all are the remnants of the buildings that emerge like fossils from the sand.”


Maudgalyayana and the other monks pressed their hands together in silence. Siddhārtha followed suit.


The translucent sphere in which they traveled floated over the dunes at a height of several centimeters. Suddenly, a blindingly brilliant light cut across the indigo sky above. It was made by a giant object, and for a while fragmented streaks of incandescent ions glowed in the wake of its passage. Some amount of time later, a blast wave of immense heat swept across the desert.


The faint crimson light at the edge of the indigo sky grew brighter and dimmer, a fluctuation that inspired an irrational fear in Siddhārtha.


“The proximity warning system has indicated our arrival path,” Pūrna declared, looking back over his shoulder.


Without a sound, the vast sea of sand split in half, revealing a giant city in the depths below.


Siddhārtha struggled to move his legs, but found the effort baffling. A feeling of resistance troubled every motion, as though his entire body were submerged in water. Each time he tried to step forward, his foot would shift in a different direction of its own accord.


Tu ṣ ita’s capital, Tovatsue, was enormous, full of complicated devices and structures with functions that staggered the prince’s imagination. He grasped that the vast city was in fact a single edifice, its countless parts interconnecting in an immense cylindrical shape. The walls and ceilings of the giant corridors that served as the primary streets glowed with a beautiful aquamarine light, giving a sheen of vitality to the faces and bodies of the five travelers. An incredible number of side streets connected at right angles to the corridors; down these, Siddhārtha could see the edges of living quarters and manufacturing districts. There was a faint floral scent to the air, which was pleasantly dry and a comfortable temperature against his skin.


Siddhārtha blushed when he reflected back on the gloomy, unhealthy design of Kapilavastu, and its sad lack of facilities—the city’s water supply and sewage system were barely sufficient at best. The situation cast shame on both his kingdom’s way of life and its leadership.


And yet, the prince thought, perhaps I am wrong even to compare the two. Is not this Tuṣita, the Pure Land? Am I not the first man to visit this place while still alive? It profanes the sanctity of the divine to compare this hallowed land above Heaven with the refuse-strewn streets of man below!


Prince Siddhārtha hung his head low.


They moved through several levels of the city. Along the corridor, he saw large vertical cylinders at intervals on either side, fashioned from some transparent material that transported crowds of people upward and downward. Of course, the prince realized that the figures he saw were devas, not people. And yet some among the devas wore clothes of silver, with hard-looking helmets, and carried what seemed to be strangely fashioned weapons in their hands.


After a time the five travelers boarded one of the transparent cylinders, and it carried them down into the ground at an alarming speed. The prince’s eyesight dimmed and he found himself suddenly confused as the blood drained from his head.


“Is something wrong?”


“Just . . . a spell of dizziness.”


“Ah, I apologize. Pūrna, a bit slower, if you would.”


The voices of the monks sounded unnervingly distant.


Then a howling wind sounded in the prince’s ears—a wind that bore a great deal of sand. The flying grains blasted his cheek.


Why would there be sand flying through the air down here? the prince asked his wavering heart.


“Prince Siddhārtha, you are in the presence of Brahmā,” Maudgalyayana whispered by the prince’s ear.


Siddhārtha stood upon the sand, supported on either side by Pūrna and Subhuti.


It was hard to say from the ink blue sky—there was a sky here, the prince suddenly realized—whether it was night or day, but when he stared upward, he saw an incredible number of stars hanging there.


“Is it nighttime?” the prince asked, looking up into the thin light.


“Prince Siddhārtha of Śākya?”


The ancient, quiet voice seemed to seep into his heart.


Lord Brahmā!


The prince fell to his knees upon the sand.


“You have journeyed a long way to come here.”


“You must tell me the way to enlightenment. That is my only request!”


In the deep indigo sky, several hundred billion stars suddenly glared more brightly.


“Brahmā is deeply impressed by your dedication to the path of salvation, Siddhārtha.” Brahmā’s voice was deep and grand, and it filled the prince’s chest with its energy as it erupted from the very axis of the world—and yet it contained within it a subtle hint of sorrow. “These Heavens, however, now stand in terrible peril. We are pooling all our strength in an attempt to save them, yet the solution is still far from our grasp. It is difficult even to predict what will be required of us. Thus, though I welcome your visit, I cannot guarantee you will be satisfied with what we have to offer you at this moment.”


The prince peered upward, trying to see Brahmā’s glory; yet though he felt that the god must be near, he saw nothing but the deep spreading indigo of the sky.


Siddhārtha’s head fell as though he had been struck by lightning.


Of course—Brahmā has no form. Brahmā is the universal principle, the will of Heaven! Siddhārtha found that he, too, had lost his physical form, becoming part of the vast indigo void.


“Listen, my prince. Do you know that this place, Tuṣita, is a full sixty thousand yojana above Yāma? By another way of reckoning, that is roughly 160 billion light-years. Up here, we have created clouds of interstellar material by stacking layer upon layer of near-vacuum. And so have we created this great world, an experimental model, here in Tuṣita, which is itself eighty billion light-years across.


“Listen, my prince.


“In the center of the universe, Mt. Sumeru extends above the Golden Ring. Its four sides are bounded by seas of fragrant waters, and beyond that, the Seven Golden Mountains and the Seven Seas. Beyond that is an ocean of the kind you are accustomed to, with salt in its water. The outermost perimeter is the great iron ring of the Cakravāḍa mountains—think of them as the rim of the great saucer that holds these many seas and peaks. The Cakravāḍa are made of iron, copper, and steel, and nothing—neither deva nor demon—may ascend their walls. We might interpret this as the limit of the universe as defined by the speed of light.


“Now, my prince, in the outer ocean float four continents, one in each of the cardinal directions. The continent to the south is Jambudvīpa, where man dwells—your world.


“The summit of Mt. Sumeru is the place called Trayastriṃśa, where Śakra, lord of the devas, maintains his Seeing-Joy Palace. Looking from the palace, down the slopes of the mountain, one can see three terraces below—Sadāmada, Mālādhara, and Karoṭapāni. Gazing farther to the south one sees Jambudvīpa; to the east is Pūrvavideha, to the north is Uttarakuru, and to the west is Aparagodānīya, all great continents, each with seasons of warmth and icy cold. Just below Tuṣita is Cāturmahārājika, where reside the Four Heavenly Kings: Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the east, Virūḍhaka in the south, Virūpākṣa in the west, and Vaiśravaṇa in the north, all serving Śakra and each commanding a retinue of elites—though not the Eight Generals, who fall directly under Śakra’s command. In particular, Virūpākṣa—who is called ‘he who sees all’—is in charge of the advance warning system. It is he who monitors all surrounding space for shifts in the gravitational field.


“The warning system is part of a defense network split between the two heavens upon Mt. Sumeru and coordinated through the four heavens above that, all of which are called together the Six Heavens of the Realm of Desire. Some distance above Tuṣita are the three Heavens of the First Meditation, which include the Mahā Brahmā, ruled by Brahmā himself. Above that are the Three Heavens of the Second Meditation, and above that the Three Heavens of the Third Meditation and the Nine Heavens of the Fourth Meditation, with Akaniṣṭha at the very top. This world is thought to lie beyond the light-speed barrier—and thus its existence has not yet been confirmed, my prince.”


Siddhārtha’s mind strained to comprehend this model of the universe. He felt overwhelmed.


“In Tuṣita there are forty-nine satellite cities surrounding this city of the Pearl Palace. The Pearl Palace is the last line of defense, responsible for protecting all the Heavens. It is our last hope,” said Brahmā.


Finally Siddhārtha found the courage to speak. “Allow me to ask you, Brahmā . . . Why do these vaulted heavens harbor such catastrophe? On my way here, the monks led me through countless places where I saw nothing but waste and destruction. I thought in my journey I would witness the truth behind those dark principles that bring ruin to the world of men—yet what I find here is more of the same: devastation and death. Lord Brahmā, what is the cause of this heavenly catastrophe that affects Tuṣita?”


Brahmā answered in a voice filled with bitter grief.


“My Prince, it is the invasion of these heavens by the asura that has brought us to these desperate straits, where we struggle even to defend Tuṣita.”


“The asura?”


“Yes. Misshapen creatures—beings with three faces and six arms. Whence they come we do not know. But their leader, whom we call “Asura,” is full of cunning and violence. His warriors are many and deadly; even our powerful yakṣa cannot defend against them without great casualties. Asura has warred with Lord Śakra, defender of Tuṣita, for some four hundred million years and shows no sign of ever abandoning the assault. Asura is the very essence of evil in the universe. Be warned, my prince, and be wary.”


Siddhārtha felt Brahmā’s mind focus intently upon him, and with a start he realized that all of their discussion had taken place without a single word being uttered. As he lacked form, so too did he lack words.—No, he thought, it is not a lack or loss. For where one must rely upon words to convey meaning, one can never have a true dialogue.


In gratitude Prince Siddhārtha turned to the vast space above and pressed his hands together, formless though he was.


“My prince, the first thing you must learn is the nature and appearance of the destruction that assails this world. How might we save Tuṣita from its fate? The many sorrows of the human world originate here, you understand. Where will you find the source of this destruction, this unhappiness? That is the question to which you must find an answer.”


A long silence passed. Siddhārtha could not say how long he had sat hunched upon the dry, drifting sands.


“My prince, let us be off,” Maudgalyayana said, and he and Subhuti helped the prince to his feet.


The immense sea of sand had disappeared before the prince’s eyes, replaced by a long corridor of scintillating light. They were just outside the boundaries of the city.


Which is the real Kabahla, Siddhārtha wondered, the barren desert where the wind whips the sand through the air, or the shining city I see now before me? In what world did I meet with Brahmā? He could not say with certainty which it had been. And it didn’t really matter. He would have been equally pleased by a sand-strewn wasteland or a perfectly constructed city of ideal beauty. No matter where he was, he knew that his body was void, already a part of the cosmos. And he would be taking that void-body to confront the very substance of evil.






“Maudgalyayana. I wish to meet Asura. I would encounter this most evil of all evil kings and ask the true meaning of his actions.”


The four Brahmin monks exchanged glances, seeming impressed at Prince Siddhārtha’s willingness to face the ultimate evil and his desire to find the path to enlightenment.


“Very good, my prince,” said Maudgalyayana. “You would do well to meet Asura and ascertain for yourself the true nature of that being. However—”


“Yes?”


“We are students of the Way of the Heavens under Brahmā, and as such, are unable to escort you to such a one as Asura.”


“I understand. You need only tell me the way to Asura’s camp and how to contact him.”


Subhuti nodded thoughtfully. “There is a single subspace communication circuit established between Asura and Śakra. You may use that.”


“Yes,” Mahākāśyapa said, “though it has lain dormant for many tens of millions of years, ever since Śakra and Asura abandoned the way of peace. Now—” the monk’s voice took on a new urgency—” we must relocate to an expansion of refracted subspace at once, before Asura’s attack begins.”


The thin crimson curtain of light near the horizon had begun to flicker intensely.


“What’s that?” the prince asked, casting an unsettled look at the sky.


“The aurora. Asura is beneath that changing light.”


It occurred to the prince that the shifting colors in that arc of brightness revealed minute changes in the heart of the enemy.


“Here,” said Maudgalyayana, “I will instruct you in the operation of the gravity bubble.” Guiding the prince with a hand on his back, the monk directed their progress into the walled city of Tovatsue.


From the moment they entered the giant cylinder it was clear that the city was well defended against all manner of attacks. And yet the place had a smell of tragedy, as though it had already lost something it would never be able to reclaim. It was alone, resigned to await its fate.


How odd to think that Tuṣita was a city of future glory—for as Siddhārtha’s studies had taught him, 5,670,000,000 years from now this place was to be the city of Maitreya, the being who would save humanity by opening the way to a perfect world.


But 5,670,000,000 years was such a long time that it was effectively an eternity for Tuṣita and the distant world of men to wait. And yet waiting—that simple act—was all they could do in the face of Asura’s promised destruction. Unlike the city, holding on for a distant salvation, Asura was acting in the now. Asura had no tomorrow.


“Perhaps,” Siddhārtha muttered, “Asura has nothing to lose.”






Gradually, the silent, barren sea of sand took on the same deep indigo color as the sky. Occasionally, a stiff wind would pass across the dunes, lifting up a dust cloud that raced along as though some invisible creature were galloping across the landscape, kicking up a long trail in its wake.


The gravity bubble carrying the prince moved slowly across the sand toward the burning crimson aurora on the horizon.


Siddhārtha was uncertain whether the passage of time continued or whether it had stopped. Surely, if it continues, it is not proceeding in the normal fashion, he thought, resigned to wait. The nature of time in these heavenly realms seemed bizarrely different from that in the world of men. Much to his own surprise, the prince was stricken by a sudden feeling of longing for his own distant kingdom.


The fragments of once-great buildings dotted the dry desert around him. Mighty edifices lay stricken and crumbled into ruins on the ground. Sections of walls, huge pillars, and leaning towers loomed like phantasms in the indigo light. Some were made of metal, others of beautiful translucent crystal, and still others of some rare and precious wood.


A large dome stood cracked and partly fallen. Through the rifts in its beautifully patterned surface he saw the light of the aurora shining.


Occasionally on the sand he saw what appeared to be parts of living things. Shriveled bits of living tissue, they seemed wracked with raw emotion—choked with sand, panicked at their own rapid loss of moisture. Their voiceless screams stabbed at the prince’s heart. Far beyond the horizon, he saw an incredible number of lighted spheres flying wildly across the sky. The spheres seemed to form a line, moving from right to left as though joined by a single thread. He watched them waver upward and then plunge abruptly below the curve of the land. Where they landed, violent gouts of light and flame burst up and whirled heavenward.


This, Siddhārtha was sure, was nothing other than a horrific battle being waged far, far away. And yet he could sense none of the fear or disturbance that comes with such bloodshed. It was like viewing a strategist’s painting of a war upon a scroll—he saw in it the cold calculation and heartless direction of killers who seek to take the maximum amount of life with a minimum of effort.


“Prince Siddhārtha?”


A young girl stood, her back to the flickering light of the aurora.


“Asura?”


The girl’s skin was the color of barley, and her brown hair, tinged with purple, was bound into a knot atop her head, fixed with a tiny hairpin.


“Yes.”


The prince quickly found his imagination captured by her boyish, muscular frame and clear, piercing black eyes. Siddhārtha leaned forward. “Asura, I would ask you a question.”


The girl frowned, and in her innocent expression, Siddhārtha saw a single-mindedness of purpose and a passion burning hot enough to kill.


“The Brahmins tell me that, driven by former karma, you have invaded Tuṣita and fought with Śakra’s armies for some four hundred million long years.”


“This is true,” the girl said in a voice like a song.


“Asura—”


The girl frowned again slightly. It seemed to be a habit of hers whenever she looked at something intently—and the effect was not unattractive. Quietly, she began to toy with the necklace she wore. It seemed to be made of fragments of bone strung on a silver thread. Their dry clacking sounded like the ringing of tiny bells to the prince’s ears.


“Can you tell me why you have invaded Brahmā’s heavens?” he asked her. “What is it that you desire? And where have you come from? Where is the world in which you dwell?”


The prince sat down on the sand, straightening his back and staring at the girl. A smile played around one corner of her mouth; her lips parted to reveal a startlingly white canine tooth.


“Asura?”


“Siddhārtha!”


Suddenly, the girl’s voice was the voice of all creation. The wind began to blow with fury, and her long hair fluttered like flames. Her anger and sorrow were transformed into a blinding shower of fiery sparks.


“Siddhārtha! Go to see Maitreya! Go to see this Maitreya who is destined to save you 5,670,000,000 years from now!”


Not thinking, the prince threw himself bodily upon the sand. His hands shook with embarrassment as he clasped them together.


Asura vanished in the wind. But her voice seemed to continue on, from somewhere far off toward the distant horizon.


See Maitreya—those words pierced the prince’s chest through to his back and burned the bottom of his heart to a cinder.


“Siddhārtha! I have heard the Brahmin talk of a śramaña called Maitreya in the Pure Land of Tuṣita who will come at the end of this world and save us all. But tell me, my prince—”


Asura was there again before him. She put her hands behind her and gracefully knelt down, her large eyes glimmering with sardonic mirth.


“Tell me, what will be here 5,670,000,000 years from now? What sort of destruction will visit us then? Can you even imagine such a thing?”


Prince Siddhārtha shook his head sadly, remaining silent as a stone.


“Did you ever think, my prince,” Asura continued, “that perhaps it is because Maitreya knows what form this destruction will take that he chooses to wait such a very, very long time? Perhaps he would claim that he is only able to save humanity because he can predict the nature of the destruction so precisely. I wonder then why he does not describe it to us. Should he not describe it? And should he not explain how he intends to save us? If he truly were a savior, shouldn’t we expect him to prevent the destruction from coming in the first place?”


Asura leaned forward, as though to peer directly inside the prince’s heart.


“Well, it seems to me—” Siddhārtha began, seeking some counterargument, but no more words came to him.


“Do you have the answer, my prince?” Asura asked, fixing him with an icy stare.


“It seems to me that he does not save us because the destruction has yet to come.”


She laughed without a sound, one edge of her mouth drawing back into a lopsided smile. “The destruction has yet to come?! My prince, have you not seen the devastation all around you? Examine any of these worlds stacked upon worlds and you will find them filled with ruin and despair so deep they appear beyond recovery. Is this not destruction? The very destruction for which Maitreya waits and waits?”


The prince’s arms shook; his hands clenched into fists on his lap. Swallowing his fear, he looked up at Asura.


“But who brought this ruin here? Who brought the calm of death, the peace of destruction? Was it not you, Asura, and your minions who visited devastation upon this place?”


Asura ignored the prince’s words, letting them pass by her as though she had no ears with which to hear him. “Do not forget, my prince, that I am a part of this world too. My existence is but one aspect of its reality. Listen well, my prince.” Asura’s cheeks were red in the light of the aurora. With each passing moment, another part of the sky was burning.


“The cause of this world’s devastation does not originate within this world. Destruction and growth are merely two aspects of change. Even the death of a man is not a true destruction—it is one step in the cycle of reincarnation. However, the destruction that threatens this world now is the true destruction; it will leave this place unchanging, forever stilled. All the energy of this world will be converted in the end to heat energy, and that will spill out into the universe until perfect equilibrium is reached and heat death arrives.”


Asura averted her eyes, as though she were seeing her prediction play out before her. “Brahmā does not heed my warnings. He would claim that the source of this devastation is my army of minions and the violence they represent. And he is welcome to his theories. And yet . . .”


The eerie light of the aurora sent flames up the side of Asura’s face. The light seemed to pierce her robes, painting the thin muscles at her shoulders the color of the sky. “He must know of the cakravarti-rājan.”


“And what is this cakravarti-rājan of which you speak?”


“The Brahmins can tell you as well as I. He is the King of Kings, the master of karma. He stands without this world, and has viewed its life and growth for more than one trillion years.”


“Have you ever met the cakravarti-rājan?”


Asura glanced at the prince, a surprised look on her face. Then she slowly shook her head. “My prince. No one has seen the cakravarti-rājan. Nor do we know where he might be. Yet all who know his name know that, not long from now, the cakravarti-rājan will appear in this world. And when he does he will rule over all as the one great God, the Creator, he who transcends karma.”


“But is it not Maitreya who is destined to save humanity in the time of the last dharma?”


The dim flames lighting the distant horizon seemed to spread nearer now, scorching the sky, surging forward like a giant wave. Bands of deeper crimson appeared; then blue rings of light rose again into the sky. The brilliant colors were reflected in Asura’s clear eyes.


“My prince, no one knows what Maitreya is in truth. They say that he waits in the Tuṣita Pure Land for the age of the last dharma, yet it is unclear whether he awaits the end of days itself or the salvation of humanity. Which is it? Is Maitreya truly worthy of the hopeful worship that is showered upon him? That is the question that none will answer—that must be answered. That is why I raised an army and moved against Brahmā. It is because I believed the fate of our world had been left to hang solely on the existence of Maitreya.”


“I had heard it was because of past karma, but I see you had other aims. Why did Brahmā not listen to your words?”


“I do not know, though I suspect—”


“Thought control?”


“Precisely. It seems we agree on one thing at least.” Asura crossed her arms and grinned, her white teeth stark against her dark skin.


“I would like to see for myself what Maitreya is,” Siddhārtha muttered, his eyes watching the kaleidoscopic sky.


“You would do well to do so, my prince. Even the Brahmin monks have not met Maitreya. Yes . . . find him, and see the truth for yourself.”


Siddhārtha stood unsteadily. He detected the faint smell of oil and decay on the icy cold wind that blew across the plain. Turning his back on Asura, he strode away in silence. He hadn’t the faintest idea in which direction Tovatsue lay, yet he knew with conviction that so long as he moved forward, his feet would unerringly lead him there.


The icy wind blew at his back, a reminder of the distant montage of battle. Something far away was burning. The curtain of flame in the sky was spreading wider in pulses, its brightness increasing and then retreating, sending new jets of flame in all directions.


“My prince,” said Asura, who seemed to be walking alongside him, though he had not seen her approach, “Maitreya is in the center of Tuṣita, in the Pearl Palace. I will lead you there.”


“Lead me? Can you even enter Tovatsue?”


“Though the Brahmin may not enter my camp, I can enter all Six Heavens of the Realm of Desire, and all the other heavens besides. They will not see me. And even if they could, they cannot harm me. This is why even Śakra with his Four Heavenly Kings and Eight Generals has been fighting me for four hundred million years and has not won a single victory.”


“Why can they not see you? They are no primitives to be so easily deceived.”


“They cannot see me because they do not try. It’s a form of self-hypnosis—an information processing error. Recognition is merely the result of information processing, you know.”


Asura extended her right hand toward the prince’s face. A fearsome light blazed in her eyes.


“For example—”






The walls of the honeycomb-shaped compartment were slightly warped, as though they had been crushed from above. A forced-air device attached to some kind of humidity controller was malfunctioning, and it gave off a rattling, threatening sound. The muggy air blowing in through the duct carried sand inside, creating a brownish yellow pattern on the walls of the corridor. Metal containers had been stacked along all the walls—most of them were corroded, their doors hanging open, the equipment inside covered with thick red rust. Dozens of pipes and electrical lines ran along the high ceiling, and all were coated in a thick layer of dust.


“There is an express lift up ahead. The one with the lit orange sign goes to the control area.”


They moved into the corridor. Its floor was layered with a thin carpet of grayish sand, or perhaps dust, and it sucked at Siddhārtha’s feet as he walked. Several lifts were visible, but only two appeared to be operational. The shutter door covering one of them had buckled and ripped like old paper, parts of it falling away to reveal the cavernous depths beyond. Siddhārtha heard the echoing sound of a compressor working somewhere off in the distance.


“Why is no one here?” he asked, peering up and down the long corridor.


“Once, this place and every level above it was filled with citizens. It was a lively city. Clothing, food, shelter—everything was meticulously managed and planned. People here lived to be five hundred years of age on average, and they lived rich lives.”


“What happened?”


“I do not know. When we first came to this land, Tovatsue, at least, showed no signs of decay. This was truly the kingdom of the gods that the Brahmin said it was—and many were the men who saw the city in her glory.”


“Men? Humans?”


Like a shadow, Asura glided down the corridor. Perhaps she was weightless, for where she stepped she left no marks in the dust.


“In those days, there was a close connection between this place and the world of men. Some of those who came here built the city-states of Sumer and Mohenjo-Daro. The aqueducts and sewers, the paved roads, the centrally controlled lighting, the moving stairs . . . all were built with knowledge obtained here.”


“I did not know that any men had traveled to places such as this.”


“Have you ever heard of the towers in Egypt they call the pyramids?”


“The stupas?”


“You could call them that.”


“I heard stories of them from merchants who came from the west. They said they were as large as the hills and mountains.”


“The technology used to construct the pyramids was obtained here,” Asura said. “They were built using a variety of gravity field generation.”


The prince continued on down the corridor, his mind empty, his gaze drifting aimlessly ahead. He could not begin to imagine how Tuṣita was connected to the world of men, but he could understand how, if men came here, it would have a profound influence on their world.


“Get in.”


Asura had paused before a lift. Siddhārtha turned and stepped inside the square metal box that served to carry its passengers.


There was a slight vibration and the lift began to move, yet though he knew they were in motion, the prince had no idea whether they were going up or down.


A sudden fear struck his chest, becoming a physical constriction in his throat.


Perhaps I will be stuck in this tiny space for an eternity?


“Asura!” he cried, half choking. His own voice in his ears sounded deadened, like a voice at the bottom of the ocean. “Asura!”


“Yes, my prince?”


Siddhārtha heard a soft, familiar voice behind him.


“You are here!”


Asura stood, back to the metal wall, legs slightly crossed. Her large eyes glimmered mischievously.


“Might we say that man prefers the company of evil to the ache of loneliness?”


The prince hung his head. Sweat mingled with the chagrined tears that ran down his cheeks.


Asura laughed gently. “No worries, my prince. I do not judge you. That is just what Maudgalyayana and that lot would say; pay it no mind.”


The lift continued its downward progress. As the two descended through the many levels of Tovatsue, the signs of devastation grew steadily worse. Abandoned compartments stood like dark caves behind countless rusting doors. Though parts of some walls still emitted a greenish luminescence, many sections had gone dark entirely. Others were split by enormous cracks, their tiles askew, fallen to the floor or smashed to dust. Sections of the corridor walls were severely warped and discolored to a sickly yellow hue by what appeared to be fire damage; in some places the damaged walls bulged out into the middle of the passageways, nearly cutting off all travel. Clearly some form of intense heat had hit the corridors from the outside. Perhaps Asura’s attacks penetrated this far.


Only one section of the ruined city still bustled with activity—a corridor that ran alongside the power lines that stretched up from the nuclear reactor at the bottom of the city, crossing the metropolis at its center. The prince could see a well-illuminated area where it seemed workers had once been housed. He could also hear sounds from within the undamaged corridor—people talking, some kind of work going on. Whoever they were, they seemed strangely separated from the rest of the city down here, like miners stranded deep in a mine.


Siddhārtha wondered if they even knew what was going on outside their walls. And he wondered if human misery was an eternal constant. Were men fated to live their lives knowing nothing, understanding nothing?


“Just how large are your armies, Asura?”


Asura lifted an eyebrow at Siddhārtha. “Some say they number sixty million, some say six hundred billion. Whenever one falls it will rise again as two. When two fall, they rise again as four—and we have been fighting Śakra’s troops for a very long time, so I’ve completely lost track of their numbers. Śakra’s troops are well trained, well equipped, and eager to provide me with reinforcements in this manner.”


The prince thought gloomily about the soldiers’ future, wondering how many of them knew their own origin or the meaning or purpose for which they fought, or how long the war would last.


“We are here,” Asura announced a moment later. She stopped the lift and pointed toward a large set of doors. There were cracks in the luminescent material that covered the doors, and a pale, silvery metal was visible beneath.


“Here?”


“This leads to the level where Maitreya may be found.”


Gingerly, the prince put his hand upon the doors and pushed. They opened inward without a sound. A waterfall of pale blue light spilled down from the high ceiling above. Siddhārtha’s shadow stretched across the room. He looked down at the floor and his eyes widened. “Asura! You have no shadow.”


“Shadow?”


“Look upon the floor! Only my shadow can be seen.”


“My prince, this is because I’m not actually here. I remain upon the battlefield where we first met. From where I stand, I can see the sky above Tovatsue and the blue-ringed explosions of the lithium bombs. The sky-shell over Tovatsue is such that even with the incredible heat generated by the bombs and the radiation, we’re having trouble breaking through. It’ll take another several thousand, perhaps a million, years before we see real progress. If this is what those monks meant by ‘former karma,’ they may have been more accurate than I thought.” Asura’s voice came drifting into the prince’s mind like a gentle breeze over a great distance.


He glared at her. “Asura!”


“We’d best continue on, my prince,” she said, pointing down the corridor with her chin. “Go see what Maitreya is, and then return to your world at once. You must not forget what you find here—what the faith of your world rests upon.”


Then the prince walked for what seemed to be an impossibly long time—hours, days. He grew greatly fatigued.


At last he heard Asura’s voice again. “There, through those doors. Maitreya is there.”


The corridor ended at a giant pair of doors. They were flat, made of silvery metal without ornamentation, and were several dozen meters in height and width. They closed off the entire end of the enormous corridor.


“How can I possibly open such large doors?” The prince craned his neck to look up at them.


“Do not stop, my prince. Keep walking,” Asura said from behind him. His legs carried him forward of their own volition. A numbness crept over his mind, dulling all thought and emotion except the nightmarish fear that began to rise within him.


“Straight ahead! Go!”


The doors were directly in front of him now, filling his sight. He walked steadily, propelled by a mysterious strength, striding directly into the flat metal surface.


For a moment he lost all sensation. For the first time, the prince felt that his own death was near.






Is this . . . an ocean?


All around the prince clear, blue light stretched as far as he could see. The light seemed to flow into his body like air into his lungs, swirling inside him.


He heard not a sound. The prince’s heart beat faster than he thought possible, and the fear made his breath as ragged and wild as a storm, yet he could not hear the hammering of his heart nor feel the rasping of his breath. He felt nothing.


Everything was wrapped in an eternal silence, as though he’d stepped into the land of the dead.


He moved out into the thin light. It shone through him from the right and left, the front and back, until he became transparent, shadowless.


What is that?


Far off, deep within the pale blue light, he saw a giant shadow.


“Maitreya . . .”


Now he could see the form of a single śramaña far off in the pale sea of light: the future savior, deep in eternal contemplation.


The prince ran without blinking, eyes fixed on that dark shape looming in the void.


So this is Maitreya! At last!


Abruptly Siddhārtha stopped, standing as though turned to stone. Errant thoughts boiled upward in his mind, somehow bursting with a roar in this soundless place.


Maitreya—


The being called Maitreya was seated right there in front of him. His right leg was tucked in above his left knee; he had put his right elbow on it and had leaned forward to rest his cheek upon his upturned hand. His eyes, half lidded, stared out at something beyond space and time. Insurmountable pain played across his brow. He wore a crown shaped like an upturned boat, its top so tall it seemed it could touch the glowing blue of the ceiling.


“Maitreya!”


The prince’s voice wavered wildly through the blue expanse. All that he knew of the being before him came flooding into his consciousness.


Maitreya. A Brahmin from the Deccan Plateau in southern India. Through his devotion, he had been reborn in Tuṣita, where he would remain in the Inner Court until the age of the last dharma, 5,670,000,000 years from now, when he would once again be sent to the world of Jambudvīpa, there to be born to a father, Subrahmana, and mother, Brahmavati, and attain Buddhahood in an orchard beneath a Dragon Flower Tree.


The world Maitreya would descend upon would be very different from the world of today. There would be no mountains or valleys, only a flat plain like a mirror. All land would be fertile, and there would be no want of food, nor any need for storage of grains. All men would enjoy a perfect balance of labor and rest. The cities would be lively; there would be no change in the seasons, no harsh summers nor any cold winters. As long life would be assured, all men’s thoughts would grow similar—there would be one language and no borders to restrain people from going wherever they wished. In that far-off time, men would live two hundred years, three hundred years, or longer, and be able to travel to the moon and among the stars as they wished.


This was the true promised land, the land of the gods for which mankind had been searching for an eternity. In time, they would call this Heaven. They would call it Paradise.


When Maitreya came down to the world of men, he would save the world by changing its very construction, its nature, so that it was in essence no different from the world of the gods. This was why people looked forward to Maitreya’s coming with such eagerness, even across such a long span of time—Maitreya was the promise of the Kingdom of Heaven. It was this one person who inspired the fervent belief that gave the Brahmin monks the power to capture people’s hearts. And yet the darker side of that faith, the fact that mankind would have to wait such an impossibly long time for its salvation, was also a reflection of the despair that lurked in the hearts of men.


All of that—the hope and despair, the yearning for a new world—was right here.


“Maitreya!” the prince shouted toward the massive form. “Maitreya!”


There was no answer.


Suddenly, the prince heard laughter in his ears. The sound made his chest quiver as though he were a bow of silver and an archer had drawn him to full; his mind echoed with the noise.


“What are you laughing about, Maitreya? I am Siddhārtha, Prince of the Kingdom of Śākya. I came here to see you, our future savior. I’ve come all the way to the very root of Tuṣita.”


Instantly, the laughter stopped. All was enveloped in deep silence again, a silence more frightening than death.


“Look upon Maitreya, my prince,” Asura’s voice whispered by his ear. The prince started but stood his ground, staring upward from Maitreya’s massive foot.


Suddenly, he felt as though he had made some terrible mistake, though what it was he could not be sure. He peered around him like a frightened child. Something was wrong. He looked back up at Maitreya, the hope gone from his eyes.


It was not a man, but a statue—a giant, silvery statue, marred here and there by ugly gouts of rust. The statue sat silent as a mountain by the edge of the sea of pale blue light.


“Well, my prince? This is a statue of Maitreya. A statue of the great being who will come down to the world of men in 5,670,000,000 years to save us all.” Asura spoke in a singsong voice, mocking the prince’s faith.


The prince turned, slowly, as though he had suddenly aged another twenty or thirty years, and looked at her. “Where did Maitreya go?”


Asura shook her head. Her necklace gave a little death rattle across the slender, girlish lines of her neck.


“Where did Maitreya go?” the prince muttered, pressing his hand to his head. He had a splitting headache; cold sweat dripped down his back and chest.


“To tell the truth,” Asura said suddenly, “no one knows what the statue represents. The Brahmins gave it the name Maitreya. My prince, it was the men who came to play here in Tuṣita who made up that story about a god who would come to save them in the far future.”


“That is too cruel. Everyone believes in the coming of Maitreya. It cannot be a lie . . .” he said, his voice trailing off into a hoarse whisper.


“My prince, look again upon the statue. This giant statue was built to an exact likeness.”


“An exact likeness? So there truly is a Maitreya, then?”


Asura shrugged her shoulders and stepped in front of the prince, staring deep into his eyes. The breath that passed her ruby lips carried with it a fragrance of flowers, and it brought him back to his senses. “Asura! Which is it?”


“Have you understood, my prince? Do you know whose statue that is? Not even Brahmā, ruler of this world, does. The great god after whom that statue was modeled was a resident from another world who visited this region and claimed it for his own. This world is to be ruled from without, you see. Five billion six hundred seventy million years from now, he will once again appear in this world and determine the fate of all who remain here. That is what they call Maitreya.”


“What of salvation? What of salvation in the time of the last dharma?” The prince shook with rage. It was too cruel. The truth was the exact opposite of everything for which mankind was waiting.


“Let us go, my prince. We can stare at the statue all we like, but no salvation will come of it. Do not worry. You can be like Brahmā and still believe if you want to. It’s all right. This god will visit Jambudvīpa, your world, at the appointed hour. He will be born to a mother, Brahmavati, and a father, Subrahmana. That is all true. But what will Maitreya do in your world when he comes?


“Brahmā did not listen to my warnings. I doubt you will accept the reality of the situation either. The sutra that the Brahmin like to read about Maitreya and Tuṣita tells a compelling story. One always likes to hear about paradise. What would you give to secure that paradise, I wonder? Your wisdom? Your life? Your heart? There is still time. Plenty of time to think, my prince.”


Asura’s voice grew increasingly distant and faint.


The dry, barren sea of sand spread beneath a dark sky. The scattered remnants of life and the fragmented ruins of buildings visible in all directions were ample proof that nothing lived here anymore.






“Prince Siddhārtha?”


Asura stood, the flickering aurora at her back.


“There’s one more thing I wish to ask you.”


Asura stared intently into the night. “I think I can guess.”


The prince looked around and saw a giant, fiery orange sphere rising massively toward the top of the sky. Its brilliance scorched the night, vaporizing a vast expanse of sand below. A wave of heat and radiation moved across the plain like a tsunami, leaving nothing in its wake.


“You want to ask why I still fight with Brahmā, my prince?”


Strangely shaped ships cut silently across the arc of night, appearing from the darkness of one horizon, vanishing into the darkness of the other.


“My prince, as the Brahmin tell it, I was spurred to invade this Tuṣita by past karma and have been fighting Śakra’s armies for some four hundred million years. Past karma, my prince. Have you thought about what that might mean? How did this past karma come about in the first place?”


Brilliant flashes of light erupted from the horizon where the strange ships had disappeared. Siddhārtha had no idea what form Asura’s armies might take, but he imagined that the armada of ships in the sky might well be part of them.


“We will meet another day, my prince. You should go. The Brahmins will be worried.”


Siddhārtha thought he should say some word of farewell to the beautiful girl, but no words came to mind. And he felt certain that Asura was right—they would meet again, some day far in the future.


The prince put his hands together and bowed to Asura, then silently turned and began to walk away. After he had gone a short distance, he turned to look back and found that she, the flickering aurora, and the brilliant lights that cut across the sky were all gone without a trace.


An icy wind blew from the empty dark.


Was it all an illusion?


The prince stared long into the darkness, trying to see beyond it. The image of that girl who could not possibly be Asura, and yet who was Asura beyond a shadow of a doubt, was forever burned like a brand into his heart.