EPILOGUE
The Consul awoke to the sound 'of a balalaika being played so softly
that at first he thought it was an undercurrent of his dream.
The Consul rose, shivered in the cold air, wrapped his blanket around
him, and went out onto the long balcony.
It was not yet dawn. The skies still burned with the light of battle.
'I'm sorry,' said Lenar Hoyt, looking up from his instrument. The
priest was huddled deep in his cape.
'It's all right,' said the Consul. 'I was ready to awaken." It was
true. He could not remember feeling more rested. 'Please continue,' he
said. The notes were sharp and clear but barely audible above the wind
noise. It was as if Hoyt was playing a duet with the cold wind from the
peaks above. The Consul found the clarity almost painful.
Brawne Lamia and Colonel Kassad came out. A minute later Sol Weintraub
joined them. Rachel twisted in his arms, reaching toward the night sky
as if she could grasp the bright blossoms there.
Hoyt played. The wind was rising in the hour before dawn, and the
gargoyles and escarpments acted' like reeds to the Keep's cold bassoon.
Martin Silenus emerged, holding his head. 'No fucking respect for a
hangover,' he said. He leaned on the broad railing. 'If I barf from
this height, it'll be half an hour before the vomitus lands."
Father Hoyt did not look up. His fingers flew across the strings of the
small instrument. The northwest wind grew stronger and colder and the
balalaika played
counterpart, its notes warm and alive. The Consul and the others
huddled in blankets and capes as the breeze grew to a torrent and the
unnamed music kept pace with it. It was the strangest and most
beautiful symphony the Consul had ever heard.
The wind gusted, roared, peaked, and died. Hoyt ended his tune.
Brawne Lamia looked around. 'It's almost dawn." 'We have another hour,'
said Colonel Kassad.
Lamia shrugged. 'Why walt?"
'Why indeed?" said Sol Weintraub. He looked to the east where the only
hint of sunrise was the faintest of palings in constellations there. 'It
looks like a good day is coming."
'Let's get ready,' said Hoyt. 'Do we need our luggage?"
The group looked at one another.
'No, I think not,' said the Consul. 'The Colonel will bring the comlog
with the fatline communicator.
Bring anything necessary for your audience with the Shrike. We'll leave
the rest of the stuff here."
'All right,' said Brawne Lamia, turning back from the dark doorway,
gesturing toward the others, 'let's do it."
There were six hundred and sixty-one steps from the northeast portal of
the Keep to the moor below. There were no railings. The group
descended carefully, watching their step in the insecure light.
Once onto the valley floor, they looked back at the outcrop of stone
above. Chronos Keep looked like part of the mountain, its balconies and
external stairways mere slashes in the rock. Occasionally a brighter
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

explosion would illuminate a window or throw a gargoyle shadow, but
except for those instances it was as if the Keep had vanished behind
them.
They crossed the low hills below the Keep, staying on grass and avoiding
the sharp shrubs which extended thorns like claws. In ten minutes they
had crossed to sand and were descending low dunes toward the valley.
Brawne Lamia led the group. She wore her finest cape and a red silk
suit with black trim. Her cornlog gleamed on her wrist. Colonel Kassad
came next. He was in full battle armor, camouflage polymer not yet
activated so the suit looked matte black, absorbing even the light from
above. Kassad carried a standard-issue FORCE assault rifle. His visor
gleamed like a black mirror.
Father Hoyt wore his black cape, black suit, and clerical collar. The
balalaika was cradled in his arms like a child. He continued to set his
feet carefully, as if each step caused pain. The Consul followed. He
was dressed in his diplomatic best, starched blouse, formal black
trousers and demi-jacket, velvet cape, and the gold tricome he had worn
the first day on the treeship.
He had to keep a grip on the hat against the wind that had come up
again, hurling grains of sand in his face and sliding across the dune
tops like a serpent. Martin Silenus followed close behind in his coat
of wind-rippled fur.
So! Weintraub brought up the rear. Rachel rode in the infant carrier,
nestled under the cape and coat against her father's chest. Weintraub
was singing a low tune to her, the notes lost in the breeze.
Forty minutes out and they had come even with the dead city. Marble and
granite gleamed in the violet light. The peaks glowed behind them, the
Keep indistinguishable from the other mountain-sides. The group crossed
a sandy vale, climbed a low dune, and suddenly the head of the valley of
the Time Tombs was visible for the first time. The Consul could make
out the thrust of the Sphinx's wings and a glow of jade.
A rumble and crash from far behind them made the Consul turn, startled,
his heart pounding.
'Isn't it beginning?" asked Lamia. 'The bombardment?" 'No, look,' said
Kassad. He pointed to a point above
the mountain peaks where blackness obliterated the stars. Lightning
exploded along the false horizon, illuminating icefields and glaciers.
'Only a storm,' he said.
They resumed their trek across vermilion sands. The Consul found
himself straining to make out the shape of a figure near the Tombs or at
the head of the valley. He was certain beyond all certainty that
something awaited them there . . . that it
awaited.
'Look at that,' said Brawne Lamia, her whisper almost lost in the wind.
The Time Tombs were glowing. What the Consul had first taken to be
light reflected from above was not.
Each Tomb glowed a different hue and each was clearly visible now, the
glow brightening, the Tombs receding far back into the darkness of the
valley. The air smelled of ozone.
'Is that a common phenomenon?" asked Father Hoyt, his voice thin.
The Consul shook his head. 'l've never heard of it." 'It had never been
reported at the time Rachel came to study the Tombs,' said Sol
Weintraub. He began to hum the low tune as the group started forward
again through shifting sands.
They paused at the head of the valley. Soft dunes gave way to rock and
ink-black shadows at the swale which led down to the glowing Tombs. No
one led the way. No one pokc. The Consul felt his heart beating wildly
against his ribs. Worse than fear or knowledge of what lay below was
the blackness of spirit which seemed to have come into him on the wind,
chilling him and making him want to run screaming toward the hills from
which they had come.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The Consul turned to Sol Weintraub. 'What's that tune you're singing to
Rachel?"
The scholar forced a grin and scratched his short beard. 'It's from an
ancient flat film. Pre-Hegira. Hell, it's pre-everything."
'Let's hear it,' said Brawne Lamia, understand ing what the Consul was
doing. Her face was very pale.
Weintraub sang it, his voice thin and barely audible at first. But the
tune was forceful and oddly compelling.
Father Hoyt uncradled the balalaika and played along, the notes gaining
confidence.
Brawne Lamia laughed. Martin Silenus said in awe, 'My God, I used to
sing this in my childhood. It's ancient."
'But who is the wizard?" asked Colonel Kassad, the amplified voice
through his helmet oddly amusing in this context.
'And what is Oz?" asked Lamia.
'And just who is off to see this wizard?" asked the Consul, feeling the
black panic in him fade ever so slightly.
Sol Weintraub paused and tried to answer their questions, explaining the
plot of a flat film which had been dust for centuries.
'Never mind,' said Brawne Lamia. 'You can tell us later. Just sing it
again."
Behind them, the darkness had engulfed the mountains as the storm swept
down and across the moors toward them. The sky continued to bleed light
but now the eastern horizon had paled slightly more than the rest. The
dead city glowed to their left like stone teeth.
Brawne Lamia took the lead again. Sol Weintraub sang more loudly,
Rachel wiggling in delight. Lenar Hoyt threw back his cape so as to
better play the balalaika. Martin Silenus threw an empty bottle far out
onto the sands and sang along, his deep voice surprisingly strong and
pleasant above the wind.
Fedmahn Kassad pushed up his visor, shouldered his weapon, and joined in
the chorus. The Consul started to sing, thought about the absurd
lyrics, laughed aloud, and started again.
Just where the darkness began, the trail broadened.
The Consul moved to his right, Kassad joining him, Sol Weintraub filling
the gap, so that instead of a single-file
procession, the six adults were walking abreast. Brawne Lamia took
Silenus's hand in hers, joined hands with Sol on the other side.
Still singing loudly, not looking back, matching stride for stride, they
descended into the valley.