THE SOLDIER'S TALE: The War Lovers
It was during the Battle of Agincourt that Fedmahn Kassad encountered
the woman he would spend the rest of his life seeking.
It was a wet and chilly late October morning in A.D.
1415. Kassad had been inserted as an archer into the army of Henry V of
England. The English force had been on French soil since August 14 and
had been retreating from superior French forces since October 8.
Henry had convinced his War Council that the army could bent the French
in a forced march to the safety of Calais. They had failed. Now, as
October 25 dawned gray and drizzly, seven thousand Englishmen, mostly
bowmen, faced a force of some twenty-eight thousand French men-at-arms
across a kilometer of muddy field. '
Kassad was cold, tired sick, and scared. He and the other archers had
been surviving on little more than scavenged berries for the past week
of the march and almost every man on the line that morning was suffering
from diarrhea. The air temperature was in the low fifties Fahrenheit
and Kassad had spent a long night trying to sleep on damp ground. He
was impressed with the unbelievable realism of the experience- the
Olympus Command School Historical Tactical Network was as far beyond
regular stimsims as full-form holos were beyond tintypes - but the
physical sensations were so convincing, so real, that Kassad did not
relish the thought of being wounded. There were tales of cadets
receiving fatal wounds in the OCS:HTN sims and being pulled dead from
their immersion creches.
Kassad and the other bowmen on Henry's right flank had been staring at
the larger French force for most of the morning when pennants waved, the
fifteenth-century equivalent of sergeants brayed, and the archers obeyed
the King's command and began marching against the
enemy. The ragged English line, stretching about seven hundred meters
across the field from treeline to treeline, consisted of clusters of
archers like Kassad's troop interspersed with smaller groups of
men-at-arms. The English had no formal cavalry and most of the horses
Kassad could see on his end of the field were carrying men clustered
near the King's command group three hundred meters toward the center, or
huddled around the Duke of York's position much closer to where Kassad
and the other archers stood near the right flank. These command groups
reminded Kassad of a FORCE:ground mobile staff HQ, only instead of the
inevitable forest of comm antennae giving away their position, bright
banners and pennants hung limp on pikes. An obvious artillery target,
thought Kassad, and then reminded himself that this particular military
nuance did not yet exist.
Kassad noticed that the French had plenty of horses.
He estimated six or seven hundred mounted men formed in ranks on each of
the French flanks and a long line of cavalry behind the main battle
line. Kassad did not like horses. He had seen holos and pictures, of
course, but he had not encountered the animals themselves until this
exercise, and the size, smell, and sound of them tended to be unnerving
- especially so when the damn quadrupeds were armored chest and head,
shod in steel, and trained to carry armored men wielding four meters of
lance.
The English advance halted. Kassad estimated that his battle line was
about two hundred and fifty meters from the French. He knew from the
experience of the past week that this was within longbow range, but he
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

also knew that he would have to pull his arm half out of its socket to
hold the pull.
The French were shouting what Kassad assumed were insults. He ignored
them as he and his silent comrades stepped forward from where they had
planted their long arrows and found soft ground in which to drive their
stakes. The stakes were long and heavy and Kassad had been carrying his
for a week. Almost a meter and a half long, the clumsy thing had been
sharpened at both ends.
When the order first came down for all archers to find saplings and cut
stakes, somewhere in the deep woods
just after they had crossed the Somme, Kassad had wondered idly what the
things were for. Now he knew.
Every third archer carried a heavy mallet nnd now they took tums driving
their stakes in at a careful angle.
Kassad pulled out his long knife, resharpened the end which, even
leaning, rose almost to his chest, and stepped back through the hedgehog
of sharpened stakes to await the French charge.
The French did not charge.
Kassad waited with the others. His bow was strung, forty-eight arrows
were planted in two clusters at his
feet, and his feet were set properly.
The French did not charge.
The rain had stopped but a cool breeze had come up and what little body
heat Kassad had generated by the short march and the task of driving
stakes had been lost quickly. The only sounds were the metallic
shufflings of men and horses, occasional mutterings or nervous laughs,
and the heavier thud of hooves as the French cavalry rearranged itself
but still refused to charge.
'Fuck this,' said a gri,.led yeoman a few feet from Kassad. 'Those
bastards've wasted our whole bleeding morning. They'd better piss or
get off the pot."
Kassad nodded. He was not sure if he was hearing and understanding
Middle English or if the sentence had been in simple Standard. He had
no idea if the grizzled archer was another Command School cadet, an
instructor, or merely an artifact of the sire. He could not guess if
the slang had been correct. He did not care. His heart was pounding
and his palms were sweaty. He wiped his hands on his jerkin.
As if King Henry had taken his cue from the old man's muttering, command
flags suddenly bobbed and rose, sergeants screamed, and row upon row of
English archers raised their longbows, pulled when commands were
shouted, released on the next command.
Four waves of arrows comprised of more than six thousand meter-long,
chisel-pointed, clothyard missiles rose, seemed to hang in a cloud
thirty meters up, and fell on the French.
There came the sound of horses screaming and a
thousand demented children pounding on ten thousand tin pots as the
French men-at-arms leaned into the rain of arrows to let their steel
helmets and their chest and shoulder armor take the brunt of the
downpour. Kassad knew that in military terms little real damage had
been done, but this was small solace to the occasional French soldier
with ten inches of arrow through his eye, or to the scores of horses
leaping, tumbling, and crashing into one another while their riders
struggled to remove wooden
shafts from the creatures' backs and flanks.
The French did not charge.
More commands were shouted. Kassad raised, read-led, loosed his arrow.
Again. And again. The sky darkened every ten seconds. Kassad's arm
and back ached from the punishing rhythm. He found that he felt neither
elation nor anger. He was doing his job. His forearm was raw. Again
the arrows flew. And again. Fifteen of his first sheaf of twenty-four
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

arrows were gone when a cry went up along the English line and Kassad
paused and glanced down while holding full pull.
The French were charging.
A cavalry charge was something beyond Kassad's experience.
Watching twelve hundred armored horses charging directly at him created
internal sensations which Kassad found a bit unnerving. The charge took
less than forty seconds but Kassad discovered that this was ample time
for his mouth to go absolutely dry, his breathing to begin to have
problems, and for his testicles to retreat completely into his body. If
the rest of Kassad could have found a comparable hiding place, he would
have seriously considered crawling into it.
As it was, he was too busy to run.
Firing on command, his line of archers got off five flat volleys at the
attacking horsemen, managed one more shot in independent fire, and then
they fell back five paces.
Horses, it turned out, were too smart to willingly impale themselves
upon stakes- no matter how hard their human riders implored them to do
so- but the second and third waves of cavalry did not stop as
abruptly as the first, and in a single mad moment horses were down and
screaming, riders were thrown and screaming, and Kassad was out and
screaming, rushing at every downed Frenchman he could see, wielding a
mallet on the prostrate form when he could, slashing through gaps in
armor with his long knife when it was too crowded to swing the mallet.
Soon he and the grizzled archer and a younger man who had lost his cap
became an efficient killing team, closing in on a downed rider from
three sides, Kassad using the mallet to knock the pleading horseman off
his knees, then all three moving in with their blades.
Only one knight gained his feet and raised a sword to confront them. The
Frenchman flipped up his visor and called out a clear request for honor
and single combat.
The old man and the youth circled like wolves. Kassad returned with his
bow and put an arrow into the knight's left eye from ten paces.
The battle continued in the deadly comic-opera vein common to all armed
combat since the first rock and thighbone duels on Old Earth. The
French cavalry managed to turn and flee just as the first wave of ten
thousand men-at-arms charged the English center on foot.
The melee broke up the rhythm of the attack and, by the time the French
had regained their initiative, Henry's own men-at-arms had braced to
hold them at pike length while Kassad and several thousand other archers
poured volley fire into the massed French infantry at close range.
That did not end the battle. It was not necessarily even the decisive
moment. The turning point, when it came, was lost - as all such moments
are - within the dust and turmoil of a thousand individual encounters
where infantrymen faced infantrymen across the distance of their
personal weapons. Before it was over some three hours later there would
be minor variations on repeated themes, ineffective thrusts and clumsy
counterthrusts, and a less than honorable moment when Henry would order
prisoners killed rather than leave them in the rear when the English
were confronted with a new threat. But the heralds and historians would
later agree that the
outcome had been sealed somewhere in the confusion during the first
French infantry charge. The French died in their thousands. English
dominion on that part of the Continent would continue for a while. The
day of the armored man-at-arms, the knight, the embodiment of ·
chivalry, was over - hammered into history's coffin by a few thousand
ragtag peasant archers carrying longbows.
The ultimate insult to the noble-born French dead - if the dead indeed
could be further insulted - lay in the fact that the English archers
were not only common men, common in the lowest, most flea-infested sense
of the word, but that they were draftees. Doughboys. Gls.
Grunts. AIPs. Spezzes. K-techs. Jump Rats.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

But all that was in the lesson Kassad was supposed to have learned
during the OCS:HTN exercise. He learned none of it. He was too busy
having an encounter which would change his life.
The French man-at-arms went over the head of his falling horse, rolled
once, and was up and running for the woods before the mud quit flying.
Kassad followed. He was halfway to the tree line before he realized
that the youth and the griTsled archer had not come with him. It did
not matter. Kassad's adrenaline was flowing and the bloodlust had him
in its grip.
The man-at-arms, who had just been thrown to the ground from a horse
moving at full gallop and who was wearing sixty pounds of clumsy armor,
should have been an easy prey to catch. He was not. The Frenchman
glanced back once, saw Kassad coming on a full run with a mallet in his
hand and his eye full of business, and then the man-at-arms shifted into
a higher gear and reached the trees fifteen meters ahead of his pursuer.
Kassad was deep into the woods before he stopped, leaned on the mallet,
gasped, and considered his position.
Thuds, screams, and crashes from the battlefield behind him were muffled
by distance and shrubbery.
The trees were almost bare and still dripped from the rainstorm the
night before; the floor of the forest was carpeted with a thick layer of
old leaves and a snarl of shrubs and brambles. The man-at-arms had left
a trail of
broken branches and footprints for the first twenty meters or so, but
now deer trails and overgrown paths made it difficult to see where he
had passed.
Kassad moved slowly, stepping deeper into the woods, trying to be alert
for any noise above the sound of his own panting and the insane pounding
of his heart. It occurred to Kassad that, tactically speaking, this was
not a brilliant move; the man-at-arms had been wearing full armor and
carrying his sword when he disappeared in the bushes. At any moment the
Frenchman might forget his panic, regret his temporary loss of honor,
and remember his years of combat training. Kassad also had been
trained. He looked down at his cloth shirt and leather vest. The
mallet was still in his hands, the knife in his broad belt. He had been
trained to use high-energy weapons with a killing range of a few meters
to thousands of kilometers. He had been rated in plasma grenades,
he!l-whips, fleschette rifles, sonics, recoilless zero-gravity weapons,
deathwands, kinetic assault guns, and beam gauntlets. He now had a
working knowledge of an English longbow. None of these objects-
including the longbow - was on his person at the moment.
'Ah, shit,' murmured Second Lieutenant Kassad.
The man-at-arms came out of the bushes like a charging bear, arms up,
legs apart, the sword coming around in a flat arc meant to disembowel
Kassad. The OCS cadet tried to leap back and raise his mallet at the
same time.
Neither effort was completely successful. The Frenchman's sword knocked
the heavy mallet out of Kassad's grip while the dull point of the blade
slashed through leather, shirt, and skin. ·
Kassad bellowed and stumbled backward again, tugging at the knife in his
belt. His right heel caught the branch of a fallen tree and he went
down backward, cursing and rolling deeper into the tangle of branches as
the man-at-arms crashed forward, his heavy sword clearing limbs like an
oversized machete. Kassad had his knife out by the time the man=at-arms
had cleared a path through the deadfall, but the ten-inch blade was a
pitiful thing against armor unless the knight was helpless. This knight
was not helpless. Kassad knew that he would
never get inside the arc of sword blade. His only hope was in running,
but the tall trunk of the fallen tree behind him and the deadfall beyond
eliminated that option. He did not wish to get cut down from behind as
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

he turned.
Nor from below as he climbed. Kassad did not wish to be cut down from
any angle.
Kassad went into a knife fighter's crouch which he hadn't used since his
street-fighting days in the Tharsis slums. He wondered how the
simulation would deal with his death.
The figure appeared behind the man-at-arms like a sudden shadow. The
noise of Kassad's mallet striking the knight's armored shoulder sounded
precisely like someone bashing the hood of an EMV with a sledge-hammer.
The Frenchman staggered, turned to meet the new threat, and took a
second mallet below in the chest.
Kassad's savior was small; the man-at-arms did not go down. The French
knight was raising his sword above his head when Kassad hit him behind
and below the knees with a shoulder tackle.
Tree limbs snapped as the Frenchman went down. The small attacker stood
astride the knight, pinning the armored man's sword arm with one foot
while bringing the mallet down repeatedly onto helmet and visor.
Kassad extricated himself from the tangle of legs and branches, sat on
the downed man's knees, and began slashing through gaps in armor at
groin, sides, and underarms. Kassad's rescuer jumped aside to plant
both feet on the knight's wrist and Kassad scrambled forward, stabbing
through crevices where the helmet met chest armor, finally slamming the
blade through slits in the visor itself.
The knight screamed as the mallet came down a final time, almost
catching Kassad's hand as the hammer drove the blade through the visor
slit like a ten-inch tent peg. The man-at-arms arched,'lifting Kassad
and sixty pounds of armor clear of the ground in a final violent spasm
and then fell back limply.
Kassad rolled onto his side. His rescuer collapsed beside him. Both
were covered with sweat and the dead
man's blood. Kassad looked at his savior. The woman was dressed in
clothes not dissimilar to Kassad's. For a moment they merely lay there
and gasped for air.
'Are you... all fight?" Kassad managed after a while.
He was suddenly struck by her appearance. Her brown hair was short by
current Worldweb fashion, short and straight and cut so that the longest
strands fell from the part, just a few centimeters left of the center of
her forehead, to just above her right ear. It was a boy's haircut from
some forgotten time, but she was no boy. Kassad thought that she was
perhaps the most beautiful woman he had ever seen: bone structure so
perfect that chin and cheekbones were shaped without being too sharp,
large eyes glowing with life and intelligence, a gentle mouth with a
soft underlip. Lying next to her, Kassad realized that she was tall -
not so tall as he but obviously not a woman from the fifteenth century -
and even under her of the tunic and baggy trousers he could see the soft
swell of hipg and breast. She appeared to be a few years older than
Kassad, perhaps in her late twenties, but this fact barely registered as
she continued staring into his face with those soft, beguiling,
endlessly deep eyes.
'Are you all right?" he asked again. His voice sounded strange, even to
himself.
She did not answer. Or, rather, she answered by sliding long fingers
across Kassad's chest, ripping away the leather thongs which bound the
rough vest. Her hands found his shirt. It was soaked with blood and
ripped halfway down the front. The woman ripped it open the rest Of the
way. She moved against him now, her fingers and lips on his chest, hips
already beginning to move.
Her fight hand found the cords to his trouser front, ripped them free.
Kassad helped her pull off the rest of his clothes, removed hers with
three fluid movements. She wore nothing under her shirt and
coarse-cloth trousers.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Kassad's hand slid between her thighs, behind her, cupped her moving
buttocks, pulled her closer, and slid to the moist roughness in front.
She opened to him, her mouth closing on his. Somehow, with all of their
motion and disrobing, their skin never lost contact. Kassad felt
his own excitement rubbing against the cusp of her belly.
She rolled above him then, her thighs astride his hips, her gaze still
locked with his. Kassad had never been so excited. He gasped as her
right hand went behind her, found him, guided him into her. When he
opened his eyes again she was moving slowly, her head back, eyes closed.
Kassad's hands moved up her sides to cup her perfect breasts. Nipples
hardened against his palms.
They made love then. Kassad, at twenty-three standard years, had been
in love once and had enjoyed sex many times. He thought he knew the way
and the why of it. There was nothing in his experience to that moment
which he could not have described with a phrase and a laugh to his
squadmates in the hold of a troop transport.
With the calm, sure cynicism of a twenty-three-year-old veteran he was
sure that he would never experience anything that could not be so
described, so dismissed. He was wrong. He could never adequately share
the sense of the next few minutes with anyone else. He would never try.
They made love in a sudden shaft of late October light with a carpet of
leaves and clothes beneath them and a film of blood and sweat oiling the
sweet friction between them. Her green eyes stared down at Kassad,
widening slightly when he began moving quickly, closing at the same
second he closed his.
They moved together then in the sudden tide of sensation as old and
inevitable as the movement of worlds: pulses racing, flesh quickening
with its own moist purposes, a further, final rising together, the world
receding to nothing at all - and then, still joined by touch and
heartbeat and the fading thrill of passion, allowing consciousness to
slide back to separate flesh while the world flowed in through forgotten
senses.
They lay next to each other. The dead man's armor was cold against
Kassad's left, arm, her thigh warm against his right leg. The sunlight
was a benediction.
Hidden colors rose to the surface of things. Kassad turned his head and
gazed at her as she rested her head on his shoulder. Her cheeks
glowed with flush and autumn light and her hair lay like copper threads
along the flesh
of his arm. She curved her leg over his thigh and Kassad felt the
clockwise stirring of renewed passion. The sun was warm on his face. He
closed his eyes.
When he awoke she was gone. He was certain that only seconds had passed
- no more than a minute, certainly -but the sunlight was gone, colors
had flowed out of the forest, and a cool evening breeze moved bare
branches.
Kassad dressed in torn clothes made stiff with blood.
The French man-at-arms lay still and rigid in the unselfconscious
attitude of death. He already seemed inanimate, a part of the forest.
There was no sign whatsoever of the woman.
Fedmahn Kassad !imPed his way back through the woods, evening gloom, and
a sudden, chilling drizzle.
The battlefield still held people, living and dead. The dead lay in
heaps like the piles of toy soldiers Kassad had played with as a child.
Wounded men moved slowly with the help of friends. Here and there
furtive forms picked their way among the dead, and near the opposite
tree line a lively group of heralds, both French and English, met in
conclave with much pointing and animated conversation.
Kassad knew that they had to decide upon a name for the battle so that
their respective records would agree. He also knew that they would
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

settle on the name of the nearest castle, Agincourt, even though it had
figured in neither strategy nor battle.
Kassad was beginning to think that this was no simulation, that his life
in the Worldweb was the dream and that this gray day had to be reality,
when suddenly the entire scene froze with outlines of human figures,
horses, and the darkening forest becoming as transparent as a fading
holo. And then Kassad was being helPed out of his simulation creche at
the Olympus Command School and the other cadets and instructors were
rising, talking, laughing with one another - all seemingly unaware that
the world had changed forever.
For weeks Kassad sPent every free hour wandering the Command School
grounds, watching from the ramparts as the evening shadow of Mons
Olympus covered first
the Plateau forest, then the heavily settled highlands, then everything
halfway to the horizon, and then all the world. And every second he
thought about what had hapPened. He thought about her.
No one else had noticed anything strange in the simulation.
No one else had left the battlefield. One instructor explained that
nothing beyond the battlefield ex/sted in that particular segment of the
simulation. No one had missed Kassad. It was as if the incident in the
forest - and the woman - had never happened.
Kassad knew better. He attended his classes on military history and
mathematics. He put in his hours at the firing range and gym. He
walked off barracks punishments on the Caldera Quadrangle, although
these were rare. In general, young Kassad became an even more excellent
officer cadet than he had been. But all the while he waited.
And then she came again.
Again it was in the final hours of an OCS:HTN simulation.
By then Kassad had learned that the exercises were something more than
mere simulations. The OCS:HTN was part of the Worldweb All Thing, the
real-time network which governed Hegemony politics, fed information to
tens of billions of data-hungry citizens, and had evolved a form of
autonomy and consciousness all its own. More than a hundred and fifty
planetary data-spheres mingled their resources within the framework
created by six thousand omega-class Als to allow the OCS:HTN to
function.
'The HTN stuff doesn't simulate,' whined Cadet Radinski, the best AI
exPert Kassad could find and bribe to explain, 'it dreams, dreams with
the best historical accuracy in the Web - way beyond the sum of its
parts 'cause it plugs in holistic insight as well as facts - and when it
dreams, it lets us dream with it."
Kassad had not understood but he had believed. And then she came again.
In the First US-Vietnam War they made love in the aftermath of an ambush
during the darkness and terror of a night patrol. Kassad wore rough
camouflage
clothes- with no underwear because of the jungle crotch rot - and a
steel helmet not much more advanced than those at Agincourt. She wore
black pajamas and sandals, the universal garb of the Southeast Asian
peasant.
And the Viet Cong. Then neither of them wore anything as they made love
standing in the night, her back against a tree and her legs wrapped
around him, while beyond them the world exploded in the green glow of
perimeter flares and the sputter-crack of claymores.
She came to him on the second day of Gettysburg and again at Borodino,
where the clouds of powder smoke hung above the piles of bodies like a
vapor congealed from departing souls.
They made love in the shattered hulk of an APC in Hellas Basin while the
hovertank battle still raged and the red dust of the approaching simoon
scraped and shrieked at the titanium hull. 'Tell me your name,' he had
whispered in Standard. She shook her head. 'Are you real- outside the
simulation?" he asked in the Japanese-English of that era. She had
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

nodded and leaned closer to kiss him.
They lay together in a sheltered place among the ruins of Brasilia while
deathbeams from Chinese EMVs played like blue searchlights on broken
ceramic walls.
During an unnamed battle after a siege of a forgotten tower city on the
Russian steppes, he pulled her back into the shattered room where they
had made love, and he whiSpered, 'I want to stay with you." She touched
his lips with a finger and shook her head. After the evacuation of New
Chicago, as they lay on the hundredth-floor balcony where Kassad had set
his sniper's nest for the last US President's hopeless rear-guard
action, he placed his hand on the warm flesh between her breasts and
said, 'Can you ever join me... out there?" She touched his cheek with
her palm and smiled.
During the last year in Command School there were only five OCS:HTN sims
as the cadets' training shifted to live field exercises. Sometimes, as
when Kitssad was strapped into the tactical command chair during a
battalion-sized drop onto Ceres, he closed his eyes, looked between the
primary-colored geographies of the
cortically generated tactical/terrain matrix, and felt a sense of...
someone? Of her? He was not sure.
And then she did not come again. Not in the final months of work. Not
in the final simulation of the great Coal Sack Battle where General
Horace Glennon-Height's mutiny was defeated. Not during the parades and
parties of graduation, nor as the class marched in a final Olympian
review before the Hegemony CEO, saluting from his red-lit levitation
deck.
And there was no time even for dreaming as the young officers farcast to
Earth's Moon for the Masada Ceremony, farcast again to Tau Ceti Center
for their formal swearing-in to FORCE, and then they were finished.
Second Lieutenant Cadet Kassad became Lieutenant Kassad, spent three
standard weeks free in the Web with a FORCE-issued universal card which
allow him to farcast as far and as frequently as he wished, and then he
was shipped out to the Hegemony Colonial Service training school on
Lusus to prepare for active duty beyond the Web. He was sure that he
would never see her again.
He was wrong.
Fedmahn Kassad had grown up in a culture of poverty and sudden death. As
a member of the minority who still called themselves Palestinians, he
and his family had lived in the slums of Tharsis, human testimony to the
bitter legacy of the terminally dispossessed. Every Palestinian in the
Worldweb and beyond carried the cul-turai memory of a century of
struggle capped by a month of nationalist triumph before the Nuclear
Jihad of 2038 wiped it all away. Then came their second Diaspora, this
one lasting five centuries and leading to dead-end desert worlds like
Mars, their dream buried with the death of Old Earth.
Kassad, like the .other boys of the South Tharsis Relocation Camps,
either ran with gangs or faced the option of being prey to every
self-proclaimed predator in the camps. He chose to run with the gangs.
Kassad had killed another youth by the time he was sixteen standard
years old.
If Mars was known for anything in the Worldweb, it
was for hunting in the Mariner Valley, Schrauder's Zen Massif in Hellas
Basin, and the Olympus Command School. Kassad did not have to travel to
Mariner Valley to learn about hunting and being hunted, he had no
interest in Zen Gnosticism, and as a teenager he felt nothing but
contempt for the uniformed cadets who came from every part of the Web to
train for FORCE.
He joined with his peers in sneering at the New Bushido as a code for
faggots, but an ancient vein of honor in the young Kassad's soul
secretly resonated to the thought of a samurai class whose life and work
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

revolved around duty, self-respect, and the ultimate value of one's
word.
When Kassad was eighteen, a Tharsis Province higher circuit judge
offered him the choice of a Martian year at polar work camp or
volunteering for the John Carter Brigade then forming to help FORCE put
down the resurgent Glennon-Height Rebellion in the Class Three colonies.
Kassad volunteered and discovered that he enjoyed the discipline and
cleanliness of military life, even though the John Carter Brigade saw
only garrison duty within the Web and was dissolved shortly after
G!ennon-Height's cloned grandson died on Renaissance.
Two days after his nineteenth birthday, Kassad applied to FORCE:ground
and was turned down. He
· went on a nine-day drunk, awoke in one of the deeper hive tunnels of
Lusus with his military cornlog implant stolen - by someone who
apparently had taken a correspondence course in surgery-his universal
card and farcaster access revoked, and his head exploring new frontiers
of pain.
Kassad worked on Lusus for a standard year, saving over six thousand
marks and allowing physical labor in the 1.3-ES gravity to put an end to
his Martian frailness.
By the time he used his savings to ship out to Maul-Covenant on an
ancient solar sail freighter with jury-rigged Hawking drives, Kassad was
still lean and tall by Web standards, but what muscles there were worked
wonderfully well by anyone's standards.
He arrived on Mani-Covenant three days before the vicious and unpopular
Island War began there, and eventually the FORCE: combined commander at
Firstsite
got so tired of seeing the young Kassad waiting in his outer office that
he allowed the boy to enlist in the 23rd Supply Regiment as an assistant
hydrofoil driver. Eleven standard months later, Corporal Fedmahn Kassad
of the Twelfth Mobile Infantry Battalion had received two Distinguished
Service Clusters, a Senate Commendation for valor in the Equatorial
Archipelago campaign, and two Purple Hearts. He was also tapped for
FORCE command school and shipped Webward on the next convoy.
Kassad dreamed of her often. He had never learned her name, she had
never spoken, but he could have recognized her touch and scent in total
darkness among a thousand others. He thought of her as Mystery.
When other young officers went whoring or seeking girlfriends in the
indigenie populations, Kassad would remain on base or take long walks
through strange cities.
He kept his obsession with Mystery secret, knowing full well how it
would read on a psych report. Sometimes, on bivouac under multiple
moons or in the womblike zero-g of a troop transport hold, Kassad would
realize how insane his love affair with a phantom truly was. But then
he would recall the small mole under her left breast which he had kissed
one night, feeling her heartbeat under his lips as the ground itself
shook from the firing of the big guns near Verdun. He would remember
the impatient gesture with which she brushed back her hair as her cheek
rested on his thigh. And the young officers would go to town or to the
huts near the base, and Fedmahn Kassad would read another history book
or jog along the perimeter or run tactical strategies on his comiog.
It was not long before Kassad came to the attention of his superiors.
During the undeclared war with the Free Miners in the Lambert Ring
Territories, it was Lieutenant Kassad who led the surviving infantry
troops and Marine guards in cutting through the bottom of the old
asteroid bore shaft on Peregrine to evacuate the Hegemony consulate
staff and citizens.
But it was during the short reign of the New Prophet
on Qom-Riyadh that Captain Fedmahn Kassad came to the attention of the
entire Web.
The FORCE:space captain of the only Hegemony ship within two leap years
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

of the colony world had been paying a courtesy call when the New Prophet
chose to lead thirty million New Order Shi'ites against two continents
of Suni shopkeepers and ninety thousand resident Hegemony infidels. The
ship's captain and five of his executive officers were taken prisoner.
Urgent fatline messages from Tau Ceti Center demanded that the ranking
officer aboard the orbiting HS Denieve settle the situation on
Qom-Riyadh, free all hostages, and depose the New Prophet . . .
without resorting to the use of nuclear weapons within the planet's
atmosphere. The Denieve was an aging orbital defense picket. It
carried no nuclear weapons that could be used within an atmosphere.
The ranking officer on board was FORCE:combined Captain Fedmahn Kassad.
On the third day of the revolution, Kassad landed the Denieve's single
assault boat in the main courtyard of the Grand Mosque at Mashhad. He
and the other thirty-four FORCE troopers watched as the mob grew to
three hundred thousand militants kept at bay only by the boat's
containment field and the lack of an order to attack by the New Prophet.
The New Prophet himself was no longer in the Grand Mosque; he had flown
to the northern hemisphere of Riyadh to join in the victory celebrations
there.
Two hours after he landed, Captain Kassad stepped out of his ship and
broadcast a short announcement. He said that he had been raised as a
Muslim. He also announced that interpretation of the Koran since the
Shi'ites' seedship days had definitely shown that the God of Islam would
neither condone nor allow the slaughter of the innocent, no matter how
many jihads were proclaimed by tinhorn heretics like the New Prophet.
Captain Kassad gave the leaders of the thirty million zealots three
hours to surrender their hostages and return to their homes on the
desert continent of Qom.
In the first three days of the revolution the armies of the New Prophet
had occupied most of the cities on two
continents and had taken more than twenty-seven thousand Hegemony
hostages. Firing squads had been busy day and night settling ancient
theological disputes and it was estimated that at least a quarter of a
million Sunis had been slaughtered in the first two days of the New
Prophet's occupation. In response to Kassad's ultimatum, the New
Prophet announced that all of the infidels would be put to death
immediately following his live television address fhat evening. He also
ordered an attack on Kassad's assault boat.
Avoiding high explosives because of the Grand Mosque, the Revolutionary
Guard used automatic weapons, crude energy cannon, plasma charges, and
human wave attacks. The containment field held.
The New Prophet's televised address began fifteen minutes before
Kassad's ultimatum ran out. The New Prophet agreed with Kassad's
statement that Allah would horribly punish heretics but announced that
it was the Hegemony infidels who would be so punished. It was the only
time the New Prophet ever had been seen to lose his temper on camera.
Screaming, saliva flying, he ordered the human wave attacks to be
renewed on the grounded assault boat. He announced that at that moment
a dozen fission bombs were being assembled at the occupied Power for
Peace reactor in All. With these, the forces of Allah would be carried
into space itself. The first fission bomb, he explained, would be used
on the infidel Kassad's satanic assault boat that very afternoon.
The New Prophet then began to explain exactly how the Hegemony hostages
would be executed, but at that moment Kassad's deadline ran out.
Qom-Riyadh was, by its own choice and the accident of its distant
location, a technically primitive world. But the inhabitants were not
so primitive that they did not have an active datasphere. Nor were the
revolutionary mullahs who had led the invasion so opposed to the 'Great
Satan of Hegemony Science' that they refused to tie into the global data
net with their personal cornlogs.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The HS Denieve had seeded enough spysats so that by 1729 hours
Qom-Riyadh Central Time, the datasphere had been tapped to the point
that the Hegemony ship had
identified sixteen thousand eight hundred and thirty revolutionary
muilahs by their access codes. At 1729:30 hours the spysats began
feeding their real-time targeting data to the twenty-one perimeter
defense sats which Kassad's assault boat had left in low orbit. These
orbital defense weapons were so old that the Denieve's mission had been
to return them to the Web for safe destruction.
Kassad had suggested another use for them.
At precisely 1730 hours, nineteen of the small satellites detonated
their fusion cores. In the nanoseconds before their self-destruction,
the resulting X rays were focused, aimed, and released in sixteen
thousand eight hundred and thirty invisible but very coherent beams. The
ancient defense sats were not designed for atmospheric use and had an
effective destructive radius of less than a millimeter.
Luckily, that was all that was needed. Not all of the targeting beams
penetrated whatever stood between the mu!lahs and the sky. Fifteen
thousand seven hundred and eighty-four did.
The effect was immediate and dramatic. In each case the target's brain
and cerebral fluid boiled, turned to vapor, and blew the encasing skull
to bits. The New Prophet was in the middle of his live, planetwide
broadcast - literally in the middle of pronouncing the word 'heretic' -
when 1730 hours arrived.
For almost two minutes the TV screens and walls around the planet
carried the image of the New Prophet's headless body slumped over the
microphone. Then Fedmahn Kassad cut in on all bands to announce that
his next deadline was one hour away and that any actions against the
hostages would be met with a more dramatic
demonstration of Allah's displeasure.
There were no reprisals.
That night, in orbit around Q0m-Riyadh, Mystery visited Kassad for the
first time since his cadet days. He was asleep but the visit was more
than a dream and less than the alternative reality of the OCS:HTN sims.
The woman and he were lying together under a light blanket beneath a
broken roof. Her skin was warm and electric, her face little more than
a pale outline against nighttime darkness. Overhead the stars had just
begun to fade into
the false light of predawn. Kassad realized that she was trying to
speak to him; her soft lips formed words which were just below the
threshold of Kassad's hearing. He pulled back a second in order to see
her face better and, in so doing, lost contact completely. He awoke in
his sleep webbing with moisture on his cheeks and the hum of the ship's
systems sounding as strange to him as the breathing of some
half-awakened beast.
Nine standard ship weeks later, Kassad stood before a FORCE
court-martial review on Freeholm. He had known when he made his
decision on Qom-Riyadh that his superiors would have no choice but to
crucify or promote him.
FORCE prided itself on preparing itself for all contingencies in the Web
or the colonial regions, but nothing had properly prepared it for the
Battle of South Bressia and its implications for the New Bushido.
The New Bushido Code which governed Colonel Kassad's life had evolved
out of the necessity for the military class to survive. After the
obscenities of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries on
Old Earth, when military leaders had committed their nations to
strategies wherein entire civilian populations were legitimate targets
while their uniformed executioners sat safe in self-contained bunkers
fifty meters under the earth, the repugnance of the surviving civilians
was so great that for more than a century the word 'military' was an
invitation to a lynching.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

As the New Bushido evolved it combined the age-old concepts of honor and
individual courage with the need to spare civilians whenever possible.
It also saw the wisdom of returning to the pre-Napoleonic concepts of
small, 'nontotal' wars with defined goals and proscribed excesses. The
Code demanded a forsaking of nuclear weapons and strategic bombing
campaigns in all but the most extreme cases but, more than that, it
demanded a return to Old Earth medieval concepts of set battles between
small, professional forces at a mutually agreed upon time in a place
where destruction of public and private property would be kept to a
minimum.
This Code worked well for the first four centuries of post-Hegira
expansion. The fact that essential technologies were essentially frozen
in place for three of those centuries worked in the Hegemony's favor as
its monopoly on the use of farcasters allowed it to apply the modest
resources of FORCE at the right place in the required amount of time.
Even when separated by the inevitable leap years of time-debt, no
colonial or independent world could hope to match the power of the
Hegemony. Incidents .such as the political rebellion on Maui-Covenant,
with its unique guerrilla warfare, or the religious insanity on
Qom-Riyadh were put down quickly and firmly and any excesses in the
campaigns merely pointed out the importance of returning to the strict
Code of the New Bushido. But for all of FORCE's calculations and
preparations, no one had adequately planned on the inevitable
confrontation with the Ousters.
The Ousters had been the single external threat to the Hegemony for the
four centuries since the forebears of the barbarian hordes had left Sol
System in their crude fleet of leaking O'Neill cities, tumbling
asteroids, and experimental comet farm clusters. Even after the Ousters
acquired the Hawking drive, it remained official Hegemony policy to
ignore them as long as their swarms stayed in the darkness between the
stars and limited their in-system plunderings to scooping small amounts
of hydrogen from gas giants and water ice from uninhabited moons.
The early Outback skirmishes such as Bent's World and GHC 2990 were
considered aberrations, of little interest to the Hegemony. Even the
pitched battle for Lee Three had been treated as a Colonial Service
problem and when the FORCE task force arrived six local years after the
attack, five years after the Ousters departed, any atrocities were
conveniently forgotten in favor of the view that no barbarian raid would
repeat itself when the Hegemony chose to flex its muscle.
In the decades which followed Lee Three, FORCE and Ouster space'forces
skirmished in a hundred border
areas, but except for the odd Marine encounters in airless, weightless
places, there were no infantry confrontations.
Stories in the Worldweb proliferated: the Ousters would never be a
threat to Earthlike worlds because of their three centuries of
adaptation to weight-lessness; the Ousters had evolved into something
more -or less - than human; the Ousters did not have farcaster
technology, would never have it, and thus never would.
be a threat to FORCE. Then came Bressia.
Bressia was one of those smug, independent worlds, pleased with both its
convenient access to the Web and its eight-month separation from it,
growing rich from the export of diamonds, burr root, and its unequaled
coffee, coyly refusing to become a colony world but still dependent upon
the Hegemony Protectorate and Common Market to meet its soaring economic
goals. As with most such worlds, Bressia was proud of its Self-defense
Force: twelve torchships, a refitted attack carrier which had been
decommissioned by FORCE:space half a century earlier, twoscore or more
of small, fast orbital patrol vessels, a standing army of ninety
thousand volunteers, a respectable oceangoing navy, and a store of
nuclear weapons stockpiled purely for symbolic purposes.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The Ouster Hawking wake had been noticed by Hegemony monitoring stations
but was misinterpreted as merely another swarm migration which would
pass no closer than half a light-year to the Bressian system.
Instead, with a single course correction which was not detected until
the swarm was within the O6rt cloud radius, the Ousters fell on Bressia
like some Old Testament plague. A minimum of seven standard months
separated Bressia from any Hegemony rescue or response.
Bressia's space force was obliterated within the first twenty hours of
fighting. The Ouster swarm then put more than three thousand ships into
Bressia's cislunar space and began the systematic reduction of all
planetary defenses.
The world had been settled by no-nonsense Central Europeans in the first
wave of the Hegira, and its two continents bore the prosaic names of
North Bressia and
South Bressia. North Bressia held desert, high tundra, and six major
cities housing mostly burr-root harvesters and petroleum engineers.
South Bressia, much more temperate in climate and geography, was the
home for most of the world's four hundred million people and the huge
coffee plantations.
As if to demonstrate what war had once been about, the Ousters scoured
North Bressia - first with several hundred fallout-free nuclear weapons
and tactical plasma bombs, then with deathbeams, and finally with
tailored viruses. Only a handful of the fourteen million residents
escaped. South Bressia received no bombardment except for the lancing
of specific military targets, airports, and the large harbor at Solno.
FORCE doctrine held that, while a world could be reduced from orbit,
actual military invasion of an industrialized planet was an
impossibility; the problems with landing logistics, the immense area to
be occupied, and the unwieldy size of the invading army were considered
to be the ultimate arguments against invasion.
The Ousters obviously had not read the FORCE doctrine books. On the
twenty-third day of the investiture, more than two thousand dropships
and assault boats fell on South Bressia. What was left of the Bressian
air force was destroyed in those first hours of the invasion. Two
nuclear' devices were actually detonated against Ouster staging areas:
the first was deflected by energy fields and the second destroyed a
single scoutship which may have been a decoy.
Ousters, it turned out, had changed physically in three centuries. They
did prefer zero-gravity environments.
But their mobile infantry's powered exoskeletons served very well and it
was only, a matter of days before the black-clad, 1ong-limbed Ouster
troops were swarming over South Bressia's cities like an infestation of
giant spiders.
The last organized resistance collapsed on the nineteenth day of the
invasion. Buckminster, the capital, fell the same day. The last
fatline message from Bressia to the Hegemony was cut off in
mid-transmission an hour after Ouster troops entered the city.
Colonel Fedmahn Kassad arrived with FORCE Fleet One twenty-nine standard
weeks later. Thirty omega-class torchships protecting a single,
farcaster-equipped JumpShip penetrated the system at high speed. The
singularity sphere was activated three hours after spin-down and ten
hours after that there were four hundred FORCE ships of the line in
system. The counterinvasion began twenty-one hours later.
Those were the mathematics of the first minutes of the Battle of
Bressia. For Kassad, the memory of those days and weeks held not
mathematics but the terrible beauty of combat. It was the first time
JumpShips had been used on anything above a division level and there was
the expected confusion. Kassad went through from five light-minutes out
and fell into gravel and yellow dust because. the assault boat
farcaster portal was facing down a steep incline made slick with mud and
the blood of the first squads through. Kassad lay in the mud and looked
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

down the hillside at madness. Ten of the seventeen farcaster assault
boats were down and burning, scattered across the foothills and
plantation fields like broken toys. The containment fields of the
surviving boats were shrinking under an onslaught of missile and CPB
fire that turned the landing areas into domes of orange flame. Kassad's
tactical display was a hopeless mess; his visor showed a garble of
impossible fire vectors, blinking red phosphors where FORCE troops lay
dying, and overlays of Ouster jamming ghosts. Someone was screaming
'Oh, goddammit! Goddammit! Oh, goddammit!" on his primary command
circuit and the implants registered a void where Command Group's data
should be.
An enlisted man helped him up, Kassad flicked mud off his command wand
and got out of the way of the next squad farcasting through, and the war
was on.
From his first minutes on South Bressia, Kassad realized that the New
Bushido was dead. Eighty thousand superbly armed and trained
FORCE:ground troops advanced from their staging areas, seeking battle in
an unpopulated place. Ouster forces retreated behind a line
of scorched earth, leaving only booby traps and dead civilians. FORCE
used farcasters to outmaneuver the enemy, to force him to fight. The
Ousters responded with a barrage of nuclear and plasma weapons, pinning
the ground troops under forcefields while the Ouster infantry retreated
to prepared 'defenses around cities and dropship staging areas.
There were no quick victories in space to shift the balance on South
Bressia. Despite feints and occasional fierce battles, the Ousters
retained complete control of everything within three AU of Bressia.
FORCE:space units fell back and concentrated on keeping the fleet within
farcaster range and protecting the primary JumpShip.
What had been. forecast as a two-day battle ground on for thirty days,
then sixty. Warfare had been thrown back to the twentieth or
twenty-first century: long, grim campaigns fought through the brick dust
of ruined cities over the corpses of civilians. The eighty thousand
original FORCE troops were ground up, reinforced with a hundred thousand
more, and were still being decimated when the call went out for two
hundred thousand more.
Only the grim resolve of Meina Gladstone and a dozen other determined
senators kept the war alive and the troops dying while the billions of
voices of the All Thing and the AI Advisory Council called for
disengagement.
Kassad had understood the change of tactics almost at once. His
street-fighting instincts had risen to the forefront even before most of
his division was wiped out in the Battle of the Stoneheap. While other
FORCE commanders were all but ceasing to function, frozen into
indecision by this violation of the New Bushido, Kassad - in command of
his regiment and in temporary command of his division after the nuking
of Command Group Delta - was trading men for time and calling for the
release of fusion weapons to spearhead his own counterattack. By the
time the Ousters withdrew ninety-seven days after the FORCE 'rescue' of
Bressia, Kassad had earned the double-edged nickname of the Butcher of
South Bressia. It was rumored that even his own troops were afraid of
him.
And Kassad dreamed of her with dreams that were more - and less - than
dreams.
On the last night of the Battle for Stoneheap, in the maze of dark
tunnels where Kassad and his hunter-killer groups used sonics and T-5
gas to flush out the last warrens of Ouster commandos, the Colonel fell
asleep amid the flame and screams and felt the touch of her long fingers
on his cheek and the soft compression of her breasts against him.
When they entered New Vienna on the morning after the space strike
Kassad had called in, the troops following the glass-smooth,
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

twenty-meter-wide burn grooves into the lanced city, Kassad had stared
without blinking at the rows of human heads lying on the pavement,
carefully lined up as if to welcome the rescuing FORCE troops with their
accusatory stares. Kassad had returned to his command EMV, closed the
hatches, and - curling up in the warm darkness smelling of rubber,
heated plastics, charged ions - had heard her whispers over the babble
of the C3 channels and implant coding.
On the night before the Ouster retreat, Kassad left the command
conference on the HS Brazil, farcast to his HQ in the Indelibles north
of the Hyne Valley, and took his command car to the summit to watch the
final bombardment.
The nearest of the tactical nuclear strikes was forty-five kilometers
away. The plasma bombs blossomed like orange and blood-red flowers
planted in a perfect grid.
Kassad counted more than two hundred dancing columns of green light as
the hellwhip lances ripped the broad plateau to shreds. And even before
he slept, while he sat on the flare skirt of the EMV and shook pale
afterimages from his eyes, she came. She wore a pale blue dress and
walked lightly between the dead burr-root plants on the hillside.
The breeze lifted the hem of the soft fabric of her dress. Her face and
arms were pale, almost translucent. She called his name -
hecouldalmosthearthewords - andthenthesec-ond wave of bombardment rolled
in across the plain below him and everything was lost in noise and
flame.
As tends to be the case in a universe apparently ruled by irony, Fedmahn
Kassad passed unscathed through ninety° seven days of the worst fighting
the Hegemony had ever
seen, only to be wounded two days after the last of the Ousters had
retreated to their fleeing swarmships. He was in the Civic Center
Building in Buckminster, one of only three buildings left standing in
the city, giving curt answers to stupid questions from a Worldweb
newsteep when a plasma booby trap no larger than a microswitch exploded
fifteen floors above, blew the newsteep and two of Kassad's aides
through a ventilator grille into the street beyond, and dropped the
building on him.
Kassad was medevacked to division HQ and then far-cast to the JumpShip
now in orbit around Bressia's second moon. There he was resuscitated
and put on full life support while the military brass and Hegemony
politicians decided what to do with him.
Because of the farcaster connection and the real-time media coverage of
Bressia, Colonel Fedmahn Kassad had become somewhat of a cause cdibre.
Those billions who had been appalled by the unprecedented savagery of
the South Bressia campaign would have been pleased to see Kassad
court-martialed or tried for war crimes. CEO Gladstone and many others
considered Kassad and the other FORCE commanders as saviors.
In the end, Kassad was put on a hospital spinship for the slow trip back
to the Web. Since most of the physical repair would be done in fugue
anyway, it made some sense to let the old hospital ships work on the
seriously wounded and the revivable dead. By the time Kassad and
' the other patients reached the Worldweb, they would be ready for
active duty. More importantly, Kassad would have accrued a time-debt of
at least eighteen standard months and whatever controversy surrounded
him might well be over by that time.
Kassad awoke to see the dark shape of a woman bending over him. For a
second he was sure that it was her, and
then he realized that it was aFORCE medic.
'Am I dead?" he whispered.
'You were. You're on the HS Merrick. You've been through resuscitation
and renewal several times but you probably don't. remember because of
the fugue hangover.
We're ready to start the next step in physical
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

therapy. Do you feel like trying to walk?"
Kassad lifted his arm to cover his eyes. Even through the
disorientation of fugue state, he now remembered the painful therapy
sessions, the long hours in the RNA virus baths, and the surgery. Most
of all the surgery.
'What's our route?" he asked, still shielding his eyes. 'I forget how
we're getting back to the Web."
The medic smiled as if this were a question he asked each time he came
out of fugue. Perhaps it was. 'We'll be putting in at Hyperion and
Garden,' she said. 'We're just entering the orbit of..."
The woman was interrupted by the sound of the end of the world - great
brass trumpets blowing, metal ripping, furies screaming. Kassad rolled
off the bed, wrapping the mattress around him as he fell in the
one-sixth g.
Hurricane winds slid him across the deck and hurled pitchers, trays,
bedclothes, books, bodies, metal instruments, and countless other
objects at him. Men and women were screaming, their voices rising
through falsetto as the air rushed out of the ward. Kassad felt the
mattress slam into the wall; he looked out between clenched fists.
A meter from him, a football-sized spider with wildly waving legs was
trying to force itself into a crack which had suddenly appeared in the
bulkhead. The thing's jointless legs seemed to be swatting at the paper
and other detritus whirling around it. The spider rotated and Kassad
realized that it was the head of the medic; she had been decapitated in
the initial explosion. Her long hair writhed at Kassad's face. Then
the crack widened to the width of a fist and the head disappeared
through it.
Kassad pulled himself up just as the boom arm quit spinning and 'up'
ceased to be. The only forces now in play were the hurricane winds
still flinging everything in the ward toward the cracks and gaps in the
bulkhead and the sickening lurch and tumble of the ship. Kassad swam
against it all, pulling himself toward the door to the boom-arm
corridor, using every handhold he could find, kicking free the last five
meters. A metal tray struck him above the eye; a corpse with
hemorrhaged eyes almost tumbled him back into the ward. The airtight
emergency
doors were slamming uselessly into a dead Marine whose spacesuited body
blocked the seal from closing. Kassad rolled through into the boom-arm
shaft and pulled the corpse after him. The door sealed behind him, but
there was no more air in the shaft than there had been in the ward.
Somewhere a klaxon's scream thinned to inaudibility.
Kassad also screamed, trying to relieve the pressure so that his lungs
and eardrums would not burst. The boom arm was still draining air; he
and the corpse were being sucked the hundred and thirty meters to the
main body of the ship. He and the dead Marine tumbled along the
boom-arm shaft in a grisly waltz.
It took Kassad twenty seconds to slap open the emergency releases on the
Marine's suit, another minute to eject the man's corpse and to get his
own body in. He was at least ten centimeters taller than the dead man,
and although the suit was built to allow some expansion, it still
pinched painfully at his neck and wrists and knees.
The helmet squeezed his forehead like a cushioned vise.
Gobbets of blood and a moist white material clung to tbe inside of the
visor. The piece of shrapnel which had killed the Marine had left
entrance and exit holes, but tbe suit had done its best to seal itself.
Most of the chest lights were red and the suit did not respond when
Kassad ordered it to give a status report, but the rebreather worked,
although with a worrying rasp.
Kassad tried the suit radio. Nothing, not even background static. He
found the comlog lead, jacked into a hull termex. Nothing. The ship
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

pitched again then, metal reverberating to a succession of blows, and
Kassad was thrown against the wall of the boom-arm shaft. One of the
transport cages tumbled by, its severed cables whipping like the
tentacles of an agitated sea anemone. There were corpses in the cage
and more bodies tangled along the segments of spiral staircase still
intac along the shaft wall. Kassad kicked the remaining distance to the
end of the shaft and found all of the airtight doors there sealed, the
boom-arm shaft itself irised shut, but there were holes in the primary
bulkhead large enough to drive a commercial EMV through.
The ship lurched again and began to tumble more wildly, imparting
complex new Coriolis forces to Kassad and everything else in the shaft.
Kassad hung on torn metal and pulled himself through a rent in the
triple hull of the HS Merrick.
He almost laughed when he saw the interior. Whoever had lanced the old
hospital ship had done it right, chopping and stabbing the hull with
CPBs until pressure seals failed, self-seal units ruptured,
damage-control remotes overloaded, and the interior bulkheads collapsed.
Then the enemy ship had put missiles into the guts of the hulk with
warheads o f what the FORCE:space people quaintly called canister shot.
The effect had been quite similar to setting off an antipersonnel
grenade in a crowded rat maze.
Lights shone through a thousand holes, here and there becoming colorful
rays where they found a colloidal base in floating haze of dust or blood
or lubricant. From where Kassad hung, twisting with the lurch and
tumble of the ship, he could see a score or more of bodies, naked and
torn, each moving with the deceptive underwater-ballet grace of the
zero-gravity dead. Most of the corpses floated within their own small
solar systems of blood and tissue. Several of them watched Kassad with
the cartoon-character sares of their pressure-expanded eyes and seemed
to beckon him closer with random, languid movements of arms and hands.
Kassad kicked through the wreckage to reach the main dropshaft to the
command core. He had seen no weapons - it seemed that no one except the
Marine had managed to suit up - but he knew that there would be a
weapons locker in the command core or in the Marine quarters aft.
Kassad stopped at the last torn pressure seal and stared. He did laugh
this time. Beyond this point there was no main dropshaft, no aft
section. There was no ship. This section - a boom-arm and medical ward
mod, a ragged chunk of the hull - had been ripped free of the ship as
easily as Beowulf had torn the arm from Grendel's body. The final,
unsealed doorway to the dropshaft led to open space. Some kilometers
away,
Kassad could see a dozen other ravaged fragments of the HS Merrick
tumbling in the glare of sunlight. A green and lapis planet loomed so
close that Kassad felt a surge of acrophobia and clung more tightly to
the doorframe.
Even as he watched, a star moved above the limb of the planet, laser
weapons winked their ruby morse, and a gutted ship section half a
kilometer away across the gulf of vacuum from Kassad burst again in a
gout of vaporized metal, freezing volatiles, and tumbling black specks
which Kassad realized were bodies.
Kassad pulled himself deeper into the concealing tangle of wreckage and
considered his situation. The Marine's suit could not last more than
another hour -already Kassad could smell the rotten-eggs stench of the
malfunctioning rebreather - and he had seen no airtight compartment or
container during his struggle through the wreckage. And even if he
found a closet or air-lock to shelter in, what then? Kassad did not
know if the planet below was Hyperion or Garden, but he was sure that
there was no FORCE presence on either world. He was also quite sure
that no local defense forces would challenge an Ouster warship. It
would be days before any patrol craft investigated the wreckage. It was
quite possible, Kassad knew, that the orbit of the tumbling piece of
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

junk he now inhabited would decay before they sent anyone up to check on
it, sending thousands of tons of twisted metal burning through the
atmosphere.
The locals would not like that, Kassad knew, but from their point of
view it might be preferable to let a bit of sky fall than to antagonize
the Ousters. If the planet had primitive orbital defenses or
ground-based CPBs, he realized with a grim smile, it would make more
sense for them to blast the wreckage than to fire on the Ouster ship.
It would make no difference to Kassad. Unless he did something quickly,
he would be dead long before the remnants of the ship entered atmosphere
or the locals took action.
The Marine's amplification shield had been cracked by the shrapnel which
had killed him, but now Kassad tugged what was left of the viewplate
down over the
visor. Telltales winked red but there was still enough suit power to
show the amplified view glowing pale green through the spiderweb of
cracks. Kassad watched as the Ouster torchship stood off a hundred
klicks, its defense fields blurring background stars, and launched
several objects. For an instant Kassad was sure that these were the
coup de grdce missiles and he found himself grinning joylessly at the
certainty of having only a few seconds to live. Then he noticed their
low velocity and notched the amplification higher. The power lights
blinked red and the amplifier failed, but not before Kassad had seen the
tapering ovoid shapes, spotted with thrusters and cockpit blisters, each
trailing a tangle of six jointless manipulator arms. 'Squids,' the
FORCE:space people had called the Ouster boarding craft.
Kassad pulled himself farther back in the wreckage.
He had only a few minutes before one or more of the squids reached his
piece of the ship. How many Ousters would one of those things carry?
Ten? Twenty? Kassad was sure that it would be no fewer than ten. And
they would be well armed and rigged with infrared and motion sensors.
The elite Ouster equivalent of Hegemony Space Marines, the commandos
would not only have been trained for free-fall combat but had been born
and bred to zero-g. Their long limbs, prehensile toes, and prosthetic
tails would be added advantages for this environment, although Kassad
doubted that they needed any more advantages than they already had.
He began to pull himself carefully back through the labyrinth of twisted
metal, fighting the adrenaline fear-surge that made him want to kick off
screaming through the darkness. What did they want? Prisoners. That
would solve his immediate survival problem. All he had to do to survive
was surrender. The difficulty with that solution' was that Kassad had
seen the FORCE:intelligence holos of the Ouster ship they had captured
off Bressia. There had been more than two hundred prisoners in the
storage bay of that ship. And the Ousters obviously had many questions
for these Hegemony citizens.
Perhaps they had found it inconvenient to feed and imprison so many- or
perhaps it was their basic
interrogation policy - but the fact was that the Bressian civilians and
captured FORCE troops had been found flayed open and pinned down on
steel trays like frogs in a biology lab, their organs bathed with
nutrient fluids, arms and legs efficiently amputated, eyes removed, and
their minds readied for interrogators' questions with crude cortical
comtaps and shunt-plugs jacked directly through three-centimeter holes
in the skulls.
Kassad pulled himself along, floating through debris and the tangled
entrails of the ship's wiring. He felt no inclination whatsoever to
surrender. The tumbling hulk vibrated and then steadied some as at
least one of the squids attached itself to the hull or bulkhead. Think,
Kassad commanded. He needed a weapon more than a hiding place. Had he
seen anything during his crawl through the wreckage that would help him
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

survive?
Kassad stopped moving and hung from an exposed section of fiberoptic
cable while he thought. The medical ward where he had awakened, beds,
fugue tanks, intensive care apparatus... most of it expelled through
the breaches in the spinmod's hull. Boom-arm shaft, elevator cage,
corpses on the stairs. No weapons. Most of the bodies had been
stripped by the canister shot explosions or sudden decompression. The
elevator cables? No, too long, impossible to sever without tools.
Tools? He had seen none. The medical offices fiayed open along the
corridors beyond the main dropshaft. Medical imaging rooms, MRI tanks,
and CPD bays flung open like looted sarcophagi. At least one operating
room intact, its interior a maze of scattered instruments and floating
cables.
The solarium, scraped clean when the windows exploded outward. Patient
lounges. Medics' lounges. The scrub rooms, corridors, and
unidentifiable cubicles. The corpses.
Kassad hung there a second longer, oriented himself in tbe tumbling maze
of light and shadow, and then kicked off.
He had hoped for ten minutes; he was given less than eight. He knew
that the Ousters would be methodical and efficient but had
underestimated how efficient they could be in zero-g. He gambled his
life that there would
be at least two of them on each sweep - basic Space Marine procedure,
much as FORCE:ground jump rats had learned to go door to door il city
fighting, one to burst into each room, the other to provide cover fire.
If there were more than two, if the Ousters worked in squads of four,
Kassad almost certainly would be dead.
He was floating in the middle of Operating Room 3 when the Ouster came
through the door. Kassad's febfeather had all but failed, he was
floating immobile, gasping foul air, as the Ouster commando swung in,
swung aside, and brought his two weapons to bear on the unarmed figure
in a battered Marine spacesuit.
Kassad had bargained that the gruesome condition of his suit and visor
would gain him a second or two.
Behind his gore-smeared faceplate, Kassad's eyes stared sightlessly
upward as the Ouster's chestlight swept across him. The commando
carried two weapons- a sonic stunner in one hand and a smaller but much
more lethal tightbeam pistol in the long toes of his left 'foot." He
raised the sonic. Kassad had time to notice the killing spike on the
prosthetic tail and then he triggered the mouse in his gauntleted right
hand.
It had taken Kassad most of his eight minutes to tie in the emergency
generator to the operating-room circuits.
Not all of the surgery lasers had survived, but six still worked. Kassad
had positioned four of the smaller ones to cover the area just to the
left of the doorway, the two bone-cutters to target the space to the
right. The Ouster had moved to the right.
The Ouster's suit exploded. The lasers continued to slice away in their
preprogrammed circles as Kassad propelled himself forward, ducking under
the blue beams now swirling in a spreading mist of useless suit sealant
and boiling blood. He wrested the sonic away just as the second Ouster
swung into the room, agile as an Old Earth chimp.
Kassad pressed the sonic against the man's helmet and fired. The suited
figure went !imp. The prosthetic tail spasmed a few times from random
nerve impulses. Triggering the sonic that close was no way to take a
prisoner; a burst from that distance turned a human brain into
something resembling oatmeal mush. Kassad did not want to take a
prisoner.
He kicked free,. grabbed a girder, swept the active sonic across the
open doorway. No one else came through. A check twenty seconds later
showed an empty corridor.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Kassad ignored the first body and stripped the man with the intact suit.
The commando was naked under the spacesuit and it turned out not to be a
man; the female commando had short-cropped blond hair, small breasts,
and a tattoo just above her line of pubic hair. She was very pale and
droplets of blood floated from her nose, ears, and eyes. Kassad made a
note that the Ousters used women in their Marines. All of the Ouster
bodies on Bressia had been male.
He kept his helmet and rebreather pack on as he kicked the body aside
and tugged on the unfamiliar suit.
Vacuum exploded blood vessels in his flesh. Deep cold nipped at him as
he struggled with strange clasps and locks. Tall as he was, he was too
short for the woman's suit. He could operate the hand gauntlets by
stretching, but the foot gloves and tail connections were hopeless.
Hc let them hang useless as he bailed out of his own helmet and wrestled
the Ouster bubble into place.
Lights in the collar diskey glowed amber and violet.
Kassad heard the rush of air through aching eardrums and almost gagged
as a thick, rich stench assailed him.
He assumed it was the sweet smell of home to an Ouster.
Earphone patches in the bubble whispered coded commands in a language
which sounded like an audio tape of Ancient English played backward at
high speed.
Kassad was gambling again, this time on the fact that Ouster ground
units on Bressia had functioned as semi-independent teams united by
voice radio and basic telemetry rather than a FORCE:ground type of
tactical implant web. If they used the same system here, then the
commando leader might know that two of his (or her) troops were missing,
possibly even have medcom readings on them, but might not know exactly
where they were.
Kassad decided that it was time to quit hypothesizing
and to get moving. He programmed the mouse to have the surgical lasers
fire on anything entering the operating room, and then bounce-stumbled
his way down the corridor.
Moving in one of these damn suits, he thought, was like trying to walk
in a gravity field while standing on your own trousers. He had brought
along both energy pistols and - finding no belt, lockrings, hooks,
Velcro pads, macclamps, or pockets to secure them with - now floated
along like some drunken holodrama pirate, a weapon in each hand,
bouncing from wall to wall. Reluc-tanfly, he left one pistol floating
behind him while he tried to hook himself along one-handed. The
gauntlet fit like a size fifteen mitten on a size two hand. The damned
tail wobbled, banged against his helmet bubble, and was a literal pain
in the ass.
Twice he squeezed into crevices when he saw lights in the distance. He
was just about to the deck opening where he had watched the squid
approach when he rounded a corner and almost floated into three Ouster
commandos.
The fact that he was wearing an Ouster suit gave him at least a
two-second advantage. He shot the first suited figure in the helmet at
point-blank range. The second man- or woman- fired a wild sonic burst
past Kassad's left shoulder a second before he put three bolts into the
Ouster's chestplate. The third commando flipped backward, found three
handholds, and was out of sight around a broken bulkhead before Kassad
could retarget. His headset rang with curses, commands, and questions.
Kassad gave silent chase.
The third Ouster would have escaped if he had not rediscovered honor and
turned to fight. Kassad felt an inexplicable sense of djt vu as he put
an energy bolt through the man's left eye from five meters away.
The corpse tumbled backward into sunlight. Kassad pulled himself to the
opening and stared at the squid moored not twenty meters'away. It was,
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

he thought, the first undiluted piece of luck he had had in some time.
He kicked across the gap, knowing that if someone wanted to shoot him
from the squid or the wreckage there was nothing he could do about it.
He felt the
scrotum-lifting tension he always experienced when he was an obvious
target. No shots were fired. Commands and interrogatives squawked in
his ears. He could not understand them, did not know where they
originated, and, on the whole, thought it best if he stayed out of the
dialogue.
The clumsiness of the suit almost caused him to miss the squid. He
thought briefly that such an anticlimax would be the universe's fitting
verdict on his martial pretensions: the brave warrior floating off into
near-planet orbit, no maneuvering systems, no propellant, no reaction
mass of any sort - even the pistol was non-recoil.
He would end his life as useless and harmless as a child's runaway
balloon.
Kassad stretched until his joints popped, caught a whip antenna, and
pulled himself hand over handto the squid's hull.
Where the hell was the airlock? The hull was relatively smooth for a
spacefaring vessel but was decorated with a riot of designs, decals, and
panels announcing what he assumed were the Ouster equivalents of NO STEP
and DANGER: THRUSTER PORT. No entrances were visible. He guessed that
there were Ousters on board, a pilot at least, and that they were
probably wondering why their returning commando was crawling around the
hull like a spavined crab rather than cycling the airlock. Or perhaps
they knew why and were waiting inside with drawn pistols.
At any rate, it was obvious that no one was going to open the door for
him.
The hell with it, thought Kassad and shot out one of 'the observation
blisters.
The Ousters kept a tidy ship. Not much more than the equivalent of a
few lost paper clips and coins geysered out with the ship's air. Kassad
waited until the eruption had died down and squeezed through the gap.
He was in the carrier section: a cushioned hold looking a lot like the
jump rat bay of any dropship or APC.
Kassad made a mental note that a squid probably held about twenty Ouster
commandos in full vacuum combat gear. Now it was empty. An open hatch
led to the cockpit.
Only the command pilot had remained on board and he was in the final
process of unbelting when Kassad shot him. Kassad pushed the body into
the carrier section and strapped himself into what he hoped was the
command chair.
Warm sunlight came through the blister above him.
Video monitors and console hoios showed scenes from dead ahead, astern,
and shoulder-camera glimpses of the search operation inside. Kassad
caught a glimpse of the nude body in Operating Room 3 and several
figures in a firefight with surgical lasers.
In the holodramas of Fedmahn Kassad's childhood, heroes always seemed to
know how to operate skimmers, spacecraft, exotic EMVs, and other strange
machinery whenever the need arose. Kassad had been trained to handle
military transports, simple tanks and APCs, even an assault boat or
dropship if he was desperate. If stranded on a runaway FORCE
spacecraft, a remote possibility, he could find his way around the
command core sufficiently to communicate with the primary computer or
put out a distress call on a radio or fatline transmitter.
Sitting in the command chair of an Ouster squid, Kassad did not have a
clue.
That was not quite true. He immediately recognized the remote grip
slots for the squid's tentacle manipulators, and given two or three
hours of thought and inspection, he might have figured out several other
controls. He did not have the time. The forward screen showed three
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

spacesuited figures jumping for the squid, firing as they came. The
pale, oddly alien head of an Ouster commander suddenly materialized on
the holo console. Kassad heard shouts from his bubble earpatches.
Globules of sweat hung in front of his eyes and streaked the inside of
his helmet. He shook them away as best he could, squinted at the
control consoles, and pushed several likely-looking surfaces. If there
were voice command circuits, override controls, or a suspicious ship's
computer, Kassad knew, he was screwed. He had thought of all this in
the second or two before he shot the pilot but had not been able to
think of a way to coerce
or trust the man. No, this had to be the way, thought
Kassad even as he tapped more control surfaces.
A thruster began firing.
The squid pulled and tugged at its moorings. Kassad bounced back and
forth in his webbing. 'Shit,' he whispered, his first audible comment
since he had asked the FORCE medic where the ship was putting in. He
strained far enough forward to get his gauntleted fingers into the grip
slots. Four of the six manipulators released. One ripped off. The
final one tore away a chunk of bulkhead from the HS Merrick.
The squid tumbled free. Video cameras showed two of the space-suited
figures missing their jumps, the third clutching at the same whip
antenna which had saved Kassad. Knowing roughly where the thruster
controls were'now, Kassad tapped in a frenzy. An overhead light came
on. All of the holo projectors went dead. The squid commenced a
maneuver which incorporated all of the most violent elements of pitch,
roll, and yaw. Kassad saw the spacesuited form tumble past the overhead
blister, appear briefly on the forward video screen, become a speck on
the aft screen. The Ouster was still firing energy bolts as he - or she
- became too small to see.
Kassad struggled to stay conscious as the violent tumbling continued.
Various voice and visual alarms were screaming for his attention. Kassad
tapped at thruster controls, considered it a success, and pulled his
hands away when he felt as if he were being pulled apart in only two
directions rather than five.
A random camera shot showed him that the torchship was receding. Good.
Kassad had no doubt that the Ouster warship could destroy him at any
second, and that it would if he approached or threatened it in any way.
He did not know if the squid was armed, personally doubted if it would
carry anything larger than antipersonnel weapons, but he knew beyond a
doubt that no torchship commander would allow an out-of-control
shuttlecraft to come anywhere near his ship.
Kassad assumed that the Ousters all knew by now that the squid had been
hijacked by the enemy. He would not be surprised - disappointed, but
not surprised - if the
torchship vaporized him at any second, but in the meantime he was
counting on two emotions that were quint-essentially human if not
necessarily Ouster human: curiosity and the desire for revenge.
Curiosity, he knew, could easily be overridden in times of stress, but
he counted on a paramilitary, semifeudal culture like the Ousters' to be
deeply involved with revenge. Everything else being equal, with no
chance to hurt them further and almost no chance to escape, it would
seem that Colonel Fedmahn Kassad had become a prime candidate for one of
their dissection trays. He hoped so.
Kassad looked at the forward video display, frowned, and loosened his
harness long enough to look out the overhead blister. The ship was
tumbling but not nearly so violently as before. The planet seemed
closer - one hemisphere filled the view 'above' him - but he had no idea
how close the squid Was to atmosphere. He could read none of the data
displays. He could only guess what their orbital velocity had been and
how violent a reentry shock would be. His one long glimpse from the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

wreckage of the Merrick had suggested to Kassad that they were very
close, perhaps only five or six hundred klicks above the surface, and in
the kind of parking orbit which he knew preceded the launching of
dropships.
Kassad tried to wipe his face and frowned when the tips of loose
gauntlet fingers tapped at his visor. He was tired. Hell, only a few
hours earlier he had been in fugue and just a few ship-weeks before that
he had almost certainly been body-dead.
He wondered if the world below was Hyperion or Garden; he had been to
neither but knew that Garden was more widely settled, closer to becoming
a Hegemony colony. He hoped it was Garden.
The torchship launched three assault boats. Kassad saw them clearly
before the aft camera panned beyond range. He tapped at the thruster
controls until it felt as though the ship was tumbling more quickly
toward the wall of planet above. There was little else he could do.
The squid reached atmosphere before the three Ouster assault boats
reached the squid. The boats undoubtedly were armed and well within
range, but someone on the command circuit must have been curious. Or
furious.
Kassad's squid was in no way aerodynamic. As with most ship-to-ship
craft, the squid could flirt with planetary atmospheres but was doomed
if it dove too deeply into the gravity well. Kassad saw the telltale
red glow of reentry, heard the ion buildup on the active radio channels,
and suddenly wondered if this had been such a good idea.
Atmospheric drag stabilized the squid and Kassad felt the first
tentative tug of gravity as he searched the console and the command
chair arms for the control circuit he prayed would be there. A
static-filled video screen showed one of the dropships growing a
blue-plasma tall as it decelerated. The illusion created was similar to
that encountered when one skydiver watched another open his chute or
activate his suspension rig; the assault boat seemed to climb suddenly.
Kassad had other things to worry about. There seemed to be no obvious
bail-out control, no ejection apparatus.
Every FORCE:space shuttle carried some sort of atmospheric egress
device- it was a custom dating back almost eight centuries to when the
entire realm of space flight consisted only of tentative excursions just
above the skin of Old Earth's atmosphere. A ship-to-ship shuttle
probably would never need a planetary bail-out device, but age-old fears
written into ancient regulations tended 'to die hard.
Or so the theory went. Kassad could find nothing. The ship was quaking
now, spinning, and beginning to heat up in earnest. Kassad slapped open
his harness release and pulled himself toward the rear of the squid, not
even sure what he was looking for. Suspension packs? Parachutes?
A set of wings?
There was nothing in the troop carrier section except the corpse of the
Ouster pilot and a few storage compartments not much larger than
lunchboxes. Kassad tore through them, finding nothing bigger than a
medkit. No miracle devices.
Kassad could hear the squid shaking and beginning to break up as he hung
on a pivot ring and all but accepted the fact that the Ousters had not
wasted money or space on such low-probability rescue devices for their
squids.
Why should they? Their lifetimes were spent in the dark-nesses between
star systems; their concept of an atmosphere was the eight-klick
pressurized tube of a can city.
The external audio sensors on Kassad's bubble helmet began to pick up
the raging hiss of air on the hull and through the broken blister in the
aft section. Kassad shrugged. He had gambled too many times and lost.
The squid shuddered and bounced. Kassad could hear the manipulator
tentacles tearing away from the bow.
The Ouster's corpse suddenly was sucked up and out of the broken blister
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

like an ant into a vacuum cleaner.
Kassad clung to the pivot ring and stared through the open hatch at the
control seats in the cockpit. It struck him that they were wonderfully
archaic, like something out of a textbook of the earliest spacecraft.
Parts of the ship's exterior were burning away now, roaring past the
observation blisters like gobbets of lava. Kassad closed his eyes and
tried to remember lectures from Olympus Command School on the structure
and layout of ancient spacegoing craft. The squid began a terminal
tumble.
The noise was incredible.
'By Allah!" gasped Kassad, a cry he had not uttered since childhood. He
began pulling himself forward into the cockpit, bracing himself on the
open hatch, finding handholds on the deck as if he were climbing a
vertical wall. He was climbing a wall. The squid had spun, stabilized
in a stern-first death dive. Kassad climbed under a 3-g load, knowing
that a single slip would break every bone in his body. Behind 'him,
atmospheric hiss turned to a scream and then to a dragon roar. The
troop carrier section was burning through in fierce, molten explosions.
Climbing into the command seat was like negotiating a rock overhang with
the weight of two other climbers swinging from his back. The clumsy
gauntlets made his grip on the headrest even less sure as Kassad hung
over the vertical drop to the flaming cauldron of the carrier
section. The ship lurched, Kassad swung his legs up, and he was in the
command seat. The display videos were dead. Flame heated the overhead
blister to a sick red.
Kassad almost lost consciousness as he bent forward, his fingers feeling
in the darkness below the command seat, between his knees. There was
nothing. Wait... a hand-grip.
No, sweet Christ and Allah . . . a D-ring. Something out of the
history books.
The squid began o break up. Overhead, the blister burned through and
spattered liquid Perspex throughout the interior of the cockpit,
splashing Kassad's suit and visor. He smelled plastic melting· The
squid was spinning as it broke up. Kassad's sight turned pink, dimmed,
was gone. He used numb fingers to tighten the harness · . . tighter...
either it was cutting into his chest or the Perspex had burned through.
His hand went back to the D-ring. Fingers too clumsy to close around
it... no.
Pull.
Too late. The squid flew apart in a final screech and explosion of
flame, the control console tearing through the cockpit in ten thousand
shrapnel-sized bits.
Kassad was slammed into his seat. Up. Out. Into the
heart of the flame.
Tumbling·
Kassad was dimly aware that the seat was projecting its own containment
field as it tumbled. Flame was centimeters from his face.
Pyrobolts fired, kicking the ejection seat out of the squid's blazing
slipstream. The command seat made its own track of blue flame across
the sky. Microprocessors spun the seat so that the disc of the
forcefield was between Kassad and the furnace of friction. A giant sat
on Kassad's chest as he decelerated across two thousand kilometers of
sky at eight gravities.
Kassad forced his eyelids open once, noted that he lay curled in the
belly of a long column of blue-white flame, and then he closed his eyes
again. He saw no sign of a control for a parachute, suspension pack, or
any other braking device· It didn't matter· He could not move his arms
or hands in any case.
The giant shifted, grew heavier·
Kassad realized that part of his helmet bubble had melted or been blown
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

away. The noise was indescribable.
It didn't matter.
He closed his eyes more tightly. It was a good time to take a nap.
Kassad opened his eyes and saw the dark shape of a woman bending over
him. For a second he thought it was her. He looked again and realized
that it was her. She touched his cheek with cool fingers.
'Am I dead?" whispered Kassad, raising his own hand to grip her wrist.
'No." Her voice was soft and throaty, burred with the hint of an accent
he could not place. He had never heard
her speak before.
'You're real?" 'Yes."
Kassad sighed and looked around. He lay naked under a thin robe on some
sort of couch or platform set in the middle of a dark, cavernous room.
Overhead, starlight was visible through a broken roof. Kassad raised
his other hand to touch her shoulder. Her hair was a dark nimbus above
him. She wore a loose, thin gown which -even in the starlight - allowed
him to see the outlines of her body. He caught her scent, the fragrant
hint of soap and skin and her that he knew so well from their other
times together.
'You must have questions,' she whispered as Kassad released the gold
clasp which held her gown in place. The gown whispered to the floor.
She wore nothing underneath.
Above them, the band of the Milky Way was clearly visible·
'No,' said Kassad and pulled her to him.
Toward morning a breeze arose, and Kassad pulled the light cover over
them. The thin material seemed to preserve all of their body heat and
they lay together in perfect warmth. Somewhere sand or snow rasped at
bare walls. The stars were very clear and very bright.
They awoke at the first hint of dawn, their faces close
together under the silken coverlet. She ran her hand
down Kassad's side, finding old and recent scars.
'Your name?" whispered Kassad.
'Hush,' she whispered back, her hand sliding lower.
Kassad moved his face into the scented curve of her neck. Her breasts
were soft against him. Night paled to morning. Somewhere sand or snow
blew against bare walls.
They made love, slept, made love again. In full light they rose and
dressed. She had laid out underwear, gray tunic and trousers for
Kassad. They fit perfectly, as did the spongesocks and soft hoots. The
woman wore a similar outfit of navy blue.
'Your name?" Kassad asked as they left the building with the shattered
dome and walked through a dead city.
'Moneta,' said his dream, 'or Mnemosyne, whichever name pleases you
more."
'Moneta,' whispered Kassad. He looked up at a small
sun rising into a lapis sky. 'This is Hyperion?"
'Yes."
'How did I land? Suspensor field? Parachute?" 'You descended under a
wing of gold foil." 'I don't hurt. There were no wounds?" 'They were
tended to." 'What is this place?"
'The City of Poets. Abandoned more than a hundred years ago. Beyond
that hill lie the Time Tombs."
'The Ouster assault boats that were following me?"
'One landed nearby. The Pain Lord took the crew unto
himself. The other two set down some distance away." 'Who is the Pain
Lord?"
'Come,' said Moneta. The dead city ended in desert.
Fine sand slid across white marble half buried in dunes.
To the west an Ouster dropship sat with its portals irised open. Nearby,
on a fallen column, a thermcube yielded hot coffee and fresh-baked
rolls. They ate and drank in silence.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Kassad worked to recall the legends of Hyperion. 'The Pain Lord is the
Shrike,' he said at last.
'Of course."
'You're from here... from the City of Poets?" Moneta smiled and slowly
shook her head.
Kassad finished his coffee and set the cup down. The feeling that he
was in a dream persisted, much stronger than during any sim he had ever
participated in. But the coffee had tasted pleasantly bitter; the sun
was warm on his face and hands.
'Come, Kassad,' said Moneta.
They crossed expanses of cold sand. Kassad found himself glancing
skyward, knowing that the Ouster torchship could lance them from
orbit... then knowing with a sudden certainty that it would not.
The Time Tombs lay in a valley. A low obelisk glowed softly. A stone
sphinx seemed to absorb the light. A complex structure of twisted
pylons threw shadows onto itself. Other tombs were silhouettes against
the rising sun. Each of the tombs had a door and each door was open.
Kassad knew that they had been open when the first explorers discovered
the Tombs and that the structures were empty. More than three
centuries of searching for hidden rooms, tombs, vaults, and passageways
had been fruitless.
'This is as far as you can go,' Moneta said as they neared the cliff at
the head of the valley. 'The time tides are strong today."
Kassad's tactical implant was silent. He had no comlog. He searched
his memory. 'There are anti entropic forcefields around the Time
Tombs,' he said.
'Yes."
'The tombs are ancient. The anti-entropic fields keep them from aging."
'No,' said Moneta. 'The time tides drive the Tombs backward through
time."
'Backward through time,' Kassad repeated stupidly.
'Look."
Shimmering, miragelike, a tree of steel thorns appeared out of the haze
and a sudden dust storm of ochre sand. The thing seemed to fill the
valley, rising at least two hundred meters to the height of the cliffs.
Branches shifted, dissolved, and reformed like elements of a poorly
tuned hologram. Sunlight danced on five meter-long thorns. Corpses of
Ouster men and women, all naked, were impaled on at least a score of
these thorns. Other branches held other bodies. Not all were human.
The dust storm obscured the view for a moment and when the winds
subsided the vision was gone. 'Come,' said Moneta.
Kassad followed her through the fringes of the time tides, avoiding the
ebb and flow of the anti-entropic field the way children would play tag
with an ocean surf on a broad beach. Kassad felt the pull of the time
tides like waves of ddjd vu tugging at every cell of his body.
Just beyond the entrance to the valley, where hills opened to the dunes
and low moors led to the City of Poets, Moneta touched a wall of blue
slate and an entrance opened to a long, low room set into the cliff
face.
'Is this where you live?" asked Kassad but saw immediately that there
were no signs of habitation. The stone walls of the room were inset
with shelves and crowded niches.
'We must ready ourselves,' whispered Moneta and the lighting shifted to
a golden hue. A long rack lowered its wares. A wafer-thin strip of
reflective polymer curtained from the ceiling to serve as a mirror.
Kassad watched with the calm passivity of a dreamer as Moneta stripped
off her clothes and then his. Their nudity was no longer erotic, merely
ceremonial.
'You have been in my dreams for years,' he told her.
'Yes. Your past. My future. The shock wave of events moves across
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

time like ripples on a pond."
Kassad blinked as she raised a gold ferule and touched his chest. He
felt a slight shock and his flesh became a mirror, his head and face a
featureless ovoid reflecting all the color tones and textures of the
room. A second later Moneta joined him, her body becoming a cascade of
reflections, water over quicksilver over chrome.
Kassad saw his own reflecting reflection in every curve and muscle of
her body. Moneta's breasts caught and bent the light; her nipples rose
like small splashes on a mirrored pond. Kassad moved to embrace her and
felt
their surfaces flow together like magnetized fluid. Under the connected
fields, his flesh touched hers.
'Your enemies await beyond the city,' she whispered.
The chrome of her face flowed with light.
'Enemies?"
'The Ousters. The ones who followed you here."
Kassad shook his head, saw the reflection do likewise.
'They're not important anymore."
'Oh, yes,' whispered Moneta, 'the enemy is always important. You must
arm yourself."
'With what?" But even as he spoke, Kassad realized that she was touching
him with a bronze sphere, a dull blue toroid. His altered body spoke to
him now as clearly as troops reporting in on an implant command circuit.
Kassad felt the bloodlust build in him with turgid strength.
'Come." Moneta led the way into open desert again.
The sunlight seemed polarized and heavy. Kassad felt that they were
gliding across the dunes, flowing like liquid through the white marble
streets of the dead city.
Near the west end of town, near the shattered remnants of a structure
still bearing the inscribed lintel of Poets' Amphitheatre, something
stood waiting.
For a second Kassad thought it was another person wearing the chromium
forcefields he and Moneta were draped in - but only for a second. There
was nothing human about this particular quicksilver-over-chrome
construct. Kassad dreamily noted the four arms, retractable
fingerblades, the profusion of thornspikes on throat, forehead, wrists,
knees, and body, but not once did his gaze leave the two
thousand-faceted eyes which burned with a red flame that paled sunlight
and dimmed the day to blood shadows.
The Shrike, thought Kassad.
'The Lord of Pain,' whispered Moneta.
The thing turned and led them out of the dead city.
Kassad approved of the way the Ousters had prepared their defenses. The
two assault boats were grounded less than half a kilometer apart, their
guns, projectors, and missile turrets covering each other and a full
three
hundred and sixty degrees of fire. Ouster ground troops had been busy
diing revetments a hundred meters out from the boats and Kassad could
see at least two EM tanks hull down, their projection arrays and launch
tubes commanding the wide, empty moor between the Poets' City and the
boats. Kassad's vision had been altered; he could see the overlapping
ship containment fields as ribbons of yellow haze, the motion sensors
and antipersonnel mines as eggs of pulsing red light.
He blinked, realizing that something was wrong with the image. Then it
came to him: besides the thickness of the light and his enhanced
perception of energy fields, nothing was moving. The Ouster troops,
even those set in attitudes of motion, were as stiff as the toy soldiers
he had played with as a boy in the Thatsis slums. The EM tanks were dug
into their hull-down positions, but Kassad noticed that now even their
acquisition radars - visible to him as concentric purple arcs - were
motionless.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

He glanced skyward and saw some sort of large bird hanging in the sky,
as unmoving as an insect frozen in amber. He passed a cloud of
windblown dust hanging suspended, extended one chrome hand, and flicked
spirals of particles to the ground.
Ahead of them, the Shrike strode casually through the red maze of
sensor-mines, stepped over the blue lines of tripbeams, ducked under the
violet pulses of the autofire scanners, passed through the yellow
containment field and the green wall of the sonic defense perimeter, and
walked into the assault boat's shadow. Moneta and Kassad followed.
--How is this possible? Kas,xi realized that he had posed the question
through a medium that was something less than telepathy but something
far more sophis ticated than implant conduction.
--He controls time.
-- The Pain Lord?
--Of course.
--Why are we here?
Moneta gestured toward the motionless Ousters.
-- They are your enemies.
Kassad felt that he was finally awaking from a long
dream. This was real. The Ouster trooper's eyes, unblinking behind his
helmet, were real. The Ouster assault boat, rising like a bronze
tombstone to his left, was real.
Fedmahn Kassad realized that he could kill them all -commandos, assault
boat crew, all of them- and they could do nothing about it. He knew
that time had not stopped - any more than it stopped while a ship was
under Hawking drive - it was merely a matter of varying rates. The bird
frozen above them would complete the flap of its wings given enough
minutes or hours. The Ouster in front of him would close his eyes in a
blink if Kassad had the patience to watch long enough. Meanwhile,
Kassad and Moneta and the Shrike could kill all of them without the
Ousters realizing that they were under attack.
It was not fair, Kassad realized. It was wrong. It was the ultimate
violation of the New Bushido, worse in its way than the wanton murder of
civilians. The essence of honor lay in the moment of combat between
equals. He was about to communicate this to Moneta when she
said/thought -- Watch.
Time began again with an explosion of sound not unlike the rush of air
into an airlock. The bird soared and circled overhead. A desert breeze
threw dust against the static-charged containment field. An Ouster
commando rose from one knee, saw the Shrike and the two human shapes,
screamed something over his tactical comm channel, and raised his energy
weapon.
The Shrike did not seem to move - to Kassad it merely ceased being here
and appeared there. The Ouster commando emitted a second, shorter
scream, and then looked down in disbelief as the Shrike's arm withdrew
with the man's heart in its bladed fist. The Ouster stared, opened his
mouth as if to speak, and collapsed.
Kassad turned to his right and found himself face to face with an
armored Ouster. The commando ponderously lifted a weapon. Kassad swung
his arm, felt the chrome forcefield hum, and saw the flat of his hand
cut through body armor, helmet, and neck. The Ouster's head rolled in
the dust.
Kassad leaped into a low trench and saw several troopers begin to turn.
Time was still out of joint; the enemy moved in extreme slow motion one
second, jerked like a damaged holo to four-fifths speed in the next
instant.
They were never as quick as Kassad. Gone were his thoughts of the New
Bushido. These were the barbarians who had tried to kill him. He broke
one man's back, stepped aside, jabbed rigid, chrome fingers through the
body armor of a second man, crushed the larynx of a third, dodged a
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

knife blade moving in slow motion and kicked the spine out of the knife
wielder. He leaped up
out of the ditch.
--Kassad!
Kassad ducked as the laser beam crept past his shoulder, burning its way
through the air like a slow fuse of ruby light. Kassad smelled ozone as
it crackled past.
Impossible. l've dodged a laser/He picked up a stone and flung it at
the Ouster manning the tank-mounted he!iwhip. A sonic boom cracked; the
gunner exploded backward. Kassad pulled a plasma grenade from a
corpse's bandolier, leaped to the tank hatch, was thirty meters away
before the explosion geysered flame as high as the assault boat's bow.
Kassad paused in the eye of the storm to see Moneta in the center of her
own circle of carnage. Blood splashed her but did not adhere, flowing
like oil on water across the rainbow curves of chin, shoulder, breast,
and belly.
She looked at him across the battlefield and Kassad felt a renewed surge
of bloodlust in himself.
Behind her, the Shrike moved slowly through the chaos, choosing victims
as if he were harvesting. Kassad watched the creature wink in and out
of existence and real'-d that to the Pain Lord he and Moneta would
appear to be moving as slowly as the Ousters did to Kassado
Time jumped, moved to four-fifths speed. The surviving troops were
panicking now, firing into one another, deserting their posts, and
fighting to get aboard the assault boat. Kassad tried to realize what
the past minute or two had been like for them: blurs moving through
their defensive positions, comrades dying in
great gouts of blood. Kassad watched Moneta moving through their ranks,
killing at her leisure. To his amazement, he discovered that he had
some control of time: blink and his opponents slowed to one-third speed,
blink and events moved at nearly their normal pace. Kassad's sense of
honor and sanity called out for him to stop the slaughter but his almost
sexual bloodlust overpowered any objections.
Someone in the assault boat had sealed the airlock and now a terrified
commando used a shaped plasma charge to blow the portal open. The mob
pressed in, trampling the wounded in their flight from unseen killers.
Kassad followed them in.
The phrase 'fight like a cornered rat' is an extremely apt description.
Throughout the history of military encounters, human combatants have
been known to fight at their fiercest when challenged in enclosed places
where flight is not an option. Whether in the passageways of La Haye
Sainte and Hougoumont at Waterloo or in the Hive tunnels of Lusus, some
of the most terrible hand-to-hand battles in history have been fought in
cramped spaces where no retreat is possible. It was true this day. The
Ousters fought... and died... like cornered rats.
The Shrike had disabled the assault boat. Moneta remained outside to
kill the threescore commandos who had stayed at their posts. Kassad
killed those within.
In the end, the final assault boat fired on its doomed counterpart.
Kassad was outside by then and he watched the particle beams and
high-intensity lasers creep toward him, followed an eternity later by
missiles which seemed to move so slowly that he could have written his
name on them in flight. By that time all of the Ousters were dead in
and around the overrun boat, but its containment field held. Energy
dispersion and impact explosions tossed corpses around on the outer
perimeter, set fire to equipment, and glazed the sand to glass, but
Kassad and Moneta watched from inside a dome of orange flame as the
remaining assault boat retreated to space.
--Can we stop them? Kassad was panting, pouring sweat, and literally
quivering from excitement.
-- We could, replied Moneta, but we do not want to.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

They will carry the message to the swarm.
--Wt message?
'Come here, Kassad?
He turned at the sound of her voice. The reflective forcefield was
gone· Moneta's flesh was oiled with sweat; her dark hair was matted
against her temples; her nipples were hard. 'Come here."
Kassad glanced down at himself. His own forcefield was gone - he had
willed it away - and he was more
sexually excited than he could ever remember being.
'Come here." Moneta whispered this time·
Kassad went to her, lifted her, felt the sweat-slick smoothness of her
buttocks as he carried her to an empty stretch of grass atop a
wind-carved hummock. He lowered her to the ground between piles of
Ouster bodies, roughly opened her legs, took both her hands in the grasp
of one of his, lifted her arms above her head, pinned them to the
ground, and lowered his long body between her legs.
'Yes,' whispered Morteta as he kissed the lobe of her left ear, set his
lips to the pulse at the hollow of her neck, licked the salt tang of
sweat from her breasts. Lying among the dead. More dead to come. The
thousands.
The millions. Laughter out of dead bellies. The long lines of troops
emerging from JumpShips to enter the waiting flames.
'Yes." Her breath was hot in his ear. She freed her hands, slid them
along Kassad's damp shoulders, trailed long nails down his back, grasped
his buttocks to pull him closer. Kassad's erection scraped her pubic
hair, throbbed against the cusp of her belly. Farcaster portals opening
to admit the cold lengths of attack carriers. The warmth of plasma
explosions. Hundreds of ships, thousands, dancing and dying like dust
motes in a whirlwind.
Great columns of solid ruby light lancing across great distances,
bathing targets in the ultimate surge of warmth, bodies boiling in red
light.
'Yes." Moneta opened her mouth and body to him.
Warmth above and below, her tongue in his mouth as he entered her,.
welcomed by warm friction. His body
strained deep, pulled back slightly, allowed the moist warmth to engulf
him further as they began to move together. Heat on a hundred worlds.
Continents burning in bright spasms, the roll of boiling seas. The air
itself aflame. Oceans of superheated air swelling like warm skin rising
to a lover's touch.
'Yes... yes... yes." Moneta breathes warmth against his lips. Her
skin is oil and velvet. Kassad thrusts quickly now, the universe
contracting as sensation expands, senses dwindling as she closes warm
and wet and tight around him. Her hips thrust harshly in response now,
as if sensing the terrible build in pressure at the base of his being.
Demanding. Kassad grimaces, closes his eyes, sees...
· . . fireballs expanding, stars dying, suns exploding in great pulses
of flame, star systems perishing in an ecstasy of destruction... .
·.. he feels pain in his chest, his hips not stopping, moving faster,
even as he opens his eyes and sees...
... the great thorn of steel rising from between Moneta's breasts,
almost impaling him as he unconsciously pulls up and back, the
thornblade drawing blood which drips on her flesh, her pale flesh,
reflective now, flesh as cold as dead metal, his hips still moving even
as he watches through passion-dimmed eyes as Moneta's lips wither and
curl back, revealing rows of steel blades where teeth had been, metal
blades slash at his buttocks where fingers had gripped, legs like
powerful steel bands imprison his pumping hips, her eyes· . .
·.. in thelast seconds before orgasm Kassad tries to pull away· . .
his hands on her throat, pressing·.. she clings like a leech, a lamprey
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

ready to drain him... they roll against dead bodies...
· . . her eyes like red jewels, blazing with a mad heat like that
which fills his aching testicles, expanding like a flame, spillingover·
..
· . . Kassad slams both hands against the soil, lifts himself away
from her... from it... his strength insan but not enough as terrible
gravities press them together...
sucking like a lamprey's mouth as he threatens to explode, looks in her
eyes· . . the death of worlds... the death of worlds!
Kassad screams and pulls away. Strips of his flesh rip away as he
lunges up and sideways. Metal teeth click shut in a steel vagina,
missing his glans by a moist millimeter.
Kassad slumps on his side, rolls away, hips moving, unable to stop his
ejaculation. Semen explodes in streams, falls on the curled fist of a
corpse. Kassad moans, rolls again, curls in a fetal position even as he
comes again. And again.
He hears the hiss and rustle as she rises behind him.
Kassad rolls on his back and squints up against sunlight and his own
pain. She stands above him, legs apart, a silhouette' of thorns. Kassad
wipes sweat from his eyes, sees his wrist come away red with blood, and
waits for the killing blow. His skin contracts in anticipation of the
slash of blade into flesh. Panting, Kassad looks up to see Moneta above
him, thighs flesh rather than steel, her groin matted from the moisture
of their passion. Her face is dark, the sun behind her, but he sees red
flames dying in the multifaceted pits of her eyes. She smiles and he
sees sunlight glint on rows of metal teeth. 'Kassad · . ." she
whispers and it is the sound of sand scraping against bone.
Kassad tears his gaze away, struggles to his feet, and stumbles across
corpses and burning rubble in his terror to be free. He does not look
back.
Scouting elements of Hyperion's Self-defense Force found Colonel Fedmahn
Kassad almost two days later.
He was discovered lying unconscious on one of the grassy moors which
lead to the abandoned Chronos Keep, some twenty kilometers from the dead
city and the wreckage of the Ouster ejection pod. Kassad was naked and
almost dead from the effects of exposure and several serious wounds, but
he responded well to emergency field treatment and was immediately
airlifted south of the Bridle Range to a hospital at Keats·
Reconnaissance squads from the SDF battalion moved northward carefully,
cautious of the anti-entropic tides around the Time Tombs and wary of
any booby traps left behind by the Ousters. There were none. The
scouts found only the wreckage of Kassad's escape mechanism and the
burned out hulks of the two assault boats which the Ousters had lanced
from orbit. There were no clues as to why they had slagged their own
ships and the Ouster bodies-both in and around the boats - had been
burned beyond any hope of autopsy or analysis.
Kassad regained consciousness three Hyperion days later, swore that he
remembered nothing after stealing the squid, and was shipped out on a
FORCE torchship two local weeks later.
Upon returning to the Web, Kassad resigned his commission.
For a while he was active in antiwar movements, occasionally appearing
on the All Thing net arguing disarmament. But the attack on Bressia had
mobilized the Hegemony toward true interstellar war as had nothing else
in three centuries, and Kassad's voice was either drowned out or
dismissed as the guilty conscience of the Butcher of South Bressia.
In the sixteen years after Bressia, Colonel Kassad had disappeared from
the Web and from the Web consciousness.
Although there had been no more major battles, the Ousters remained the
Hegemony's prime bogeymen.
Fedmahn Kassad was only a fading memory.
It was late morning when Kassad finished his story. The Consul blinked
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

and looked around him, noticing the ship and its surroundings for the
first time in more than two hours. The Benares had come out into the
main channel of the Hoolie. The Consul could hear the creaks of the
chains and hawsers as the river mantas surged against their harnesses.
The Benares appeared to be the only ship heading upriver, but now
numerous small craft were visible going the other way. The Consul
rubbed his forehead and was surprised to see his hand come away slick
with sweat. The day had grown very warm and the shadow of the tarp had
crept away from the Consul without his noticing. He blinked, wiped
sweat from his eyes, and moved into the shade to get a drink from one of
the liquor bottles the androids had set in a cabinet near the table.
'My God,' Father Hoyt was saying, 'so, according to this Moneta
creature, the Time Tombs are moving backward in time?"
'Yes,' said Kassad.
'Is that possible?" asked Hoyt.
'Yes." It was Sol Weintraub who answered.
'If that's true,' said Brawne Lamia, 'then you "met" this Moneta... or
whatever her real name is... in her past but your future ... in a
meeting that's still to come."
'Yes,' said Kassad.
Martin Silenus walked to the railing and spat into the river. 'Colonel,
do you think the bitch was the Shrike?"
'I don't know." Kassad's monotone was barely audible.
Silenus turned to Sol Weintraub. 'You're a scholar. Is there anything
in the Shrike mythography that says the thing can change shape?"
'No,' said Weintraub. He was preparing a milk globe to feed his
daughter. The infant made soft, mewling noises and moved tiny fingers.
'Colonel,' said Het Masteen, 'the forcefield... whatever the fighting
suit was... did you bring it with you after the encounter with the
Ousters and this ...
female?"
Kassad looked at the Templar a moment and then shook his head.
The Consul was staring into his drink but his head suddenly snapped
upright with the force of a thought.
'Colonel, you said that you saw a vision of the Shrikc's killing tree...
the structure, the thing where it impales its victims."
Kassad moved his basilisk stare from the Templar to the Consul. He
slowly nodded.
'And there were bodies on it?"
Another nod.
The Consul wiped sweat from his upper lip. 'If the tree is traveling
backward in time with the Time Tombs, then the victims are from our
future."
Kassad said nothing. The others also were staring at the Consul now but
only Weintraub appeared to understand what the comment meant... and
what the Con-su!'s next question had to be.
The Consul resisted the urge to wipe the sweat from his
lips again. His voice was steady. 'Did you see any of us there?"
Kassad said nothing for more than a minute. The soft sounds of the
river and the ship's rigging suddenly seemed very loud. Finally Kassad
took a breath. 'Yes."
Silence stretched again. Brawne Lamia broke it. 'Will you tell us
who?"
'No." Kassad rose and went to the stairway leading to the lower decks.
'Wait,' called Father Hoyt.
Kassad paused at the head of the stairway.
'Will you at least tell us two other things?" 'What?"
Father Hoyt grimaced from a wave of pain. His gaunt face went white
under its film of perspiration. He took a breath and said, 'First, do
you think the Shrike... the woman... somehow wants to use you to start
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

this terrible interstellar war you foresaw?"
'Yes,' Kassad said softly.
'Second, will you tell us what you plan to petition the Shrike for... or
this Moneta... when you meet them on the pilgrimage?"
Kassad smiled for the first time. It was a thin smile, and very, very
cold. 'I will make no petition,' said Kassad. 'I will ask nothing of
them. When I meet them this time, I will kill them:'
The other pilgrims did not speak or look at one another as Kassad went
below. The Benares continued north-northeast into afternoon.
THREE
The barge Benares entered the river port of Naiad an hour before sunset.
Crew and pilgrims pressed to the rail to stare at smoldering embers of
what once had been a city of twenty thousand people. Little remained.
The famous River Front Inn, built in the days of Sad King Billy, had
burned to the foundations; its charred docks, piers, and screened
balconies now collapsed into the shallows of the Hoolie. The
customhouse was a burned-out shell. The airship terminal on the north
end of town survived only as a blackened hulk, its mooring tower reduced
to a spire of charcoal. There was no sign whatsoever of the small
riverfront Shrike temple. Worst of all, from the pilgrims' point of
view, was the destruction of the Naiad River Station - the harness dock
lay burned and sagging, the manta holding pens open to the river.
'God damn it!" said Martin Silenus.
'Who did it?" asked Father Hoyt. 'The Shrike?"
'More likely the SDF,' said the Consul. 'Although they may have been
fighting the Shrike."
'I can't believe this,' snapped Brawne Lamia. She turned to A. Bettik,
who had just joined them on the rear deck. 'Didn't you know this had
happened?"
'No,' said the android. 'There has been no contact with any point north
of the locks for more than a week."
'Why the hell not?" asked Lamia. 'Even if this godforsaken world
doesn't have a datasphere, don't you have radio?"
A. Bettik smiled slightly. 'Yes, M. Lamia, there is radio, but the
comsats are down, the microwave repeater stations at the Karla Locks
were destroyed, and we have no access to shortwave."
'What about'the mantas?" asked Kassad. 'Can we press on to Edge with
the ones we have."?"
Bettik frowned. 'We will have to, Colonel,' he said.
'But it is a crime. The two in harness will not recover from such a
pull. With fresh mantas we would have put into Edge before dawn. With
these two..." The android shrugged. 'With luck, if the beasts survive,
we will arrive by early afternoon..."
'The windwagon will still be there, will it not?" asked Het Masteen.
'We must assume so,' said A. Bettik. 'If you will excuse me, I will
see to feeding the poor beasts we have.
We should be under way again within the hour."
They saw no one in or near the ruins of Naiad. No river craft made
their appearance above the city. An hour's pull northeast of the town
they entered the region where the forests and farms of the lower Hoolie
gave way to the undulating orange prairie south of the Sea of Grass.
Occasionally the Consul would see the 'mud towers of architect ants,
some of their serrated structures near the river reaching almost ten
meters in height. There was no sign of intact human habitation. The
ferry at Betty's Ford was totally gone, with not even a towrope or
warming shack left to show where it had stood for almost two centuries.
The River Runners Inn at Cave Point was dark and silent. A. Bettik and
other crew members hallooed, but there was no response from the black
cave mouth.
Sunset brought a sensuous stillness over the river, soon broken by a
chorus of insect noises and night-bird calls. For a while the surface
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

of the Hoolie became a mirror of the gray-green disk of twilight sky,
disturbed only by the leap of dusk-feeding fish and the wake of the
laboring mantas. As true darkness fell, innumerable prairie gossamers -
much paler than their forest cousins, but also of greater wingspan,
luminescent shades the size of small children - danced in the vales and
valleys of the gently rolling hills. By the time the constellations
emerged and the meteor trails began scarring the night sky, a brilliant
display this far from all man-made light, the lanterns had been lit and
dinner set out on the aft deck.
The Shrike pilgrims were subdued, as if still contemplating Colonel
Kassad's grim and confusing tale. The Consul had been drinking steadily
since before midday and now he felt the pleasant displacement - from
reality, from the pain of memory - which allowed him to get through each
day and night. Now he asked, his voice as careful and unslurred as only
a true alcoholic's can be, whose turn it was to tell a tale.
'Mine,' said Martin Silenus. The poet also had been drinking steadily
since early in the day. His voice was as carefully controlled as the
Consul's but redness on his sharp cheeks and an almost manic brightness
of eye gave the old poet away. 'At least I drew number three..." He
held up his slip of paper. 'If you still want to hear the fucking
thing."
Brawne Lamia lifted her glass of wine, scowled, and set it down.
'Perhaps we should talk about what we have learned from the first two
stories and how it might relate to our current... situation."
'Not yet,' said Colonel Kassad. 'We don't have enough information."
'Let M. Silenus speak,' said Sol Weintruab. 'Then we
can begin discussing what we have heard."
'I agree,' said Lenar Hoyt.
Het Mastcen and the Consul nodded.
'Agreed!" cried Martin Silenus. 'I'11 tell my story. Just let me
finish my fucking glass of wine."