THE POET'S TALE: 'Hyperion Cantos'
In the beginning was the Word. Then came the fucking word processor.
Then came the thought processor. Then came the death of literature. And
so it goes.
Francis Bacon once said, 'There arises from a bad and unapt formation of
words a wonderful obstruction to the mind." We have all contributed our
wonderful obstructions to the mind, have we not? I more than most. One
of the twentieth century's better, forgotten writers- that is
better-comma-forgotten, once bon
rnoted: 'i love being a writer. It's the paperwork I can't stand." Get
it? Well, amigos and amigette, I love being a
poet. It's the goddamned words I can't stand.
Where to start?
Start with Hyperion perhaps?
(Fade in) Almost two standard centuries ago.
Sad King Billy's five seedships spin like gold dandelions above this all
too familiar lapis sky. We land like conquistadors strutting to and
fro; more than two thousand visual artists and writers and sculptors and
poets and ARNists and vid makers and holie directors and composers and
decomposers and God knows what all, supported by five times that many
administrators and technicians and ecologists and supervisors and court
chamberlains and professional ass kissers, not to mention the family of
royal asses themselves, supported in turn by ten times that many
androids willing to till the soil and stoke the reactors and raise the
cities and lift that bale and tote that load... hell, you get the idea.
We landed on a world already seeded by the poor buggers who'd gone
indigenie two centuries before and were living hand to mouth and cudgel
to brain wherever they could. Naturally the noble descendants of these
brave pioneers greeted us like gods - especially after a few of our
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

security folk slagged a few of their more aggressive leaders- and
naturally we accepted their worship as our due and put them to work next
to our blueskins, plowing the south forty and working to build our
shining city on the hill.
And it was a shining city on a hill. Seeing the ruins today can tell
you nothing of the place. The desert had advanced in three centuries;
the aqueducts from the mountains have fallen and shattered; the city
itself is only bones. But in its day the City of Poets was fair indeed,
a bit of Socrates's Athens with the intellectual excitement of
Renaissance Venice, the artistic fervor of Paris in the days of the
Impressionists, the true democracy of the first decade of Orbit City,
and the unlimited future of Tau Ceti Center.
But, in the end, it was none of these things, of course.
It was only Hrothgar's claustrophobic mead hall with
the monster waiting in the darkness without. We had our Grendel, to be
sure. We even had our Hrothgar if one squints a bit at Sad King Billy's
poor slouched profile.
We lacked only our Geats; our great, broad-shouldered, small-brained
Beowulf with his band of merry psycho-paths.
So, lacking a Hero, we settled into the role of victims and composed our
sonnets and rehearsed our ballets and unrolled our scrolls, while all
the while our thorn-and-steel Grendel served the night with fear and
harvested thighbones and gristle.
And this was when I - a satyr then, formed in flesh as mirror to my soul
- came as close to completing my Cantos, my life's work, as I have come
in five sad centuries of
stubborn continuance.
(Fade to black)
It occurs to me that the Grendel tale is premature. The players have
not been brought upon the stage. Dislinear plotting and non-contiguous
prose have their adherents, not the least of which am I, but in the end,
my friends, it is character which wins or loses immortality upon the
vellum. Haven't you ever harbored the secret thought that somewhere
Huck and Jim are- at this instant-poling their raft down some river just
beyond our reach, so much more real are they than the shoe clerk who
fitted us just a forgotten day ago? At any rate, if this fucking
story's to be told, you should know who's in it. So --as much as it
pains me - VII back up to begin at the beginning.
In the beginning was the Word. And the Word was programmed in classic
binary. And the Word said, 'Let there be life!" And so, somewhere in
the TechnoCore vaults of my mother's estate, frozen sperm from my
long-dead daddy was defrosted, set in suspension, shaken like the
vanilla malts of yore, loaded into something part squirt gun and part
dildo, and - at the magic touch of a trigger - ejaculated into Mother at
a time when the moon was full and the egg was ripe.
Mother didn't have to be impregnated in this barbaric fashion, of
course. She could have chosen ex utero fertilization, a male lover with
a transplant of Daddy's
DNA, a clonal surrogate, a gene-spliced virgin birth, you name it...
but, as she told me later, she opened her legs
to tradition. My guess is that she preferred it that way.
Anyway, I was born.
I was born on Earth... Old Earth... and fuck you, Lamia, if you don't
believe it. We lived on Mother's estate on an island not far from the
North American Preserve.
Notes for sketch of home on Old Earth:
Fragile twilights fading from violet to fuchsia to purple above the
crepe-paper silhouettes of trees beyond the southwest sweep of lawn.
Skies as delicate as translucent china, unscarred by cloud or contrail.
The presymphony hush of first light followed by the cymbal crash of
sunrise. Oranges and russets igniting to gold, the long, cool descent
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

to green: leaf shadow, shade, tendrils of cypress and weeping willow,
the hushed green velvet of the glade.
Mother's estate - our estate - a thousand acres centered in a million
more. Lawns the size of small prairies with grass so perfect it
beckoned a body to lie on it, to nap on its soft perfection. Noble
shade trees making sundials of the Earth, their shadows circling in
stately procession; now mingling, now contracting to midday, finally
stretching eastward with the dying of the day.
Royal oak. Giant elms. Cottonwood and cypress and redwood and bonsai.
Banyan trees lowering new trunks like smooth-sided columns in a temple
roofed by sky.
Willows lining carefully laid canals and haphazard streams, their
hanging branches singing ancient dirges to the wind.
Our house rises on a low hill where, in the winter, the browning curves
of lawn look like the smooth flank of some female beast, all thigh
muscle and meant for speed.
The house shows its centuries of accretion: a jade tower on the east
courtyard catching the first light of dawn, a series of gables on the
south wing throwing triangles of shadow on the crystal conservatory at
teatime, the balconies and maze of exterior stairways along the east
porticoes playing Escher games with afternoon's shadows.
It was after the Big Mistake but before everything grew uninhabitable.
Mostly we occupied the estate during what we quaintly called 'periods of
remission'-stretches of ten to eighteen quiet months between planet-wide
spasms as the Kiev Team's goddamn little black hole digested bits of the
Earth's center and waited for its next feast. During the 'Bad Times,'
we vacationed at Uncle Kowa's place out beyond the moon, on a
terra-formed asteroid brought there before the Ouster migration.
You might already be able to tell that I was born with a silver spoon up
my ass. I offer no apologies. After three thousand years of dabbling
with democracy, the remaining Old Earth families had come to the
realization that the only way to avoid such riffraff was not to allow
them to breed. Or, rather, to sponsor seedship fleets; spinship
explorations, new farcaster migrations ... all of the panicked urgency
of the Hegira... as long as they bred out there and left Old Earth
alone. The fact that the homeworld was a diseased old bitch, gone in
the teeth, didn't hurt the riffraff's urge to pioneer. No fools they.
And like the Buddha, I was almost grown before I saw my first hint of
poverty. I was sixteen standard years old, on my Wanderjahr, and
backpacking through India when I saw a beggar. The Hindu Old Families
kept them around for religious reasons, but all I knew at the time was
that here was a man in rags, ribs showing, holding out a wicker basket
with an ancient credit diskey in it, begging for a touch of my universal
card. My friends thought it was hysterical. I threw up. It was in
Benares.
My childhood was privileged but not obnoxiously so. I have pleasant
memories of Grande Dame Sybil's famous parties (she was a great-aunt on
my mother's side). 1 remember one three-day affair she threw in the
Manhattan Archipelago, guests ferried in by dropship from Orbit City and
from the European arcologies. I remember the Empire State Building
rising from the water, its many lights reflecting on the lagoons and
fern canals; the EMVs unloading passengers on the observation deck while
cooking fires burned on the overgrown island mounds of lower buildings
all around.
The North American Preserve was our private playground in those days. It
was said that about eight thousand people still resided in that
mysterious continent, but half of these were rangers. The rest included
the renegade ARNists who plied their trade by resurrecting species of
plants and animals long absent from their antediluvian North American
haunts, the ecology engineers, licensed primitives such as the Ogalalla
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Sioux or the He!l's Angel Guild, and the occasional tourist. I had a
cousin who reportedly backpacked from one observation zone to the other
in the Preserve, but he did so in the Midwest where the zones were
relatively close together and where the dinosaur herds were much
scarcer.
In the first century after the Big Mistake, Gaea was mortally injured
but slow in the dying. The devastation was great during the Bad Times -
and these came more often in precisely plotted spasms, shorter
remissions, more terrible consequences after each attack - but the Earth
abided and repaired itself as best it could.
The Preserve was, as I say, our playground but, in a real sense, so was
all of the dying Earth. Mother let me have my own EMV when I was seven
and there was no place on the globe farther than an hour's flight from
home. My best friend, Amalfi Schwartz, lived in the Mount Erebus
Estates in what had once been the Antarctic Republic. We saw each other
daily. The fact that Old Earth law forbade farcasters did not bother us
in the least; lying on some hillside at night looking up through the ten
thousand Orbiting Lights and the twenty thousand beacons of the Ring, at
the two or three thousand visible stars, we felt no jealousy, no urge to
join the Hegira that even then was spinning the farcaster silk of the
Worldweb. We were happy.
My memories of Mother are oddly stylized, as if she were another
fictional construct from one of my Dying Earth novels. Perhaps she was.
Perhaps I was raised by robots in the automated cities of Europe,
suckled by androids in the Amazon Desert, or simply grown in a vat like
brewer's yeast. What I recall is Mother's white gown sliding ghostlike
through the shadowed rooms of the estate; infinitely delicate blue veins
on the back of her
thin-fingered hand as she poured tea in the damask and dust light of the
conservatory; candlelight caught like a gold fly in the spiderweb sheen
of her hair, hair done up in a bun in the style of the Grandes Dames.
Sometimes 1 dream that I remember her voice, the lilt and tone and
turn-in-the-womb centerhess of it, but then I awake and it becomes only
the wind moving lace curtains or the sound of some alien sea on stone.
From my earliest sense of self, I knew that I would be - should be - a
poet. It was not as if I had a choice; more like the dying beauty all
about breathed its last breath in me and commanded that I be doomed to
play with words the rest of my days, as if in expiation for our race's
thoughtless slaughter of its crib world. So what the hell; I became a
poet.
I had a tutor whose name was Balthazar, human but ancient, a refugee
from ancient Alexandria's flesh-scented alleys. Balthazar all but
glowed blue-white from those crude, early Poulsen treatments; he was
like an irradiated mummy of a man, sealed in liquid plastic.
And randy as the proverbial goat. Centuries later, when I was in my
satyr period, I felt that I finally understood poor don Balthazar's
priapic compulsions, but in those days it was mostly a hindrance to
keeping young girls on the estate's staff. Human or android, don
Baitbazar did not discriminate - he poinked them all.
Luckily for my education, there was nothing homosexual in don
Balthazar's addiction to young flesh, so his escapades evidenced
themselves either as absences from our tutorial sessions or an
inordinate amount of attention lavished on memorizing verses from Ovid,
Senesh, or Wu.
He was an excellent tutor. We studied the ancients and the late
classical period, took field trips to the ruins of Athens, Rome, London,
and Hannibal, Missouri, and never once had a quiz or test. Don
Balthazar expected me to learn everything by heart at first encounter
and I did not disappoint him. He convinced my mother that the pitfalls
of 'progressive education' were not for an Old Earth family, so ! never
knew the mind-stunting shortcuts of RNA medication, datasphere
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

immersion,
systemic flashback training, stylized encounter groups, 'higher-level
thinking skills' at the expense of facts, or preliterate programming. As
a result of these deprivations, I was able to recite all of Fitzgerald's
translation of the Odyssey by the time I was six, compose a sestina
before I could dress myself, and think in spiral fugue-verse before I
ever interfaced with an AI.
My scientific education, on the other hand, was something less than
stringent. Don Balthazar had little interest in what he referred to as
'the mechanical side of the universe." I was twenty-two before I
realized that computers, RMUs, and Uncle Kowa's asteroidal life-support
devices were machines and not some benevolent manifestations of the
animas around us. I believed in fairies, woodsprites, numerology,
astrology, and the magic of Midsummer's Eve deep in the primitive
forests of the NAP. Like Keats and Lamb in Haydon's studio, don
Balthazar and 1 drank toasts to 'the confusion of mathematics' ancl
mourned the destruction of' the poetry of the rainbow by M. Newton's
prying prism.. The early distrust and actual hatred of all things
scientific and clinical served me well in later life. It is not
difficult, 1 have learned, to remain a pre-Copernican pagan in the
postscientific Hegemony.
My early poetry was execrable. As with most bad poets, I was unaware of
this fact, secure in my arrogance that the very act of creating gave
some worth to the worthless abortions I was spawning. My mother
remained tolerant even as I left reeking little piles of doggerel lying
around the house. She was indulgent of her only child even if he was as
blithely incontinent as an unhousebroken llama.
Don Balthazar never commented on my work; primarily, I assume, because I
never showed him any of it. Don Baithazar thought that the venerable
Daton was a fraud, that Salmud Brevy and Robert Frost should have hanged
themselves with their own entrails, that Wordsworth was a fool, and that
anything less than Shakespeare's sonnets was a profanation of the
language. I saw no reason to bother don Baitbazar with my verse, rife
with budding genius though I knew it to be.
I published several of these little literary turds in the various
hardcopy journals then in vogue in the various arcologies of the
European Houses, the amateur editors of these crude journals being as
indulgent of my mother as she was of me. Occasionally I would press
Amalfi or one of my other playmates - less aristocratic than I and thus
with access to the datasphere or fatline transmitters - to uplink some
of my verses to the Ring or to Mars, and thus to the burgeoning
farcaster colonies.
They never replied. I assumed they were too busy.
Belief in one's identity as a poet or writer prior to the acid test of
publication is as naive and harmless as the youthful belief in one's
immortality... and the inevitable disillusionment is just as painful.
My mother died with Old Earth. About half the Old Families stayed
during that last cataclysm; I was twenty years old then and had made my
own romantic plans to die with the homeworld. Mother decided otherwise.
What concerned her was not my premature demise - like me, she was far
too self-centered to think of someone else at a time like that - nor
even the fact that the death of my DNA would mark the end of a line of
aristocrats which stretched back to the Mayflower;, no, what bothered
Mother was that the family was going to die out in debt. Our last
hundred years of extravagance, it seems, had been financed through
massive loans from the Ring Bank and other discreet extraterrestrial
institutions.
Now that the continents of Earth were crashing under the impact of
contraction, the great forests aflame, the oceans heaving and heating
themselves into a lifeless soup, the very air transforming itself into
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

something too hot and thick to break and too thin to plow, now the banks
wanted their money back. I was collateral.
Or, rather, Mother's plan was. She liquidated all available assets some
weeks before that phrase became a literal reality, deposited a quarter
of a million marks in long-term accounts in the fleeing Ring Bank, and
dispatched me on a trip to the Rifkin Atmospheric Protectorate on
Heaven's Gate, a minor world circling the star Vega. Even then, that
poisonous world had a
farcaster connection to Sol System, but I did not farcast.
Nor was I a passenger on the single spinship with Hawking drive which
put into Heaven's Gate each standard year. No, Mother sent me to this
back end of the outback on a Phase Three ramship, slower than light,
frozen with the cattle embryos and orange juice concentrate and feeder
viruses, on a trip that took one hundred and twenty-nine shipboard
years, with an objective time-debt of one hundred and sixty-seven
standard years!
Mother figured that the accrued interest on the long-term accounts would
be enough to pay off our family debt and perhaps allow me to survive
comfortably for a while. For the first and last time in her life,
Mother figured wrong.
Notes for a sketch of Heaven's Gate:
Mud lanes which run back from the station's conversion docks like a
pattern of sores on a leper's back.
Sufrus-brown clouds which hang in tatters from a rotten burlap sky. A
tangle of shapeless wooden structures half decayed before they were ever
fully constructed, their paneless windows now staring sightlessly into
the gaping mouths of their neighbors. lndigenies breeding like...
like humans, I suppose ... eyeless cripples, lungs burned out with air
rot, squiring a nest of a dozen offspring, the children's skin scabrous
by age five-standard, their eyes watering incessantly from the sting of
an atmosphere which will kill them before they're forty, their smiles
carious, their oily hair rife with lice and the blood bags of dracula
ticks. Proud parents beaming. Twenty million of these doomed schmucks,
crowded into slums overflowing an island smaller than my family's west
lawn on Old Earth, all of them fighting to breathe the only breathable
air on a world where the standard is to inhale and die, crowding ever
closer to the center of the sixty-mile radius of survivable atmosphere
which the Atmospheric Generating Station had been
able to provide before it began to malfunction.
Heaven's Gate: my new home.
Mother had not taken into account the possibility that all Old Earth
accounts would be frozen- and then
appropriated into the growing Worldweb economy. Nor had she remembered
that the reason people had waited for the Hawking drive to see the
spiral arm of the galaxy is that in long-term cryogenic sleep - as
opposed to a few weeks or months of fugue - chances of terminal brain
damage were one in six. I was lucky. When I was uncrated on Heaven's
Gate and put to work digging out acid canals beyond the perimeter, I had
suffered only a cerebral accident - a stroke. Physically, I was able to
work in the mud pits within a few local weeks. Mentally, there was much
left to be desired.
The left side of my brain had been shut down like a damaged section of a
spinship being sealed off, airtight doors leaving the doomed
compartments open to vacuum. I could still think. Control of the right
side of my body soon returned. Only the language centers had been
damaged beyond simple repair. The marvelous organic computer wedged in
my skull had dumped its language content like a flawed program. The
right hemisphere was not without some language - but only the most
emotionally charged units of communication could lodge in that affective
hemisphere; my vocabulary was now down to nine words. (This, I learned
later, was exceptional, many victims of CVAs retain only two or three.)
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

For the record, here is my entire vocabulary of manageable words: fuck,
shit, piss, cunt, goddamn, motherfucker, asshole, peepee, and poopoo.
A quick analysis will show some redundancy here. I had at my disposal
eight nouns, which stood for six things; five of the eight nouns could
double as verbs. I retained one indisputable noun and a single
adjective which also could be used as a verb or expletive. My new
language universe was comprised of four monosyllables, three compound
words, and two baby-talk repetitions.
My arena of literal expression offered four avenues to the topic of
elimination, two references to human anatomy, one request for divine
imprecation, one standard description of or request for coitus, and a
coital variation which was no longer an option for me since my mother
was deeeased.
All in all, it was enough.
I will not say that I remember my three years in the mud pits and slime
slums of Heaven's Gate with fondnexs, but it is true that these years
were at least as formative as - and probably more so than - my previous
two decades on Old Earth.
I soon found that among my intimate acquaintances - Old Sludge, the
scoop-shovel foreman; Unk, the slum-yard bully to whom I paid my
protection bribes; Kiti, the lice-ridden crib doxy whom I slept with
when I could afford it - my vocabulary served me well. 'Shit-fuck,' I
would grunt, gesticulating. 'Asshole cunt peepec fuck."
'Ah,' grinned Old Sludge, showing his one tooth, 'going to the company
store to get some algae chewies, huh?"
'Goddamn poopoo,' I would grin back at him.
The life of a poet lies not merely in the finite language-dance of
expression but in the nearly infinite combinations of perception and
memory combined with the sensitivity to what is perceived and
remembered. My three local years on Heaven's Gate, almost fifteen
hundred standard days, allowed me to see, to feel, to hear -to remember,
as if I literally had been born again. Little matter that I had been
born again in hell; reworked experience is the stuff of all true poetry
and raw experience was the birthing gift of my new life.
There was no problem adapting to a brave new world a century and a half
beyond my own. For all of our talk of expansion and pioneering spirit
these past five centuries, we all know how stultified and static our
human universe has become. We are in a comfortable Dark Ages of the
inventive mind; institutions change but little, and that by gradual
evolution rather than revolution; scientific research creeps crablike in
a lateral shuffle, where once it leaped in great intuitive bounds;
devices change even less, plateau technologies common to us would be
instantly identifiable- and operable!- to our great-grandfathers.
So while I slept the Hegemony became a formal entity, the Worldweb was
spun to something close to its final shape, the All Thing took its
democratic place among the list of humanity's benevolent despots, the
TechnoCore seceded from human service and then offered its help as an
ally rather than a slave, and the Ousters retreated to darkness and the
role of Nemesis · . . but all these things had been creeping toward
critical mass even before I was frozen into my ice coffin between the
pork bellies and sherbet, and such obvious extensions of old trends took
little effort to understand. Besides, history viewed from the inside is
always a dark, digestive mess, far different from the easily
recognizable cow viewed from afar by historians.
My life was Heaven's Gate and the minute-to-minute demands of survival
there. The sky was always an eternal yellow-brown sunset hanging like a
collapsing ceiling mere meters above my shack. My shack was oddly
comfortable: a table for eating, a cot for sleeping and fucking, a hole
for pissing and shitting, and a window for silent staring. My
environment mirrored my vocabulary.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Prison always has been a good place for writers, killing, as it does,
the twin demons of mobility and diversion, and Heaven's Gate was no
exception. The Atmospheric Protectorate owned my body but my mind - or
what was left of it - was mine.
On Old Earth, my poetry was composed on a Sadu-Dekenar cornlog thought
processor while I lounged in a padded chaise 1ongue or floated in my EM
barge above dark lagoons or walked pensively through scented bowers.
The execrable, undisciplined, limp-wristed flatulent products of those
reveries already have been described.
On Heaven's Gate, I discovered what a mental stimulant physical labor
could be; not mere physical labor, 1 should add, but absolutely
spine-bending, lung-racking, gut-ripping, ligament-tearing, and
ball-breaking physical labor. But as long as the task is both onerous
and repetitive, I discovered, the mind is not only free to wander to
more imaginative climes, it actually flees to higher planes.
Thus, on Heaven's Gate, as I dredged bottom scum from the slop canals
under the red gaze of Vega Primo or crawled on hands and knees through
stalactites and
stalagmites of rebreather bacteria in labyrinthine lungpipes, I became a
poet.
All I lacked were the words.
the station's
The twentieth century's most honored writer, William Gass, once said in
an interview; 'Words are the supreme objects. They are minded things."
And so they are. As pure and transcendent as any Idea which ever cast a
shadow into Plato's dark cave of our perceptions. But they are also
pitfalls of deceit and misperception. Words bend our thinking to
infinite paths of self-delusion, and the fact that we spend most of our
mental lives in brain mansions built of words means that we lack the
objectivity necessary to see the terrible distortion of reality which
language brings. Example: the Chinese pictogram for 'integrity' is a
two-part symbol of a man literally standing next to his word. So far,
so good. But what does the Late English word 'honesty' mean? Or
'Motherland'? Or 'progress'7 Or 'democracy'?
Or 'beauty'? But even in our self-deception, we become gods.
A philosopher/mathematician named Bertrand Russell, who lived and died
in the same century as Gass, once wrote: 'Language serves not only to
express thought but to make possible thoughts which could not exist
without it." Here is the essence of mankind's creative genius: not the
edifices of civiliz.tion nor the bang-flash weapons which can end it,
but the words which fertilize new concepts like spermatazoa attacking an
ovum. It might be argued that the Siamese-twin infants of word/idea are
the only contribution the human species can, will, or should make to the
reveling cosmos.
(Yes, our DNA is unique but so is a salamander's. Yes, we construct
artifacts but so have species ranging from beavers to the architect ants
whose crenellated towers are visible right now off the port bow. Yes,
we weave real-fabric things from the dreamstuff of mathematics, but the
universe is hardwired with arithmetic. Scratch a circle and :r peeps
out. Enter a new solar system and Tycho Brahe's formulae lie waiting
under the black velvet cloak of space/time. But where has the universe
hidden a word
under its outer layer of biology, geometry, or insensate rock?) Even the
traces of other intelligent life we have found - the blimps on Jove II,
the Labyrinth Builders, the Seneschai empaths on Hebron, the Stick
People of Durulis, the architects of the Time Tombs, the Shrike itself -
have left us mysteries and obscure artifacts but no language. No words.
The poet John Keats once wrote to a friend of his named Bailey: 'I am
certain of nothing but the holiness of the Heart's affections and the
truth of Imagination - What the imagination seizes as Beauty must be
truth - whether it existed before or not."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The Chinese poet George Wu, who died in the Last Sino-Japanese War about
three centuries before the Hegira, understood this when he recorded on
his comlog: 'Poets are the mad midwives to reality. They see not what
is, nor what can be, but what must become." Later, on his last disk to
his lover the week before he died, Wu said: 'Words are the only bullets
in truth's bandolier. And poets are the snipers."
You see, in the beginning was the Word. And the Word was made flesh in
the weave of the human universe.
And only the poet can expand this universe, finding shortcuts to new
realities the way the Hawking drive tunnels under the barriers of
Einsteinian space/time.
To be a poet, I realized, a true poet, was to become the Avatar of
humanity incarnate; to accept the mantle of poet is to carry the cross
of the Son of Man, to suffer the birth pangs of the Soul-Mother of
Humanity.
To be a true poet is to become God.
I tried to explain this to my friends on Heaven's Gate.
'Piss, shit,' I said. 'Asshole motherfucker, goddamn shit goddamn.
Cunt. Peepee cunt. Goddamn!'
They shook their heads and smiled, and walked away.
Great poets are rarely understood in their own day.
The yellow-brown clouds rained acid on me. I waded in mud up to my
thighs and cleaned leechweed from the city sewer pipes. Old Sludge died
during my second year there when we were all working on a project
extending the First Avenue Canal to the Midsump Mudflats. An
accident. He was climbing a slime dune to rescue a single sulfur-rose
from the advancing grouter when there was a mudquake. Kiti married
shortly after that. She still worked part time as a crib doxy, but I
saw less and less of her. She died in childbirth shortly after the
green tsunami carried away Mudflat City. I continued to write poetry.
How is it, you might ask, that someone can write fine verse with a
vocabulary of only nine right-hemisphere words?
The answer is that I used no words at all. Poetry is only secondarily
about words. Primarily, it is about tuth. I dealt with the Ding an
$i¢h, the substance behind the shadow, weaving powerful concepts,
similes, and connections the way an engineer would raise a skyscraper
with the whiskered-alloy skeleton being constructed long before the
glass and plastic and chromaluminum appears.
And slowly the words returned. The brain retrains and retools itself
amazingly well. What had been lost in the left hemisphere found a home
elsewhere or reasserted their primacy in the damaged regions like
pioneers returning to a fire-damaged plain made more fertile by the
flames. Where before a simple word like 'salt' would leave me
stuttering and. gasping, my mind probing emptiness like a tongue
prodding the socket of a missing tooth, now the words and phrases flowed
back slowly, like the names of forgotten playmates. During the day I
labored in the slimefields, but at night I sat at my splintered table
and wrote my Cantos by the light of a hissing ghee lamp. Mark Twain
once opined in his homey way: 'The difference between the right word and
the almost right word is the difference between lightning and the
lightning bug." He was droll but incomplete.
During those long months of beginning my Cantos on Heaven's Gate, I
discovered that the difference between finding the right word as opposed
to accepting the almost right word was the difference between being
struck by lightning and merely watching a lightning display.
So my Cantos began and grew. Written on the flimsy sheets of recycled
leechweed fiber which they issued by
the ton for use as toilet paper, scribbled by one of the cheap felt-tip
pens sold at the Company Store, the Cantos took shape. As the words
returned, slipping into place like once scattered pieces of a 3-D
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

pu:,le, I needed a form. Returning to don Baithazar's teachings, 1
tried on the measured nobility of Milton's epic verse. Gaining
confidence, I added the romantic sensuality of a Byron matured by a
Keatsish celebration of the language. Stirring all this, I seasoned the
mixture with a dash of Yeats's brilliant cynicism and a pinch of Pound's
obscure, scholastic arrogance. I chopped, diced, and added such
ingredients as Eliot's control of imagery, Dylan Thomas's feel for
place, Delmore Schwartz's sense of doom, Steve Tem's touch of horror,
Salmud Brevy's plea for innocence; Daton's love of the convoluted rhyme
scheme, Wu's worship of the physical, and Edmond Ki Fererra's radical
playfulness.
In the end, of course, I threw this entire mixture out and wrote the
Cantos in a style all my own.
If it had not been for Unk the slumyard bully, I probably still would be
on Heaven's Gate, digging acid canals by day and writing Cantos by
night.
It was my day off and I was carrying my Cantos - the only copy of my
manuscript! - to the Company Library in the Common Hall to do some
research when Unk and two of his cronies appeared from an alley and
demanded immediate payment of the next month's protection money. We had
no universal cards in the Heaven's Gate Atmospheric Protectorate; we
paid our debts in company scrip or bootleg marks. I had neither. Unk
demanded to see what was in my plastic shoulder bag.
Without thinking, I refused. It was a mistake. If I'd shown Unk the
manuscript, he most probably would have scattered it in the mud and
slapped me around after making threats. As it was, my refusal angered
him so he and his two Neanderthal companions tore open the bag,
scattered the manuscript in the mud, and beat me within the proverbial
inch of my life.
It so happened that on this day an EMV belonging to a Protectorate air
quality control manager was passing
low above and the wife of the manager, traveling alone to the arc's
Company Residential Store, ordered the EMV down, had her android servant
retrieve me and what was left of my Cantos, and then personally drove me
to the Company Hospital. Normally, the members of the bonded work force
received medical aid, if any, at the walk-in Bio Clinic, but the
hospital did not want to refuse the wife of a manager so I was admitted
- still unconscious - and watched over by a human doctor and the
manager's wife while I recovered in a healing tank.
All right, to make a banal long story into a banal short story, I'll cut
to the uplink. Helenda - that was the manager's wife - read my
manuscript while I was floating in renewal nutrient. She liked it. On
the same day I was being decanted in the Company Hospital, Helenda
farcast to Renaissance where she showed my Cantos to her sister Felia,
who had a friend whose lover knew an editor at Transline Publishing.
When I awoke the next day, my broken ribs had been set, my shattered
cheekbone had been healed, my bruises were gone, and I'd received five
new teeth, a new cornea for my left eye, and a contract with Transline.
My book came out five weeks later. A week after that, Helenda divorced
her manager and married me. It was her seventh marriage, my first. We
honeymooned on the Concourse and, when we returned a month later, my
book had sold more than a billion copies - the first book of verse to
hit the bestseller lists in four centuries - and I was a millionaire
many times over.
Tyrena Wingreen-Feif was my first editor at Transline. It was her idea
to title the book The Dying Earth (a records search showed a novel by
that name five hundred years earlier, but the copyright had lapsed and
the book was out of print). It was her idea to publish just the
sections of the Cantos which dealt with the nostalgic final days of Old
Earth. And it was her idea to remove the sections which she thought
would bore the readers - the philosophical passages, the descriptions of
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

my mother, the sections which paid homage to earlier poets, the places
where I played with experimental verse, the more personal
passages - everything, in fact, except the descriptions of the idyllic
final days which, emptied of all heavier freight, came across as
sentimental and insipid. Four months after publication The Dying Earth
had sold two and a half billion hardfax copies, an abridged and
digitalized version was available on the See Thing datasphere, and it
had been optioned for the holies.
Tyrena pointed out that the timing had been perfect...
that the original trauma shock of the death of Old Earth had meant a
century of denial, almost as if Earth had never existed, followed by a
period of revived interest culminating in the Old Earth nostalgia cults
which could now be found on every world in the Web. A book - even a
book of verse - dealing with the final days had struck at precisely the
right moment.
For me, the first few months of life as a celebrity in the Hegemony were
far more disorienting than my earlier transition from spoiled son of Old
Earth to enslaved stroke victim on Heaven's Gate. During those first
months I did book and fax signing on more than a hundred worlds; I
appeared on 'The AllNet Now!" show with Marmon Hamlit; I met CEO
Senister Per6t and All Thing Speaker Drury Fein aswell as a score of
senators; I spoke to the Interplanetary Society of PEN Women and to the
Lusus Writers' Union; I was given honorary degrees at the University of
New Earth and at Cambridge Two; I was feted, interviewed, imaged,
reviewed (favorably), bioed (unauthorized), lionized, serialized, and
swindled. It was a busy time.
Notes for a sketch of life in the Hegemony:
My home has thirty-eight rooms on thirty-six worlds.
No doors: the arched entrances are farcaster portals, a few opaqued with
privacy curtains, most open to observation and entry. Each room has
windows everywhere and at least two walls with portals. From the grand
dining hall on Renaissance Vector, 1 can see the bronze skies and the
verdigris towers of Keep Enable in the valley below my volcanic peak,
and by turning my head I can look through the farcaster portal and
across the expense of white carpet in the formal living area to see
the Edgar Allan Sea crash against the spires of Point Prospero on
Nevermore. My library looks out on the glaciers and green skies of
Nordholm while a walk of ten paces allows me to descend a short stairway
to my tower study, a comfortable, open room encircled by polarized glass
which offers a three-hundred-sixty-degree view of the highest peaks of
the Kushpat Karakoram, a mountain range two thousand kilometers from the
nearest settlement in the easternmost reaches of the Jamnu Republic on
Deneb Drei.
The huge sleeping room Helenda and I share rocks gently in the boughs of
a three-hundred-meter Worldtree on the Templar world of God's Grove and
connects to a solarium which sits alone on the arid saltflats of Hebron.
Not all of our views are of wilderness: the media room opens to a
skimmer pad on the hundred and thirty-eighth floor of a Tau Ceti Center
arctower and our patio lies on a terrace overlooking the market in the
Old Section of bustling New Jerusalem. The architect, a student of the
legendary Millon DeHaVre, has incorporated several small jokes into the
house's design: the steps go down to the tower room, of course, but
equally droll is the exit from the eyrie which leads to the exercise
room on the lowest level of Lusus's deepest Hive, or perhaps the guest
bathroom which consists of toilet, bidet, sink and shower stall on an
open, wall-less raft afloat on the violet seaworld of Mare Infinitus.
At qst the shifts in gravity from room to room were disturbing, out I
soon adapted, subconsciously bracing myself for the drag of Lusus and
Hebron and Sol Draconi Septera, unconsciously anticipating the less than
l-stanclra-g freedom of the majority of the rooms.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

In the te ,,t nclard months Helenda and I are together we spend little
6--. in our home, preferring instead to move with frcids ,,nong the
resorts and vacation arcologies and night spots of the Worldweb. Our
'friends' are the former farcaster set, now calling themselves the
Caribou Herd after an extinct, Old Earth migratory mammal. This herd
consists of other writers, a few successful visual artists, Concourse
intellectuals, All Thing media representatives, a few radical ARNists
and cosmetic gene splicers, Web aristocrats, wealthy farcaster freaks
and Flashback addicts, a few holie and stage directors, a scattering of
actors and performance artists, several Mafia dons gone straight, and a
revolving list of recent celebrities... myself included.
Everyone drinks, uses stims and autoimplants, takes the wire, and can
afford the best drugs. The drug of choice is Flashback. It is
definitely an upper-class vice: one needs the full range of expensive
implants to fully experience it.
Helenda has seen to it that I have been so fitted: biomonitors, sensory
extenders, and internal comlog, neural shunts, kickers, metacortex
processors, blood chips, RNA tapeworms . . . my mother wouldn't have
recognized my insides.
I try Flashback twice. The first time is a glide - I target my ninth
birthday party and hit it with the first salvo. It is all there: the
servants singing on the north lawn at daybreak, don Balthazar grudgingly
canceling classes so I can spend the day with Amalfi in my EMV,
streaking across the gray dunes of the Amazon Basin in gay abandon; the
torchlight procession that evening as representatives of the other Old
Families arrive at dusk, their brightly wrapped presents gleaming under
the moon and the Ten Thousand Lights. I rise from nine hours in
Flashback with a smile on my face. The second trip almost kills me.
I am four and crying, seeking my mother through endless rooms smelling
of dust and old furniture. Android servants seek to console me but I
shake off their hands, running down hallways soiled with shadows and the
soot of too many generations. Breaking the first rule I ever learned, I
throw open the doors to Mother's sewing room, her sanctum sanctorum-to
which she retires for three hours every afternoon and from which she
emerges with her soft smile, the hem of her pale dress whispering across
the carpet like the echo of a ghost's sigh.
Mother is sitting there in the shadows. ! am four and my finger has
been hurt and I rush to her, throwing myself into her arms.
She does not respond. One of her elegant arms remains reclined along
the back of the chaise !ongue, the other remains limp on the cushion.
I pull back, shocked by her cool plasticity. I tug open the heavy
velvet drapes without rising from her lap.
Mother's eyes are white, rolled back in her head. Her lips are slightly
open. Drool moistens the corners of her mouth and glints on her perfect
chin. From the gold threads of her hair - done up in the Grande Dame
style she favors - I see the cold steel gleam of the stim wire and the
duller sheen of the skull socket she has plugged it into. The patch of
bone on either side is very white. On the table near her left hand lies
the empty Flashback syringe.
The servants arrive and pull me away. Mother never blinks. I am pulled
screaming from the room.
I wake screaming.
Perhaps it was my refusal to use Flashback again which hastened
Helenda's departure, but I doubt it. I was a toy to her - a primitive
who amused her by my innocence about a life she had taken for granted
for many decades.
Whatever the case, my refusal to Flashback left me with many days
without her; the time spent in replay is real time and Flashback users
often die having spent more days of their lives under the drug than they
ever experienced conscious.
At first I entertained myself with the implants and technotoys which had
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

been denied to me as a member of an Old Earth Family. The datasphere
was a constant delight that first year - I called up information almost
continually, living in a frenzy of full interface. I was as addicted to
raw data as the Caribou Herd were to their stims and drugs. I could
imagine don Balthazar spinning in his molten grave as I gave up
long-term memory for the transient satisfaction of implant omniscience.
It was only later that I felt the loss- Fitzgerald's Odyssey, Wu's
FinalMarch, and a score of other epics which had survived my stroke now
were shredded like cloud fragments in a high wind. Much later, freed of
implants, I painstakingly learned them all again.
For the first and only time in my life 1 became political.
Days and nights would pass with me monitoring the Senate on farcaster
cable or lying tapped into the All Thing. Someone once estimated that
the All Thing deals with about a hundred active pieces of Hegemony
legislation per day, and during my months spent screwed into the
sensorium I missed none of them. My voice and name became well known on
the debate channels. No bill was too small, no issue too simple or too
complex for my input. The simple act of voting every few minutes gave
me a false sense of having accomplished something. I finally gave up
the political obsession only after I realized that accessing the All
Thing regularly meant either staying home or turning into a walking
zombie. A person constantly busy accessing on his implants makes a
pitiful sight in public and it didn't take Helenda's derision to make me
realize that if I stayed home I would turn into an All Thing sponge like
so many millions of other slugs around the Web. So I gave up politics.
But by then I had found a new passion: religion.
I joined religions. Hell, I helped create religions. The Zen Gnostic
Church was expanding exponentially and I became a true believer,
appearing on HTV talk shows and searching for my Places of Power with
all of the devoutness of a pre-Hegira Muslim pilgrimaging to Mecca.
Besides, I loved farcasting. I had earned almost a hundred million
marks from royalties for The Dying Earth, and Helenda had invested well,
but someone once figured that a farcaster home such as mine cost more
than fifty thousand marks a day just to keep in the Web and I did not
limit my farcasting to the thirty-six worlds of my home. Transline
Publishing had qualified me for a gold universal card and I used it
liberally, farcasting to unlikely corners of the Web and then spending
weeks staying in luxury accommodations and leasing EMVs to find my
Places of Power in remote areas of backwater worlds.
I found none. I renounced Zen Gnosticism about the same time Helenda
divorced me. By that time the bills were piling up and I had to
liquidate most of the stocks and long-term investments remaining to me
after Helenda had taken her share. (1 was not only naive and in love
when she had had her attorneys draw up the marriage contract... I was
stupid.)
Eventually, even with such economies as cutting down my farcasting and
dismissing the android servants, I was facing financial disaster.
I went to see Tyrena Wingreen-Feif.
'No one wants to read poetry,' she said, leafing through the thin stack
of Cantos I had written in the past year and a half.
'What do you mean?" I said. 'The Dying Earth was poetry:'
'The Dying Earth was a fluke,' said Tyrena. Her nails were long and
green and curved in the latest mandarin fashion; they curled around my
manuscript like the claws of some chlorophyll beast. 'It sold because
the mass subconscious was ready for it."
'Maybe the mass subconscious is ready for this,' 1 said. I was
beginning to get angry.
Tyrena laughed. It was not an altogether pleasant sound. 'Martin,
Martin, Martin,' she said. 'This is poetry. You're writing about
Heaven's Gate and the Caribou Herd, but what comes across is loneliness,
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

displacement, angst, and a cynical look at humanity." 'So?"
'So no one wants topay for a look at another person's angst,' laughed
Tyrena.
I turned away from her desk and walked to the far side of the room. Her
office took up the entire four hundred and thirty-fifth floor of the
Transline Spire in the Babel section of Tau Ceti Center. There were no
windows; the circular room was open from floor to ceiling, shielded by a
solar-generated containment field which showed no shimmer whatsoever. It
was like standing between two gray plates suspended halfway between the
sky and earth. I watched crimson clouds move between the lesser spires
half a kilometer below and I thought about hubris.
Tyrena's office had no doorways, stairways, elevators, field lifts, or
trapdoors: no connection to the other levels at all. One entered
Tyrena's office through the five-faceted farcaster which shimmered in
midair like an abstract hoiosculpture. I found myself thinking about
tower fires and power failures as well as hubris. I said,
'Are you saying that you won't publish it?"
'Not at all,' smiled my editor. 'You've earned Transline several
billion marks, Martin. We will publish it. All I am saying is that no
one will buy it."
'You're wrong!" I shouted. 'Not everyone recognizes fine poetry, but
there are still enough people who read to make it a bestseller."
Tyrena did not laugh again but her smile slashed upward in a twist of
green lips. 'Martin, Martin, Martin,' she said, 'the population of
literate people has been declining steadily since Gutenberg's day. By
the twentieth century, less than two percent of the people in the
so-called industrialized democracies read even one book a year. And
that was before the smart machines, dataspheres, and user-friendly
environments. By the Hegira, ninety-eight percent of the Hegemony's
population had no reason to read anything. So they didn't bother
learning how to. It's worse t$day. There are more than a hundred
billion human beings in the Worldweb and less than one percent of them
bothers to hardfax any printed material, much less read a book."
'The Dying Earth sold almost three billion copies,' I reminded her.
'Mm-hmm,' said Tyrena. 'It was the Pilgrim's Progress Effect."
'The what?"
'Pilgrim's Progress Effect. In the Massachusetts Colony of... what was
it! - seventeenth-century Old Earth, every decent family had to have a
copy in the household. But, my heavens, no one had to read it. It was
the same with Hitler's Mein Kampfor Stukatsky's
Visions in the Eye of a Decapitated Child."
'Who was Hitler?" I said.
Tyrena smiled slightly. 'An Old Earth politician who did some writing.
Mein Kampf is still in print ...
Transline renews the copyright every hundred and thirty-eight years."
'Well, look,' I said, 'I'm going to take a few weeks to polish up the
Cantos and give it my best shot."
'Fine,' smiled Tyrena.
'1 suppose you'll want to edit it the way you did last time?"
'Not at all,' said Tyrena. 'Since there's no core of nostalgia this
time, you might as well write it the way you want."
I blinked. 'You mean I can keep in the blank verse this time?"
'Of course."
'And the philosophy?"
'Please do."
'And the experimental sections?"
'Yes."
'And you'll print it the way I write it?"
'Absolutely."
'Is there a chance it'll sell?"
'Not a hope in hell."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

My 'few weeks to polish up the Cantos' turned into ten months of
obsessive labor. I shut off most of the rooms in the house, keeping
only the tower room on Deneb Drei, the exercise room on Lusus, the
kitchen, and the bathroom raft on Mare lnfinitus. I worked a straight
ten hours a day, took a break for some vigorous exercise followed by a
meal and a nap, and then returned to my writing table for another
eight-hour stint. It was similar to the time five years before when I
was recovering from my stroke and it sometimes took an hour or a day for
a word to come to me, for a concept to sink its roots into the firm soil
of language. Now it was an even slower process as I agonized over the
perfect word, the precise rhyme scheme, the most playful image, and the
most ineffable analog to the most elusive emotion.
After ten standard months I was done, acknowledging the ancient aphorism
to the effect that no book or poem is ever finished, merely abandoned.
'What do you think?" I asked Tyrena as she read through the first copy.
Her eyes were blank, bronze disks in that week's fashion, but this did
not hide the fact that there were tears there. She brushed one away.
'It's beautiful,' she said.
'I tried to discover the voice of some of the Ancients,' 1 said,
suddenly shy.
'You succeeded brilliantly."
'The Heaven's Gate Interlude is still rough,' I said.
'It's perfect."
'It's about loneliness,' I said.
'It is loneliness."
'Do you think it's ready?" I asked.
'It's perfect... a masterpiece." 'Do you think it'll sell?" I asked.
'No fucking way."
They planned an initial run of seventy million hardfax copies of Cantos.
Transline ran ads throughout the datasphere, placed HTV commercials,
transmitted software inserts, successfully solicited blurbs from
best-selling authors, made sure it was reviewed in the New New York
Times Book Section and the TC Review, and generally spent a fortune on
advertising.
The Cantos sold twenty-three thousand hardfax copies during the first
year it was in print. At ten percent royalties of the 12MK cover price,
I had earned back 13,800MK of my 2,000,000MK advance from Transline.
The second year saw a sale of 638 hardfax copies; there were no
datasphere rights sold, no holie options, and no book tours.
What the Cantos lacked in sales it made up for in negative reviews:
'Indecipherable... archaic... irrelevant to all current concerns,'
said the Times Book Section. 'M. Silenus has committed the ultimate
act of non-communication,' wrote Urban Kapry in the TC'v Review, 'by
indulging himself in an orgy of pretentious obfuscation." Marmon Hamlit
on 'AllNet Now!" issued the final deathblow: 'Oh, the poetry thing from
Whatshisname - couldn't read it. Didn't try."
Tyrena Wingreen-Fef did not seem concerned. Two weeks after the first
reviews and hardfax returns came in, a day after my thirteen-day binge
ended, I farcast to her office and threw myself into the black flowfoam
chair which crouched in the center of the room like a velvet
panther. One of Tau Ceti Center's legendary thunderstorms was going on
and Jovian-sized lightning crashes were rending the blood-tinged air
just beyond the invisible containment field.
'Don't sweat it,' said Tyrena. This week's fashions included a hairdo
which sent black spikes thrusting half a meter above her forehead and a
body field opaciter which left shifting currents of color concealing -
and revealing- the nudity beneath. 'The first run only amounted to
sixty thousand fax transmits so we're not out much there."
'You said seventy million were planned,' I said.
'Yeah, well, we changed our minds after Transline's resident AI read
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

it."
I slumped lower in the flowfoam. 'Even the AI hated it?"
'The AI loved it,' said Tyrena. 'That's when we knew for sure that
people were going to hate it."
I sat up. 'Couldn't we have sold copies to the TechnoCore?"
'We did,' said Tyrena. 'One. The millions of Als there probably
real-time-shared it the minute it came in over fatline. Interstellar
copyright doesn't mean shit when you're dealing with silicon."
'All right,' I said, slumping. 'What next?" Outside, lightning bolts
the size of Old Earth's ancient super-highways danced between the
corporate spires and cloud towers.
Tyrena rose from her desk and walked to the edge of the carpeted circle.
Her body field flickered like electrically charged oil on water. 'Next,'
she said, 'you decide if you want to be a writer or the Worldweb's
biggest jerk-off."
'What?"
'You heard me." Tyrena turned and smiled. Her teeth had been capped to
gold points. 'The contract allows us to recover the advance in any way
we have to. Seizing your assets at Interbank, recovering the gold coins
you've got hidden on Homefree, and selling that gaudy farcaster house
would about do it. And then you can go join the other artistic
dilettantes and dropouts and
mental cases that Sad King Billy collects on whatever
Outback world he lives on."
I stared.
'Then again,' she said and smiled her cannibal smile, 'we can just
forget this temporary setback and you can get to work on your next
book."
My next book appeared five standard months later. The Dying Earth H
picked up where The Dying Earth left off, in plain prose this time, the
sentence length and chapter content carefully guided by
neuro-bio-monitored responses on a test group of 638 average hard fax
readers.
The book was in novel form, short enough not to intimidate the potential
buyer at Food Mart checkout stands, and the cover was a twenty-second
interactive holo wherein the tall, swarthy stranger - Amalfi Schwartz, I
suppose, although Amalfi was short and pale and wore corrective lenses-
rips the bodice of the struggling female just to the nipple line before
the protesting blonde turns toward the viewer and cries for help in a
breathless
whisper provided by porn holie star Leeda Swann.
Dying Earth H sold nineteen million copies.
'Not bad,' said Tyrena. 'It takes awhile to build an audience."
'The first Dying Earth sold three billion copies,' I said.
'Pilgrim's Progress,' she said. 'Mein Kampf. Once in a century. Maybe
less."
'But it sold three billion..."
'Look,' said Tyrena. 'In twentieth-century Old Earth, a fast food chain
took dead cow meat, fried it in grease, added carcinogens, wrapped it in
petroleum-based foam, and sold nine hundred billion units. Human
beings. Go figure."
Dying Earth III introduced the characters of Winona, the escaped slave
girl who rose to the ownership of her own fiberplastic plantation (never
mind that fiberplastic never grew on Old Earth), Arturo Redgrave, the
dashing blockade runner (what blockade?!), and Innocence Sperry, the
nine-year-old telepath dying of an unspecified Little Nell disease.
Innocence lasted until
Dying Earth IX, and on the day Transline allowed mc to kill the little
shit off, I went out to celebrate with a six-day, ',wenty-world binge. I
awoke in a lungpipe on Hcaven's Gate, covered with vomit and rebreatber
mold, nursing the Wcb's biggest beadache and the sure knowledge that I
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

soon would have to start on Volume X of The Chronicles of the Dying
Earth.
It isn't hard being a hack writer. Between Dying Earth H and Dying
Earth IX, six standard years had passed relatively painlessly. My
research was meager, my plots for-mulaic, my characters cardboard, my
prose preliterate, and my free time was my own. I traveled. I married
twice more; each wife left me with no hard feelings but with a sizable
portion of the royalties from my next Dying Earth. I explored religions
and serious drinking, finding more hope of lasting solace in the latter.
I kept my home, adding six rooms on five worlds, and filled it with fine
art. I entertained. Writers were among my acquaintances but, as in all
times, we tended to mistrust and badmouth each other, secretly resenting
the other's successes and finding fault in their work. Each of us knew
in his or her heart that he or she was a true artist of the word who
merely happened to be commercial; the others were hacks.
Then, on a cool morning with my sleeping room rocking slightly in the
upper branches of my tree on the Templar world, I awoke to a gray sky
and the realization that my muse had fled.
It had been five years since I had written any poetry.
The Cantos lay open in the Deneb Drei tower, only a few pages finished
beyond what had been published. I had been using thought processors to
write my novels and one of these activated as I entered the study. SHIT,
it printed out, WHAT DID i DO WITH MY MUSE?
It says something about the type of writing I had been doing that my
muse could flee without my noticing. For those who do not write and who
never have been stirred by the creative urge, talk of muses seems a
figure of speech, a quaint conceit, but for those of us who live by the
Word, our muses are as real and necessary as the soft
clay of language which they help to sculpt. When one is writing -
really writing - it is as if one is given a fatlinc to tbe gods. No
true poet has been able to explain the exhilaration one feels when the
mind becomes an instrument as surely as does the pen or thought
processor, ordering and expressing the revelations flowing in from
somewhere else.
My muse had fled. I sought her in the other worlds of my house but only
silence echoed back from the art-bedecked walls and empty spaces. I
farcast and flew to my favorite places, watching the suns set on the
windblown prairies of Grass and the night fogs obscure the ebony crags
of Nevermore, but although I emptied my mind of tbe trash-prose of the
endless Dying Earth, there came no whispers from my muse.
I sought her in alcohol and Flashback, returning to the productive days
on Hcaven's Gate when her inspiration was a constant buzzing in my cars,
interrupting my work, waking mc from sleep, but in the rclived hours and
days her voice was as muted and garbled as a damaged audio disk from
some forgotten century.
My muse had fled.
I farcast to Tyrena Wingreen-Feif's office at the precise moment of my
appointment. Tyrena had been promoted from editor-in-chief of the
hardfax division to publisher.
Her new office occupied the highest level of the Tau Ceti Center
Transline Spire and standing there was like perching on the carpeted
summit of the galaxy's tallest, thinnest peak; only the invisible dome
of the slightly polarized containment field arched overhead and the edge
of the carpet ended in a six-kilometer drop. 1 wondered if other
authors felt the urge to jump.
'The new opus?" said Tyrena. Lusus was dominating the fashion universe
this week and 'dominate' was the right word; my editor was dressed in
leather and iron, rusted spikes on her wrists and neck and a massive
ban-dolier across her shoulder and left breast. The cartridges looked
real.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Yeah,' I said and tossed the manuscript box on her desk.
'Martin, Martin, Martin,' she sighed, 'when are you going to transmit
your books rather than going to all the trouble of printing them out and
bringing them here in person?"
'There's a strange satisfaction in delivering them,' I
said. 'Especially this one."
'Oh?"
'Yes,' I said. 'Why don't you read some of it?" Tyrena smiled and
clicked black fingernails along the cartridges in her bandolicr. 'I'm
sure it's up to your usual high standards, Martin,' she said. 'I don't
have to look at it."
'Please do,' I said.
'Really,' said Tyrcna, 'there's no reason. It always makes me nervous
to read a new work while the author is present."
· 'This one won't,' I said. 'Read just the first few pages."
She must have heard something in my voice because she frowned slightly
and opened the box. The frown deepened as she read the first page and
flipped through the rest of the manuscript.
Page one had a single sentence: 'And then, one fine morning in October,
the Dying Earth swallowed its own bowels, spasmed its final spasm and
died." The other two
hundred and ninety-nine pages were blank.
'A joke, Martin?".
'Nope."
'A subtle hint then? You would like to begin a new series?"
'Nope."
'It's not as if we hadn't expected it, Martin. Our story-liners have
come up with several exciting series ideas for you. M. Subwaizee
thinks that you would be perfect for the novelizations of the Crimson
Avenger holies."
'You can stick the Crimson Avenger up your corporate ass, Tyrena,' I
said cordially. 'I'm finished with Transline and this premasticated
gruel you call fiction."
Tyrena's expression did not flicker. Her teeth were not pointed; today
they were rusted iron to match the spikes on her wrists and the collar
around her neck. 'Martin,
Martin, Martin,' she sighed, 'you have no idea how finished you will be
if you don't apologize, straighten up, and fly right. But that can wait
until tomorrow. Why don't you step home, sober up, and think about
this?"
I laughed. 'I'm as sober as l've been in eight years, lady. It just
took me awhile to realize that it wasn't just me who's writing crap...
there's not a book published in the Web this year that hasn't been total
garbage. Well, l'm getting off the scow."
Tyrena rose. For the first time I noticed that on her simulated canvas
web belt there hung a FORCE death-wand.
I hoped that it was a designer-fake as the rest of her costume.
'Listen, you miserable, no-talent hack,' she hissed.
'Transline owns you from the balls up. If you give us any more trouble
we'll have you working in the Gothic Romance factory under the name
Rosemary Titmouse.
Now go home, sober up, and get to work on Dying Earth X."
I smiled and shook my head.
Tyrena squinted slightly. 'You're still into us for almost a
million-mark advance,' she said. 'One word to Collections and we'll
seize every room of your house except that goddamn raft you use as an
outhouse. You can sit on it until the oceans fill up with crap."
I laughed a final time. 'It's a self-contained disposal unit,' I said.
'Besides, I sold the house yesterday. The check for the balance of the
advance should have been transmitted by now."
Tyrena tapped the plastic grip of her deathwand.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Transline's copyrighted the Dying Earth concept, you
know. We'll just have someone else write the books."
I nodded. 'They're welcome to it."
Something in my ex-editor's voice changed when she realized that I was
serious. Somewhere, I sensed, there was an advantage to her if I
stayed. 'Listen,' she said, 'l'm sure we can work this out, Martin. I
was saying to the director the other day that your advances were too
small and that Transline should let you develop a new story line..."
'Tyrena, Tyrena, Tyrena,' I sighed. 'Goodbye."
I farcast to Renaissance VectOr and then to Parsimony, where ! boarded
a spinship for the three-week voyage to Asquith and the crowded kingdom
of Sad King Billy.
Notes for a sketch of Sad King Billy:
His Royal Highness King William XXIII, sovereign lord of the Kingdom of
Windsor-in-Exile, looks a bit like a wax candle of a man who has been
left on a hot stove.
His long hair runs in limp rivulets to slumped shoulders while the
furrows on his brow trickle downward to the tributaries of wrinkles
around the basset-hound eyes, and then run southward again through folds
and frown lines to the maze of wattles in neck and jowls. King Billy is
said to remind anthropologists of the worry dolls of the Outback
Kinshasa, to make Zen Gnostics recall the Pitiful Buddha after the
temple fire on Tai Zhin, and to send media historians rushing to their
archives to check photos of an ancient flat-film movie actor named
Charles Laughton. None of these references mean anything to me; I look
at King Billy and think of my long-dead tutor don Balthazar after a
week-long binge.
Sad King Billy's reputation for gloominess is exaggerated.
He often laughs; it is merely his misfortune that his peculiar form of
laughter makes most people think he is sobbing.
A man cannot help his physiognomy, but in His Highness's case, the
entire persona tends to suggest either 'buffoon' or 'victim." He
dresses, if that can be the word, in something approaching a constant
state of anarchy, defying the taste and color sense of his android
servants, so that on some days he clashes with himself and his
environment simultaneously. Nor is his appearance limited to sartorial
chaos - King William moves in a permanent sphere of dishabille, his fly
unsealed, his velvet cape torn and tattered and drawing crumbs
magnetically from the floor, his left sleeve ruffle twice as long as the
right, which - in turn - looks as if it has been dipped in jam.
You get the idea.
For all this, Sad King Billy has an insightful mind and a passion for
the arts and literature which has not been equaled since the true
Renaissance days on old Old Earth.
In some ways King Billy is the fat child with his face eternally pressed
to the candy store window. He loves and appreciates fine music but
cannot produce it. A connoisseur of ballet and all things graceful, His
Highness is a klutz, a moving series of pratfalls and comic bits of
clumsiness. A passionate reader, unerring poetry critic, and patron of
forensics, King Billy combines a stutter in his verbal expression with a
shyness which will not allow him to show his verse or prose to anyone
else.
A lifelong bachelor now entering his sixtieth year, King Billy inhabits
the tumbledown palace and two-thousand-square-mile kingdom as if it were
another suit of rumpled, royal clothes. Anecdotes abound: one of the
famous oil painters whom King Billy supports finds His Majesty walking
head down, hands clasped behind him, one foot on the garden path and one
in the mud, obviously lost in thought. The artist hails his patron. Sad
King Billy looks up, blinks, looks around as if awakening from a long
nap. 'Excuse me,' His Highness says to the bemused painter, 'b-b-but
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

could you p-p-please tell me - was I headed toward the palace or away
from the p-p-palace?" 'Toward the palace, Your Majesty,' replies the
artist. 'Oh, g-g-good,' sighs the King, 'then l've had lunch."
General Horace Glennon-Height had begun his rebellion and the Outback
world of Asquith lay directly in his path of conquest. Asquith was not
- the Hegemony had offered a FORCE:space fleet as a shield - but
the royal ruler of the Kingdom of Monaco-in-Exile seemed more melted
than ever when he called me in.
'Martin,' said His Majesty, 'you've h-h-heard about the b-battle for
Fomalhaut?"
'Yeah,' I said. 'It doesn't sound like anything to worry about.
Fomalhaut was just the kind of place Glennon-Height's been hitting ...
small, no more than a few thousand colonists, rich in minerals, and with
a time-debt of at least - what was it? - twenty standard months from
the Web."
'Twenty-three,' said Sad King Billy. 'So you d-d-don't think that w-we
are in d-d-d-jeopardy?"
'Uh-uh,' I said. 'With only a three-week real-transit time and a
time-debt of less than a year, the Hegemony can always get forces here
from the Web faster than the General can spin up from Fomalhaut."
'Perhaps,' mused King Billy, beginning to lean on a globe and then
jumping upright as it started to turn under his weight. 'But
none-the-the less I've decided to start our own m-m-modest Hegira."
I blinked, surprised. Billy had been talking about relocating the
kingdom in exile for almost two years, but I had never thought he would
go through with it.
'The sp-sp-sp... the ships are ready on Parvati,' he said. 'Asquith
has agreed to su-su-su... to provide the transport we need to the Web."
'But the palace?" I said. 'The library? The farms and grounds?"
'Donated, of course,' said King Billy, 'but the contents of the library
will travel with us."
I sat on the arm of the horsehair divan and rubbed my cheek. In the ten
years I had been in the kingdom, I had progressed from Billy's subject
of patronage to tutor, to confidant, to friend, but never did I pretend
to understand this disheveled enigma. Upon my arrival he had granted me
an immediate audience. 'D-d-do you w-w-wish to j-j-join the other
t-t-talented people in our little colony?" he had asked.
'Yes, Your Majesty."
'And w-w-will you wr-wr-write more books like the D-D-Dying Earth?"
'Not if I can help it, Your Majesty."
'i r-r-read it, you know,' the little man had said. 'It was v-v-very
interesting."
'You're most kind, Sir."
'B-b-b-bullshit, M. Silenus. It w-w-was interesting because someone
had obviously b-b-bowdlerized it and left in all the bad parts."
I had grinned, surprised by the sudden revelation that I was going to
like Sad King Billy.
'B-b-but the Cantos,' he sighed, 'th-th-that was a
book. Probably the finest volume of v-v... poetry published in the Web
in the last two centuries. How you managed to get that by the
mediocrity police I will never know. I ordered twenty thousand copies
for the k-k-kingdom."
I bowed my head slightly, at a loss for words for the
first time since my poststroke days two decades before.
'Will you write more p-p-poetry like the Cantos?" 'I came here to try,
Your Majesty."
'Then welcome,' said Sad King Billy. 'You will stay in the west wing of
the p-p-p... castle, near my offices, and my door will always be open
to you."
Now I glanced at the closed door and at the little sovereign who - even
when smiling - looked as if he were on the verge of tears. 'Hyperion?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

I asked. He had mentioned the colony world-gone-primitive many times. ,
'Precisely. The android seedships have been there for some years,
M-M-Martin. Preparing the way, as it were."
I raised an eyebrow. King Billy's wealth came not from the assets of
the kingdom but from major investments in the Web economy. Even so, if
he had been carrying on a surreptitious recolonization effort for years,
the cost must have been staggering.
'D-d-do you remember why the original colonists named the pluh-pluh-pluh
... the world Hyperion, Martin?"
'Sure. Before the Hegira they were a tiny freehold on one of the moons
of Saturn. They couldn't last without terrestrial resupply, so they
emigrated to the Outback and named the survey world after their moon."
King Billy smiled sadly. 'And do you Inow why the name is
p-p-propitious for our endeavor?"
It took me about ten seconds to make the connection.
'Keats,' I said.
Several years earlier, near the end of a long discussion about the
essence of poetry, King Billy had asked me who was the purest poet who
had ever lived.
'The purest?" I had said. 'Don't you mean the greatest ?"
'No, no,' said Billy, 'that's absurd t-t-to argue over who is the
greatest. i'm curious about your opinion of
the p-p-purest... the closest to the essence you describe."
I had thought about it a few days and then brought my answer to King
Billy as we watched the setting suns from the top of the bluff near the
palace. Red and blue shadows stretched across the amber lawn toward us.
'Keats,' I said.
'John Keats,' whispered Sad King Billy. 'Ahh." And then a moment later:
'Why?"
So I had told him what I knew about the nineteenth-century Old Earth
poet; about his upbringing, training, and early death ... but mostly
about a life dedicated almost totally to the mysteries and beauties of
poetic creation.
Billy had seemed interested then; he seemed obsessed now as he waved his
hand and brought into existence a holo model which all but filled the
room. I moved backward, stepping through hills and buildings and
grazing animals to get a better view.
'Behold Hyperion,' whispered my patron. As was usually the case when he
was totally absorbed, King Billy forgot to stutter. The holo shifted
through a series of views: river cities, port cities, mountain eyries, a
city on a hill filled with monuments to match the strange buildings in a
nearby valley.
'The Time Tombs?" I said.
'Precisely. The greatest mystery in the known universe."
I frowned at the hyperbole. 'They're fucking empty,' I said. 'They've
been empty since they were discovered."
'They are the source of a strange, anti-entropic force-field which
lingers still,' said King Billy. 'One of the few phenomena outside
singularities which dares to tamper with time itself."
'It's no big deal,' I said. 'It must've been like painting rust
preventative on metal. They were made to last but they're empty. And
since when do we go bugfuck about technology?"
'Not technology,' sighed King Billy, his face melting into deeper
grooves. 'Mystery. The strangeness of place so necessary to some
creative spirits. A perfect mixture of the classical utopia and the
pagan mystery."
I shrugged, not impressed.
Sad King Billy waved the hoio away. 'Has your p-p-poetry improved?"
I crossed my arms and glared at the regal dwarf-slob.
'No."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Has your m-m-muse returned?"
I said nothing. If looks could have killed, we would all be crying 'The
King is dead, long live the King!" before nightfall.
'Very w-w-we!i,' he said, showing that he could look insufferably smug
as well as sad. 'P-p-pack your bags, my boy. We're going to Hyperion."
(Fade in)
Sad King Billy's five seedships floating like golden dandelions above a
lapis sky. White cities rising on three continents: Keats, Endymion,
Port Romance ... the Poets' City itself. More than eight thousand of
Art's pilgrims seeking escape from the tyranny of mediocrity and
searching for a renewal of vision on this rough-hewn world.
Asquith and Windsor-in-Exile had been a center for android biofacture in
the century following the Hegira, and now these blueskinned
friends-of-man labored and tilled with the understanding that once these
final labors were finished they were free at last. The white cities
rose.
The indigenies, tired of playing native, came out' of their villages and
forests and helped us rebuild the colony to more human specifications.
The technocats and bureaucrats and ecocrats were thawed and let loose
upon the unsuspecting world and Sad King Billy's dream came one step
closer to reality.
By the time we arrived at Hyperion, General Horace Glennon-Height was
dead, his brief but brutal mutiny already crushed, but there was no
turning back.
Some of the more rugged artists and artisans spurned the Poets' City and
eked out rugged but creative lives in Jacktown or Port Romance, or even
in the expanding frontiers beyond, but I stayed.
I found no muse on Hyperion during those first years.
For many, the expansion of distance because of limited transportation -
EMVs were unreliable, skimmers
scarce - and the contraction of artificial consciousness due to absence
of datasphere, no access to the All Thing, and only one fatline
transmitter - all led to a renewal of creative energies, a new
realization of what it meant to be
human and an artist.
Or so I heard.
No muse appeared. My verse continued to be techni cally proficient and
dead as Huck Finn's cat.
I decided to kill myself.
But first I spent some time, nine years at least, carrying out a
community service by providing the one thing new Hyperion lacked:
decadence.
From a biosculptor aptly named Graumann Hacket, I obtained the hairy
flanks, hooves, .and goat legs of a satyr. I cultivated my beard and
extended my ears.
Graumann made interesting alterations to my sexual apparatus. Word got
around. Peasant girls, indigenies, the wives of our true-blue city
planners and pioneers -all awaited a visit from Hyperion's only resident
satyr or arranged one themselves. I learned what 'priapic' and
'satyriasis' really mean. Besides the unending series of sexual
contests, I allowed my drinking bouts to become legendary and my
vocabulary to return to something approaching the old poststroke days·
It was fucking wonderful. It was fucking hell.
And then on the night I had set aside to blow my brains out, Grendel
appeared.
Notes for a sketch of our visiting monster:
Our worst dreams have come alive. Something wicked shuns the light.
Shades of Morbius and the Kre!l. Keep the fires high, Mother, Grendel
comes tonight.
At first we think the missing are merely absent; there are no watchers
on the wails of our city, no walls actually, no warriors at the door of
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

our mead hall. Then a husband reports a wife who disappears between the
eve ning meal and the tucking in of their two children. Then Hoban
Kristus, the abstract impiosionist, fails to appear at midweek
performance at Poets' Amphitheatre, his first missed cue in eighty-two
years of treading the boards. Concern rises. Sad King Billy returns
from his labors as overseer on the .lacktown restoration and promises
that security will be tightened. A sensor net is woven around the town.
ShipSecurity officers sweep the Time Tombs and report that all remains
empty. Mechs are sent into the labyrinth entrance at the base of the
Jade Tomb and report nothing in a six-thousand-kilometer probe.
Skimmers, automated and manned, sweep the area between the city and the
Bridle Range and sense nothing larger than the heat signature of a rock
eel.
For a local week there are no more disappearances.
Then the deaths begin.
The sculptor Pete Garcia is found in his studio . . .
and in his bedroom... and in the yard beyond. Ship-Security Manager
Truin Hines is foolish enough to tell a newsteep: 'It's like he was
mauled by some vicious animal.
But no animal I've ever seen could do that to a man."
We are all secretly thrilled and titillated. True, the dialogue is bad,
straight out of a million movies and holies we've scared ourselves with,
but now we are part of the show.
Suspicion turns toward the obvious: a psychopath is loose among us,
probably killing with a pulse-blade or hellwhip. This time he (or she)
had not found time to dispose of the body. Poor Pete.
ShipSecurity Manager Hines is sacked and City Manager Pruett receives
permission from His Majesty to hire, train, and arm a city police force
of approximately twenty officers. There is talk of truth-testing the
entire Poets' City population of six thousand. Sidewalk cafes buzz with
conversation on civil rights... we were technically out of the Hegemony
- did we have any rights?
. . and harebrained schemes are hatched to catch the murderer.
Then the slaughter begins.
There was no pattern to the murders. Bodies were found in twos and
threes, or alone, or not at all. Some of the disappearances were
bloodless; others left gallons of gore. There were no witnesses, no
survivors of attacks.
Location did not seem to matter: the Weimont family
lived in one of the outlying villas but Sira Rob never stirred from her
tower studio near the center of town; two of the victims disappeared
alone, at night, apparently while walking in the Zen Garden, but
Chancellor Lehman's daughter had private bodyguards yet vanished while
alone in a bathroom on the seventh floor of Sad King Billy's palace.
On Lusus or Tau Ceti Center or a dozen other of the old Web worlds, the
deaths of a thousand people add up to minor news - items for datasphere
short-term or the inside pages of the morning paper - but in a city of
six thousand on a colony of fifty thousand, a dozen murders - like the
proverbial sentence to be hanged in the morning- tend to focus one's
attention wonderfully well.
I knew one of the first victims. Sissipriss Harris had been one of my
first conquests as a satyr - and one of my most enthusiastic - a
beautiful girl, long blond hair too soft to be real, a
fresh-picked-peach complexion too virginal to dream of touching, a
beauty too perfect to believe: precisely the sort that even the most
timid male dreams of violating, Sissipriss now had been violated in
earnest. They found only her head, lying upright in the center of Lord
Byron's Plaza as if she had been buried to her neck in pourable marble.
I knew when I heard these details precisely what kind of creature we
were dealing with, for a cat I had owned on Mother's estate had left
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

similar offerings on the south patio most summer mornings - the head of
a mouse staring up from the sandstone in pure rodent amazement, or
perhaps a ground squirrel's toothy grin- killing trophies from a proud
but hungry predator.
Sad King Billy came to visit me while I was working on my Cantos.
'Good morning, Billy,' I said.
'It's Your Majesty,' grumped His Majesty in a rare show of royal pique.
His stutter had disappeared the day the royal dropship landed on
Hyperion.
'Good morning, Billy, Your Majesty."
'Hnnrh,' growled my liege lord, moving some papers
and managing to sit in the only puddle of spilled coffee on an otherwise
dry bench. 'You're writing again, Silenus."
I saw no reason to acknowledge an acknowledgment of the obvious.
'Have you always used a pen7'
'No,' I said, 'only when I want to write something worth reading."
'Is that worth reading?" He gestured toward the small heap of manuscript
I had accrued in two local weeks of work.
'Yes."
'Yes? Just yes?"
'Yes."
'Will I get to read it soon?"
'No."
King Billy looked down and noticed that his leg was in a puddle of
coffee. He frowned, moved, and mopped at the shrinking pool with the
hem of his cape. 'Never?" he said.
'Not unless you outlive me."
'Which I plan to do,' said the King. 'While you expire
from playing goat to the kingdom's ewes."
'Is that an attempt at a metaphor?"
'Not in the least,' said King Billy. 'Merely an observation. '
'I haven't forced my attentions on a ewe since my boyhood days on the
farm,' I said. 'I promised my mother in song that I wouldn't indulge in
sheep fucking again without asking her permission." While King Billy
looked on mournfully, I sang a few bars of an ancient ditty called
'There'll Never Be Another Ewe."
'Martin,' he said, 'someone or something is killing my people."
I set aside my paper and pen. '1 know,' I said.
'I need your help."
'How, for Christ's sake? Am I supposed to track down the killer like
some HTV detective? Have a fight to the fucking death on Reichenbach
fucking Falls?"
'That would be satisfactory, Martin. But in the meantime a few opinions
and words of advice would suffice."
'Opinion One,' I said, 'it was stupid to come here.
Opinion Two, it's stupid to stay. Advice Alpha/Omega: leave."
King Billy nodded dolefully. 'Leave this city or all of Hyperion?"
I shrugged.
His Majesty rose and walked to the window of my small study. It looked
out across a three-meter alley to the brick wall of the automated
recycling plant next door. King Billy studied the view. 'You're
aware,' he
said, 'of the ancient legend of the Shrike?"
'I've heard bits of it."
'The indigenies associate the monster with the Time Tombs,' he said.
'The indigenies smear paint on their bellies for the harvest celebration
and smoke unrecombinant tobacco,' I said.
King Billy nodded at the wisdom of this. He said: 'The Hegemony
Firstdown Team was wary of this area. They set up the multichannel
recorders and kept their bases south of the Bridle."
'Look,' I said, 'Your Majesty... what do you want?
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Absolution for screwing up and building the city here?
You're absolved. Go and sin no more, my son. Now, if you don't mind,
Your Royalship, adi6s. l've got dirty limericks to write here."
King Billy did not turn away from the window. 'You
recommend that we evacuate the city, Martin?" I hesitated only a second.
'Sure." 'And would you leave with the rest?" 'Why wouldn't I?"
King Billy turned and looked me in the eye. 'Would you?"
I said nothing. After a minute I looked away.
'I thought so,' said the ruler of the planet. He clasped his pudgy
hands behind his back and stared at the wall again. 'If I were a
detective,' he said, 'I would be suspicious.
The city's least productive citizen starts writing again after a decade
of silence only... what, Martin?
· . . two days after the first murders happened. Now he's disappeared
from the social life he once dominated and
spends his time composing an epic poem... why, even
the young girls are safe from his goatish ardor."
i sighed. 'Goatish ardor, m'!ord?"
King Billy glanced over his shoulder at me.
'All right,' I said. 'You've got me. I confess. I've been murdering
them and bathing in their blood. It works as a fucking literary
aphrodisiac. I figure two... three hundred more victims, tops... and
I'll have my next book ready for publication."
King Billy turned back to the window.
'What's the matter,' I said, 'don't you believe me?" 'No." 'Why not?"
'Because,' said the King, 'I know who the murderer is."
We sat in the darkened holopit and watched the Shrike kill novelist Sira
Rob and her lover. The light level was very low; Sira's middle-aged
flesh seemed to glow with a pale phosphorescence while her much younger
boyfriend's white buttocks gave the illusion in the dim light of
floating separately from the rest of his tanned body.
Their lovemaking was reaching its frenzied peak when the inexplicable
occurred. Rather than the final thrusts and sudden pause of orgasm, the
young man seemed to levitate up and backward, rising into the air as if
Sira had somehow forcefully ejected him from her body. The sound track
on the disk, previously consisting of the usual banal pants, gasps,
exhortations, and instructions one would expect from such activity,
suddenly filled the holopit with screams- first the young man's, then
Sira's.
There was a thud as the boy's body struck a wall off camera. Sira's
body lay waiting in tragically comic vulnerability, her legs wide, arms
open, breasts flattened, thighs pale. Her head had been thrown back in
ecstasy but now she had time to raise it, shock and anger already
replacing the oddly similar expression of imminent orgasm. She opened
her mouth to shout something.
No words. There came the watermelon-carving sound of blades piercing
flesh, of hooks being pulled free of
tendon and bone. Sira's head went back, her mouth opened impossibly
wide, and her body exploded from the breastbone down. Flesh separated a
if an invisible ax were chopping Sira Rob for kindling. Unseen scalpels
completed the job of opening her, lateral incisions appearing like
obscene time-lapse footage of a mad surgeon's favorite operation. It
was a brutal autopsy performed on a living person. On a once living
person, rather, for when the blood stopped flying and the body ceased
spasming, Sira's limbs relaxed in death, legs opening again in an echo
of the obscene display of viscera above. And then- for the briefest
second - there was a blur of red and chrome near the bed.
'Freeze, expand, and augment,' King Billy told the house computer.
The blur resolved itself into a head out of a jolt addict's nightmare: a
face part steel, part chrome, and part skull, teeth like a mechanized
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

wolf's crossed with a steam shovel, eyes like ruby lasers burning
through blood-filled gems, forehead penetrated by a curved spike-blade
rising thirty centimeters from a quicksilver
skull, and a neck ringed with similar thorns.
'The Shrike?" I asked.
King Billy nodded - the merest movement of chin and jowls.
'What happened to the boy?" I asked.
'There was no sign of him when Sira's body was discovered,' said the
King. 'No one knew he was missing until this disk was discovered. He
has been identified as a
young recreation specialist from Endymion."
'You just found the holo?"
'Yesterday,' said King Billy. 'The security people found the imager on
the ceiling. Less than a millimeter across. Sira had a library of such
disks. The camera
apparently was there only to record... ah..." 'The bedroom follies,' I
said.
'Precisely."
I stood up and approached the floating image of the creature. My hand
passed through forehead, spike, and jaws. The computer had calculated
its size and represented
it properly. Judging from the thing's head, our local Grendel stood
more than three meters tall. 'Shrike,' I
muttered, more in greeting than in identification.
'What can you tell me about it, Martin?"
'Why ask me?" I snapped. 'I'm a poet, not a mythohistorian."
'You accessed the seedship computer with a query about the Shrike's
nature and origins."
I raised an eyebrow. Computer access was supposed to be as private and
anonymous as datasphere entry in the Hegemony. 'So what?" I said.
'Hundreds of people must have checked out the Shrike legend since the
killings began. Maybe thousands. It's the only fucking monster legend
we've got."
King Billy moved his wrinkles and folds up and down.
'Yes,' he said, 'but you searched the files three months before the
first disappearance."
I sighed and slumped into the holopit cushions. 'All right,' I said, 'I
did. So what? I wanted to use the fucking legend in the fucking poem
I'm writing, so I researched it.
Arrest me."
'What did you learn?"
I was very angry now. I stamped satyr hooves into the soft carpet.
'Just the stuff in the fucking file,' I snapped.
'What in the hell do you want from me, Billy?"
The King rubbed his brow and winced as he accidentally stuck his little
finger in his eye. '1 don't know,' he said.
'The security people wanted to take you up to the ship and put you on
full interrogative interface. I chose to talk to you instead."
I blinked, feeling a strange zero-g sensation in my stomach.
Full interrogative meant cortical shunts and sockets in the skull. Most
people interrogated that way recovered fully. Most.
'Can you tell me what aspect of the Shrike legend you planned to use in
your poem?" King Billy asked softly.
'Sure,' I said. 'According to the Shrike Cult gospel that the
indigenies started, the Shrike is the Lord of Pain and the Angel of
Final Atonement, come from a place beyond time to announce the end of
the human race. I liked that conceit."
'The end of the human race,' repeated King Billy.
'Yeah. He's Michael the Archangel and Moroni and Satan and Masked
Entropy and the Frankenstein monster all rolled into one package,' I
said. 'He hangs around the Time Tombs waiting to come out and wreak
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

havoc when it's mankind's time to join the dodo and the gorilla and the
sperm whale on the extinction Hit Parade list."
'The Frankenstein monster,' mused the short little fat man in the
wrinkled cape. 'Why him?"
I took a breath. 'Because the Shrike Cult believes that mankind somehow
created the thing,' I said, although I
knew that King Billy knew everything I knew and more.
'Do they know how to kill it?" he asked.
'Not that I know of. He's supposed to be immortal,
beyond time."
'A god?"
I hesitated. 'Not really,' I said at last. 'More like one of the
universe's worst nightmares come to life. Sort of like the Grim Reaper,
but with a penchant for sticking souls on a giant thorn tree... while
the people's souls
are still in their bodies."
King Billy nodded.
'Look,' I said, 'if you insist on splitting hairs from back-world
theologies, why don't you fly to Jacktown and ask a few of the Cult
priests?"
'Yes,' said the King, chin on his pudgy fist, obviously distracted,
'they're already on the seedship being interrogated.
It's all most confusing."
I rose to leave, not sure if I would be allowed to.
'Martin?" 'Yeah."
· 'Before you go, can you think of anything else that could help us
understand this thing?"
I paused in the doorway, feeling my heart batting at my ribs to get out.
'Yeah,' I said, my voice only marginally steady. '1 can tell you who
and what the Shrike
really is."
'Oh?"
'It's my muse,' I said, and turned, and went back to my room to write.
Of course I had summoned the Shrike. I knew that. I had summoned it by
beginning my epic poem about it. In the beginning was the Word.
I retitled my poem The Hyperion Cantos. It was not about the planet but
about the passing of the self-styled Titans called humans. It was about
the unthinking hubris of a race which dared to murder its homeworld
through sheer carelessness and then carried that dangerous arrogance to
the stars, only to meet the wrath of a god which humanity had helped to
sire. Hyperion was the first serious work I had done in many years and
it was the best I would ever do. What began as a comic-serious homage
to the ghost of John Keats became my last reason for existence, an epic
tour de force in an age of mediocre farce. Hyperion Cantos was written
with a skill I could never have attained, with a mastery I could never
have gained, and sung in a voice which was not mine.
The passing of humankind was my topic. The Shrike was my muse.
A score more people died before King Billy evacuated the City of Poets.
Some of the evacuees went to Endymion or Keats or one of the other new
cities, but most voted to take the seedships back to the Web. King
Billy's dream of a creative utopia died, although the King himself lived
on in the gloomy palace at Keats.
Leadership of the colony passed to the Home Rule Council, which
petitioned the Hegemony for membership and immediately established a
Self-defense Force.
The SDF - made up primarily of the same indigenies who had been
cudgelinc each other a decade before, but commanded now by self-styled
officers from our new colony - succeeded only in disturbing the
peacefulness of the night with their automated skimmer patrols and
marring the beauty of the returning desert with their mobile
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

surveillance mechs.
Surprisingly, I was not the only one to stay behind; at least two
hundred remained, although most of us avoided social contact, smiling
politely when we passed on Poets' Walk or while we ate apart in the
echoing emptiness of the dining dome.
The murders and disappearances continued, averaging about one a local
fortnight, although they were usually discovered not by us but by the
regional SDF commander, who demanded a head count of citizens every few
weeks.
The image that remains in my mind from that first year is an unusually
communal one: the night we gathered on the Commons to watch the seedship
leave. It was at the height of the autumn meteor season and Hyperion's
night skies were already ablaze with gold streaks and red crisscrosses
of flame when the seedship's engines fired, a small sun flared, and for
an hour we watched as friends and fellow artists receded as a streak of
fusion flame. Sad King Billy joined us that night and I remember that
he looked at me before he solemnly reentered his ornate coach to return
to the safety of Keats.
In the dozen years which followed I left the city half a dozen times;
once to find a biosculptor who could rid me of my satyr affectation, the
other times to buy food and supplies. The Shrike Temple had renewed the
Shrike pilgrimages by this time, and on my trips I would use their
elaborate avenue to death in reverse- the walk to Chronos Keep, the
aerial tram across the Bridle Range, the windwagons, and the Charon
barge down the Hoolie.
Coming back, I would stare at the pilgrims and wonder who would survive.
Few visited the City of Poets. Our half-finished towers began to look
like tumbled ruins. The gallerias with their splendid metal-glass domes
and covered arcades grew heavy with vines; pyreweed and scargrass poked
up between the flagstones. The SDF added to the chaos, setting mines
and booby traps to kill the Shrike, but only succeeding in devastating
once beautiful sections of the city. Irrigation broke down. The
aqueduct collapsed. The desert encroached. 1 moved from room to room
in King Billy's abandoned palace, working on my poem, waiting for my
muse.
When you think about it, the cause-effect begins to resemble some mad
logic-loop by the data artist Carolus or perhaps a print by Escher: the
Shrike had come into existence
because of the incantatory powers of my poem but the poem could not have
existed without the threat/presence of the Shrike as muse. Perhaps I
was a bit mad in those days.
In a dozen years sudden death culled the city of dilettantes until only
the Shrike and I remained. The annual passage of the Shrike Pilgrimage
was a minor irritation, a distant caravan crossing the desert to the
Time Tombs. Sometimes a few figures returned, fleeing across vermilion
sands to the refuge of Chronos Keep twenty kilometers to the southwest.
More often, no one emerged.
I watched from the shadows of the city. My hair and beard had grown
until they covered some of the rags I wore. I came out mostly at night,
moving through the ruins like a furtive shadow, sometimes gazing at my
lighted palace tower like David Hume peering in his own windows and
solemnly deciding that he wasn't home. I never moved the food
synthesizer from the dining dome to my apartments, preferring instead to
eat in the echoing silence under that cracked duotoo like some addled
Eloi fattening himself up for the inevitable Morlock.
I never saw the Shrike. Many nights, just before dawn, I would awaken
from a nap at a sudden sound -the scratch of metal on stone, the rasp of
sand under something's foot - but although I was often sure that I was
being watched, I never saw the watcher.
Occasionally I made the short trip to the Time Tombs, especially at
night, avoiding the soft, disconcerting tugs of the anti-entropic time
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

tides while I moved through complicated shadows under the wings of the
Sphinx or stared at stars through the emerald wall of the Jade Tomb. It
was upon my return from one of these nocturnal pilgrimages that I found
an intruder in my study.
'Impressive, M-M-M-Martin,' said King Billy, tapping one of several
heaps of manuscript which lay about the room. Seated in the oversized
chair at the long table, the failed monarch looked old, more melted than
ever. It was obvious that he had been reading for several hours.
'Do you r-r-really think that mankind d-d-d-deserves
such an end?" he asked softly. It had been a dozen years since I had
heard the stutter.
i moved away from the door but did not answer. Billy had been a friend
and patron for more than twenty standard years, but at that moment I
could have killed him. The thought of someone reading Hyperion without
permission filled me with rage.
'You d-d-date your p-p-p... cantos?" said King Billy, riffling through
the most recent stack of completed pages.
'How did you get here?" I snapped. It was not an idle question.
Skimmers; dropships, and helicopters had not had much luck flying to the
Time Tombs region in recent years. The machines arrived sans
passengers. It had done wonders in fueling the Shrike myth.
The little man in the rumpled cape shrugged. His uniform was meant to
be brilliant and regal but merely made him look like an overweight
Harlequin. '1 followed the last batch of pilgrims,' he said. 'And then
c-c-came down from Keep Chronos to visit. I notice that you've written
nothing in many months, M-M-Martin. Can you explain that?"
I glowered in silence while sidling closer.
'Perhaps I can explain it,' said King Billy. He looked at the last
completed page of Hyperion Cantos as if it had the answer to a
long-puzzled riddle. 'The last stanzas were written the same week last
year that J.T. Telio disappeared."
'So?" I had moved to the far edge of the table now.
Feigning a casual attitude, I pulled a short stack of manuscript pages
closer and moved them out of Billy's reach.
'So that w-w-w-was... according to the SDF monitors ·.. the d-d-date
of the death of the last remaining Poets' City dweller,' he said. 'The
last except for y-y-you, that is, Martin."
I shrugged and began moving around the table. 1 needed to get to Billy
without getting the manuscript in the way.
'You know, you haven't f-f-f-finished it, Martin,' he said in his deep,
sad voice. 'There is still some hance that humanity s-s-s-survives the
Fall."
'No,' I said and sidled closer.
'But you can't write it, can you, Martin? You can't c-c-c-compose this
poetry unless your m-m-muse is shedding blood, can you?"
'Bullshit,' I said.
'Perhaps. But a fascinating coincidence. Have you ever wondered why
you have been spared, Martin?"
I shrugged again and slid another stack of papers out of his reach. I
was taller, stronger, and meaner than Billy, but I had to be sure that
none of the manuscript would be damaged if he struggled as I lifted him
out of his seat and threw him out.
'It's t-t-t-time we did something about this problem,' said my patron.
'No,' I said, 'it's time you left." I shoved the last stacks of poetry
aside and raised my arms, surprised to see a brass candlestick in one
hand.
'Stop right there, please,' King Billy said softly and lifted a neural
stunner from his lap.
I paused only a second. Then I laughed. 'You miserable little hangdog
fraud,' I said. 'You couldn't use a fucking weapon if your life
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

depended on it."
I stepped forward to beat him up and throw him out.
My cheek was against the stone of the courtyard but one eye was open
enough for me to see that stars still shone through the broken
latticework of the galleria dome. 1 could not blink. My limbs and
torso tingled with the pinpricks of returning sensation, as if my entire
body had fallen asleep and was now coming painfully awake. It made me
want to scream, but my jaw and tongue refused to work. Suddenly I was
lifted and propped against a stone bench so that I could see the
courtyard and the dry fountain which Rithmet Corbet had designed. The
bronze Laocon wrestled with bronze snakes in the flickering illumination
of the predawn meteor showers.
'I'm s-s-sorry, Martin,' came a familiar voice, 'b-b-but this
m-m-madness has to end." King Billy came into my field of view carrying
a tall stack of manuscript. Other heaps of pages lay on the shell of
the fountain at t he foot of the metal Trojan. An open bucket of
kerosene sat nearby.
I managed to blink. My eyelids moved like rusted iron.
'The stun should w-wowear off any s-s-s... any minute,' said King
Billy. He reached into the fountain, raised a sheaf of manuscript, and
ignited it with a flick of his cigarette lighter.
'No!" I managed to scream through clenched jaws.
The flames danced and died. King Billy let the ashes drop into the
fountain and lifted another stack of pages, rolling them into a
cylinder. Tears glistened on lined cheeks illuminated by flame. 'You
c-c-called it f-f-forth,' gasped the little man. 'It must be
f-f-finished."
I struggled to rise. My arms and legs jerked like a marionette's
mishandled limbs. The pain was incredible.
I screamed again and the agonized sound echoed from marble and granite.
King Billy lifted a fat sheaf of papers and paused to read from the top
page:
· Without story or prop
But my own weak mortality, I bore
The load of this eternal quietude,
The unchanging gloom, and th three fixed shapes Ponderous upon my senses
a whole moon.
For by my burning brain I measured sure Her silver seasons shedded on
the night And ever day by day I thought I grew
More gaunt and ghostly - Oftentimes I prayed, Intense, that Death wouM
take me from the vale And all its burdens - Gasping with despair Of
change, hour after hour I cursed myself."
King Billy raised his face to the stars and consigned this page to
flame.
'No!" I cried again and forced my legs to bend. I got to one knee,
tried to steady myself with an arm ablaze with pinpricks, and fell on my
side.
The shadow in the cape lifted a stack too thick to roll and peered at it
in the dim light.
' Then I saw a wan face
Not pinned by human sorrows, but bright blanched By an immortal sickness
which kills not;
It works a constant change, which happy death
Can put no end to; deathwards progressing
To no death was that visage; it had passed
The lily and the sno w; and beyond these
I must not think now, though Isaw that face..." ."
King Billy moved his lighter and this and fifty other pages burst into
flame. He dropped the burning papers into the fountain and reached for
more.
'Please!" I cried and pulled myself up, stiffening my legs against the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

twitches of random nerve impulses while leaning against the stone bench.
'Please."
The third figure did not actually appear so much as allow its presence
to impinge upon my consciousness; it was as if it always had been there
and King Billy and I had failed to notice it until the flames grew
bright enough.
Impossibly tall, four-armed, molded in chrome and cartilage, the Shrike
turned its red gaze on us.
King Billy gasped, stepped back, and then moved forward to feed more
cantos to the fire. Embers rose on warm drafts. A flight of doves
burst from the vine-choked girders of the broken dome with an explosion
of wing sound.
I moved forward in a motion more lurch than step. The Shrike did not
move, did not shift its bloody gaze.
'Go!" cried King Billy, stutter forgotten, voice exalted, a blazing mass
of poetry in each hand. 'Return to the pit whence you came!'
The Shrike seemed to incline its head ever so slightly.
Red light gleamed on sharp surfaces.
'My lord!" I cried, although to King Billy or the apparition from hell I
did not know then and know not now. 1 staggered the last few paces and
reached for Billy's arm.
He was not there. One second the aging King was a hand's length from me
and in the next instant he was ten meters away, raised high above the
courtyard stones. Fingers like steel thorns pierced his arms and chest
and thighs, but he still writhed and my Cantos burned in his fists.
The Shrike held him out like a father offering his son for baptism.
'Destroy it!" Billy cried, his pinned arms making pitiful gestures.
'Destroy it!'
I stopped at the fountain's edge, tottered weakly against the rim. At
first 1 thought he meant destroy the Shrike... and then I thought he
meant the poem...
and then I realized that he meant both. A thousand pages and more of
manuscript lay tumbled in the dry fountain.
I picked up the bucket of kerosene.
The Shrike did not move except to pull King' Billy slowly back against
his chest in an oddly affectionate motion. Billy writhed and screamed
silently as a long steel thorn emerged from his harlequin silk just
above the breastbone. I stood there stupidly and thought of butterfly
collections I had displayed as a child. Slowly, mechanically, I sloshed
kerosene on the scattered pages.
'End it!" gasped King Billy. 'Martin, for the love of God!'
I picked up the lighter from where he had dropped it.
The Shrike made no move. Blood soaked the black patches of Billy's
tunic until they blended with the crimson squares already here. I
thumbed the antique lighter once, twice, a third time; sparks only.
Through my tears I could see my life's work lying in the dusty fountain.
I dropped the lighter.
Billy screamed. Dimly, I heard blades rubbing bone as he twisted in the
Shrike's embrace. 'Finish it!" he cried.
'Martin... oh, God!'
I turned then, took five fast paces, and threw the half-full bucket of
kerosene. Fumes blurred my already blurred vision. Billy and the
impossible creature that held him were soaked like two comics in a
slapstick holie.
I saw Billy blink and splutter, I saw the slickness on the Shrike's
chiseled muzzle reflect the meteor-brightened sky, and then the dying
embers of burned pages in Billy's still clenched fists ignited the
kerosene.
I raised my hands to protect my face - too late, beard and eyebrows
singed and smoldered- and staggered backward until the rim of the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

fountain stopped me.
For a second the pyre was a perfect sculpture of flame, a blue and
yellow Piet with a four-armed madonna holding a blazing Christ figure.
Then the burning figure writhed and arched, still pinned by steel thorns
and a score of scalpeled talons, and a cry went up which to this
day I cannot believe emanated from the human half of that death-embraced
pair. The scream knocked me to my knees, echoed from every hard surface
in the city, and drove the pigeons into wheeling panic. And the scream
continued for minutes after the flaming vision simply ceased to be,
leaving behind neither ashes nor retinal image. It was another minute
or two before I realized that the scream I now heard was mine.
Anticlimax is, of course, the warp and way of things.
Real life seldom structures a decent denouement.
It took me several months, perhaps a year, to recopy the
kerosene-damaged pages and to rewrite the burned Cantos. It will be no
surprise to learn that I did not finish the poem. It was not by choice.
My muse had fled.
The City of Poets decayed in peace. I stayed another year or two -
perhaps five, I do not know; I was quite mad by then. To this day
records of early Shrike pilgrims tell of the gaunt figure, all hair and
rags and bulging eyes, who would wake them from their Gethsemane sleep
by screaming obscenities and shaking his fist at the silent Time Tombs,
daring the coward within to show itself.
Eventually the madness burned itself out - although the embers will
always glow - and I hiked the fifteen hundred kilometers to
civilization, my backpack weighted down with just manuscript, surviving
on rock eels and snow and on nothing at all for the last ten days.
The two and a half centuries since are not worth telling, much less
reliving. The Pouisen treatments to keep the instrument alive and
waiting. Two long, cold sleeps in illegal, sublight, cryogenic voyages;
each swallowing a century or more; each taking its toll in brain cells
and memory.
I waited then. I will still. The poem must be finished. It will be
finished.
In the beginning was the Word.
In the end... past honor, past life, past caring...
In the end will be the Word.
FOUR
The Benares put into Edge a little after noon on the next day. One of
the mantas had died in harness only twenty kilometers downriver from
their destination and A. Bettik had cut it loose. The other had lasted
until they tied up to the bleached pier and then it rolled over in total
exhaustion, bubbles rising from its twin airholes. Bettik ordered this
manta cut loose as well, explaining that it had a slim chance of
surviving if it drifted along in the more rapid current.
The pilgrims had been awake and watching the scenery roll by since
before sunrise. They spoke little and none had found anything to say to
Martin Silenus. The poet did not appear to mind... he drank wine with
his breakfast and sang bawdy songs as the sun rose.
The river had widened during the night and by morning it was a
two-kilometer-wide highway of blue gray cutting through the low green
hills south of the Sea of Grass. There were no trees this close to the
Sea, and the browns and golds and heather tones of the Mane shrubs had
gradually brightened to the bold greens of the two-meter-tall northern
grasses. All morning the hills had been pressed lower until now they
were compressed into low bands of grassy bluffs on either side of the
river.
An almost invisible darkening hung above the horizon to the north and
east, and those pilgrims who had lived on ocean worlds and knew it as a
promise of the approaching sea had to remind themselves that the only
sea now near was comprised of several billion acres of grass.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Edge never had been a large outpost and now it was totally deserted. The
score of buildings lining the rutted lane from the dock had the vacant
gaze of all abandoned
structures and there were signs on the riverfront that the population
had fled weeks earlier. The Pilgrims' Rest, a three-century-old inn
just below the crest of the hill, had been burned.
A. Bettik accompanied them to the summit of the low bluff. 'What will
you do now?" Colonel Kassad asked the android.
'According to the terms of the Temple bonditure, we are free after this
trip,' said Bettik. ' We shall leave the Benares here for your return
and take the launch downriver. And then we go on our way."
'With the general evacuations?" asked Brawne Lamia.
'No." Bettik smiled. 'We have our own purposes and pilgrimages on
Hyperion."
The group reached the rounded crest of the bluff.
Behind them, the Benare seemed a small thing tied to a sagging dock; the
Hoolie ran southwest into the blue haze of distance below the town and
curved west above it, narrowing toward the impassable Lower Cataracts a
dozen kilometers uprivcr from Edge. To their north and cast lay the Sea
of Grass.
'My God,' breathed Brawne Lamia.
It was as if they had climbed the last hill in creation.
Below them, a scattering of docks, . wharves, and sheds marked the end
of Edge and the beginning of t he Sea. Grass stretched away forever,
rippling sensuously in the slight breeze and seeming to lap like a green
surf at the base of the bluffs. The grass seemed infinite and seamless,
stretching tO all horizons and apparently rising to precisely the same
height as far as the eye could see. There was not the slightest hint of
the snowy peaks of the Bridle Range, which they knew lay some eight
hundred kilometers to the northwest.
The illusion that they were gazing at a great green sea was nearly
perfect, down to the wind-ruffled shimmers of stalks looking like
whitecaps far from shore.
'It's beautiful,' said Lamia, who had never seen it before.
'It's striking at sunset and sunrise,' said the Consul.
'Fascinating,' murmured Sol Weintraub, lifting his infant so that she
could see. She wiggled in happiness and concentrated on watching her
fingers.
'A well-preserved ecosystem,' Het Masteen said
approvingly. 'The Muir would be pleased." 'Shit,' said Martin Silenus.
The others turned to stare.
'There's no fucking windwagon,' said the poet.
The four other men, woman, and android stared silently
at the abandoned wharves and empty plain of grass.
' It's been delayed,' said the Consul.
Martin Silenus barked a laugh. 'Or it's left already. We were supposed
to be here last night."
Colonel Kassad raised his powered binoculars and swept the horizon. 'I
find it unlikely that they would have left without us,' he said. 'The
wagon was to have been sent by the Shrike Temple priests themselves.
They have a vested interest in our pilgrimage."
'We could walk,' said Lenar Hoyt. The priest looked pale and weak,
obviously in the grip of both pain and drugs, and barely able to stand,
much less walk.
' No,' said Kassad. ' It' s hundreds o f klic ks and the grass is over
our heads."
'Compasses,' said the priest.
'Compasses don't work on Hyperion,' said Kassad, still watching through
his binoculars.
'Direction finders then,' said Hoyt.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'We have an IDF, but that isn't the point,' said the Consul.
'The grass is sharp. Halfa klick out and we'd be nothing but tatters."
'And there are the grass serpents,' said Kassad, lowering the glasses.
'It's a well-preserved ecosystem but not one to take a stroll in."
Father Hoyt sighed and half collapsed into the short grass of the
hilltop. There was something close to relief in his voice when he said.
'All right, we go back."
A. Bettik stepped forward. 'The crew will be happy to wait and ferry
you back to Keats in the Benares should the windwagon not appear."
'No,' said the Consul, 'take the launch and go."
'Hey, just a fucking minute!" cried Martin Silenus. 'I don't remember
electing you dictator, amigo. We need to get there. If the fucking
windwagon doesn't show, we'!!
have to find another way."
The Consul wheeled to face the smaller man. 'How?
By boat? It takes two weeks to sail up the Mane and around the North
Littoral to Otho or one of the other staging areas. And that's when
there are ships available.
Every seagoing vessel on Hyperion is probably involved in the evacuation
effort."
'Dirigible then,' growled the poet.
Brawne Lamia laughed. 'Oh, yes. We've seen so many in the two days
we've been on the river."
Martin Silenus whirled and clenched his fists as if to strike the woman.
Then he smiled. 'All right then, lady, what do we do? Maybe if we
sacrifice someone to a grass serpent the transportation gods will smile
on as."
Brawne Lamia's stare was arctic. 'I thought burned offerings were more
your style, little man."
Colonel Kassad stepped between the two. His voice barked command.
'Enough. The Consul's right. We stay here until the wagon arrives. M.
Masteen, M. Lamia, go with A. Bettik to supervise the unloading of our
gear.
Father Hoyt and M. Silenus will bring some wood up for a bonfire."
'A bonfire?" said the priest. It was hot on the hillside.
'After dark,' said Kassad. 'We want the windwagon to know we're here.
Now let's move."
It was a quiet group that watched the powered launch move downriver at
sunset. Even from two kilometers away the Consul could see the blue
skins of the crew. The Benares looked old and abandoned at its wharf,
already a part of the deserted city. When the launch was lost in the
distance, the group turned to watch the Sea of Grass.
Long shadows from the river bluffs crept out across what the Consul
already found himself thinking of as the surf and shallows. Farther
out, the sea seemed to shift in color, the grass mellowing to an
aquamarine shimmer before darkening to a hint of verdurous depths. The
lapis sky melted into the reds and golds of sunset, illuminating their
hilltop and setting the pilgrims' skins aglow with liquid light. The
only sound was the whisper of wind in grass.
'We've got a fucking huge heap of baggage,' Martin Silenus said loudly.
'For a bunch of folks on a one-way trip."
It was true, thought the Consul. Their luggage made a small mountain on
the grassy hilltop.
'Somewhere in there,' came the quiet voice of Het Masteen, 'may lie our
salvation."
'What do you mean?" asked Brawne Lamia.
'Yeah,' said Martin Silenus, lying back, putting his hands under his
head, and staring at the sky. 'Did you bring a pair of undershorts that
are ShrikeProof?. '
The Templar shook his head slowly. The sudden twilight cast his face in
shadow under the cowl of the robe.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Let us not trivialize or dissemble,' he said. 'It is time to admit
that each of us has brought on this pilgrimage something which he or she
hopes will alter the inevitable outcome when the moment arrives that we
must face the Lord of Pain."
The poet laughed. 'I didn't bring even my lucky fucking rabbit's foot."
The Templar's hood moved slightly. 'But your manuscript perhaps?"
The poet said nothing.
Het Masteen moved his invisible gaze to the tall man on his left. 'And
you, Colonel, there are several trunks
which bear your name. Weapons, perhaps?"
Kassad raised his head but did not speak.
'Of course,' said Het Masteen, 'it would be foolish to go hunting
without a weapon."
'What about me?" asked Brawne Lamia, folding her arms. 'Do you know
what secret weapon I've smuggled along?"
The Templar's oddly accented voice was calm. 'We have not yet heard
your tale, M. Lamia. It would be premature to speculate."
'What about the Consul?" asked Lamia.
'Oh, yes, it is obvious what weapon our diplomatic friend has in store."
The Consul turned from his contemplation of the sunset. '1 brought only
some clothes and two books to read,' he said truthfully.
'Ah,' sighed the Templar, 'but what a beautiful spacecraft you left
behind."
Martin Silenus jumped to his feet. 'The fucking ship!' he cried. 'You
can call it, can't you? Well, goddammit, get your dog whistle out, l'm
tired of sitting here."
The Consul pulled a strand of grass and stripped it.
After a minute he said:
'Even if I could call it... and you heard A. Bettik say that the
comsats and repeater stations were down...
even if I could call it, we couldn't land north of the Bridle Range.
That meant instant disaster even before the Shrike began ranging south
of the mountains."
'Yeah,' said Silenus, waving his arms in agitation, 'but we could get
across this fucking... lawn! Call the ship."
'Walt until morning,' said the Consul. 'If the wind-wagon's not here,
we will discuss alternatives."
'Fuck that..." began the poet, but Kassad stepped forward with his back
to him, effectively removing Silenus from the circle.
'M. Masteen,' said the Colonel, 'what is your secret?" There was enough
light from the dying sky to show a slight smile on the Templar's thin
lips. He gestured toward the mound of baggage. 'As you see, my trunk
is the heaviest and most mysterious of all."
'It's a MObius cube,' said Father Hoyt. 'l've seen
ancient artifacts transported that way."
'Or fusion bombs,' said Kassad.
Het Masteen shook his head. 'Nothing so crude,' he said.
'Are you going to tell us?" demanded Lamia.
'When it is my turn to speak,' said the Templar.
'Are you next?" asked the Consul. 'We can listen while we wait."
Sol Weintraub cleared his throat. 'I have number four,' he said,
showing the slip of paper. 'But I would be more than pleased to trade
with the True Voice of the Tree." Weintraub lifted Rachel from his left
shoulder to his right, patting her gently on the back.
Het Masteen shook his head. 'No, there is time. 1 meant only to point
out that in hopelessness there is always hope. We have learned much
from the stories so
far. Yet each of us has some seed of promise buried even deeper than we
have admitted."
'I don't see . . ." began Father Hoyt but was interrupted by Martin
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Silenus's sudden shout.
'It's the wagon! The fucking windwagon. Here at last!'
It was another twenty minutes before the windwagon tied up to one of the
wharves. The craft came out of the north, its sails white squares
against a dark plain draining of color. The last light had faded by the
time the large ship had tacked close to the low bluff, folded its main
sails, and rolled to a stop.
The Consul was impressed. The thing was wooden, handcrafted, and huge -
curved in the pregnant lines of some seagoing galleon out of Old Earth's
ancient history.
The single gigantic wheel, set in the center of the curving hull,
normally would have been invisible in the two-meter-tall grass, but the
Consul caught a glimpse of the underside as he carried luggage onto the
wharf. From the ground it would be six or seven meters to the railing,
and more than five times that height to the tip of the mainmast. From
where he stood, panting from exertion, the Consul could hear the snap of
pennants far above and a steady, almost subsonic hum that would be
coming from either the ship's interior flywheel or its massive
gyroscopes.
A gangplank extruded from the upper hull and lowered itself to the
wharf. Father Hoyt and Brawne Lamia had to step back quickly or be
crushed.
The windwagon was less well lighted than the Benares; illumination
appeared to consist of several lanterns hanging from spars. No crew had
been visible during the approach of the ship and no one came into view
nOW.
'Hallo!" called the Consul from the base of the gangplank.
No one answered.
'Wait here a minute, please,' said Kassad and mounted the long ramp in
five strides.
The others watched while Kassad paused at the top, touched his belt
where the small deathwand was tucked,
and then disappeared amidships. Several minutes later a light flared
through broad windows at the stern, casting trapezoids of yellow on the
grass below.
'Come up,' called Kassad from the head of the ramp.
'It's empty."
The group struggled with their luggage, making several trips. The
Consul helped Her Masteen with the heavy MObius cube and through his
fingertips he could feel a faint but intense vibration.
'So where the fuck is the crew?" asked Martin Silenus when they were
assembled on the foredeck. They had taken their single-file tour
through the narrow corridors and cabins, down stairways more ladder than
stairs, and through cabins not much bigger than the built-in bunks they
contained. Only the rearmost cabin - the captain's cabin, if that is
what it was - approached the size and comfort of standard accommodations
on the Benares.
'It's obviously automated,' said Kassad. The FORCE officer pointed to
halyards which disappeared into slots in the deck, manipulators all but
invisible among the rigging and spars, and the subtle hint of gears
halfway up the lateen-rigged rear mast.
'I didn't see a control center,' said Lamia. 'Not so much as a diskey
or C-spot nexus." She slipped her comlog from a breast pocket and tried
to interface on standard data, comm, and biomed frequencies. There was
no response from the ship.
'The ships used to be crewed,' said the Consul. 'Temple initiates used
to accompany the pilgrims to the mountains."
'We!!, they're not here now,' said Hoyt. 'But I guess we can assume
that someone is still alive at the tram station or Keep Chronos. They
sent the wagon for us."
'Or everyone's dead and the windwagon is running on an automatic
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

schedule,' said Lamia. She looked over her shoulders as rigging and
canvas creaked in a suddengust of wind. 'Damn, it's weird to be cut off
from everybody and everything like this. It's like being blind and
deaf. 1 don't know how colonials stand it."
Martin Silenus approached the group and sat on the railing. He drank
from a long green bottle and said:
'Where's the Poet? Show him! Show him,
Muses mine, that I may know him!
'Tis the man who with a man
Is an equal, be he king,
Or poorest of the beggar-class,
Or any other wondrous thing
A man may be 'twixt ape and Plato.
'Tis the man who with a bird,
Wren or eagle, finds his way to
A !! its instincts. He hath heard
The !ion's roaring, and can tell
What his horny throat expresseth, And to him the tiger's yell
Comes articulate and presseth
On his ear like mother-tongue. '
'Where did you get that wine bottle?" asked Kassad.
Martin Silenus smiled. His eyes were small and bright in the lantern
glow. 'The gailery's fully stocked and there's a bar. I declared it
open."
'We should fix some dinner,' said the Consul although all he wanted at
the moment was some wine. It had been more than ten hours since they
had last eaten.
There came a clank and whir and all six of them moved to the starboard
rail. The gangplank had drawn itself in.
They whirled again as canvas unfurled, lines grew taut, and somewhere a
flywheel hummed into the ultrasonic.
Sails filled, the deck tilted slightly, and the windwagon moved away
from the wharf and into the darkness. The only sounds were the flap and
creak of the ship, the distant rumble of the wheel, and the rasp of
grass on the hull bottom.
The six of them watched as the shadow of the bluff fell behind, the
unlighted beacon pyre receding as a faint gleam of starlight on pale
wood, and then there were only the sky and night and swaying circles of
lantern light.
'I'11 go below,' said the Consul, 'and see if I can get a meal
together."
The others stayed awhile, feeling the slight surge and rumble through
the soles of their feet and watching
darkness pass. The Sea of Grass was visible only as the place where
stars ended and flat blackness began. Kassad used a handbeam to
illuminate glimpses of canvas and rigging, lines being pulled tight by
invisible !ands, and then he checked all the corners and shadowed places
from stern to bow. The others watched in silence. When he clicked the
light off, the darkness seemed less oppressive, the starlight brighter.
A rich, fertile smell - more of a farm in springtime than of the sea -
came to them on a breeze which had swept across a thousand kilometers of
grass.
Sometime later the Consul called to them and they went below to eat.
The galley was cramped and there was no mess table, so they used the
large cabin in the stern as their common room, pushing three of the
trunks together as a makeshift table. Four lanterns swinging from low
beams made the room bright. A breeze blew in when Het Masteen opened
one of the tall windows above the bed..
The Consul set plates piled high with sandwiches on the largest trunk
and returned again with thick white cups and a coffee therm. He poured
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

while the others ate.
'This is quite good,' said Fedmahn Kassad. 'Where did you get the roast
been'
'The cold box is fully stocked. There's another large freezer in the
aft pantry."
'Electrical?" asked Het Masteen.
'No. Double insulated."
Martin Silenus sniffed ajar, found a knife on the sandwich plate, and
added great dollops of horseradish to his sandwiches. His eyes sparkled
with tears as he ate.
'How long does this crossing generally take?" Lamia asked the Consul.
He looked up from his study of the circle of hot black coffee in his
cup. T m sorry, what?"
'Crossing the Sea of Grass. How long?"
'A night and half a day to the mountains,' said the Consul. 'If the
winds are with us."
'And then... how long to cross the mountains?" asked Father Hoyt.
'Less than a day,' sid the Consul.
'If the tramway is running,' added Kassad.
The Consul sipped the hot coffee and made a face.
'We have to assume it is. Otherwise..."
'Otherwise what?" demanded Lamia.
'Otherwise,' said Colonel Kassad, moving to the open window and putting
his hands on his hips, 'we will he stranded six hundred klicks from the
Time Tombs and a thousand from the southern cities."
The Consul shook his head. 'No,' he said. 'The Temple. priests or
whoever are behind this pilgrimage have seen to it that we've gotten
this far. They'll make sure we go all the way."
Brawne Lamia crossed her arms and frowned. 'As what... sacrifices?"
Martin Silenus whooped a laugh and brought out his bottle:
'Who are these coming to the sacrifice?
To what green altar, 0 mysterious priest, Lead'st thou that heifer
lowing at the skies,
And all her silken flanks with garlands dressed?
What little town by river or sea-shore,
Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,
Is emptied of its folk, this pious morn?
And, little town, thy streets for evermore Will silent be; and not a
soul, to tell Why thou art desolate, can e'er return. '
Brawne Lamia reached under her tunic and brought out a cutting laser no
larger than her little finger. She aimed it at the poet's head. 'You
miserable little shit.
One more word out of you and... 1 swear... I'll slag you where you
stand."
The silence was suddenly absolute except for the background rumble-groan
of the ship. The Consul moved toward Martin Silenus. Colonel Kassad
took two steps behind Lamia.
The poet took a long drink and smiled at the dark-haired woman. His
lips were moist. 'Oh build your ship of death,' he whispered. 'Oh
build it!'
Lamia's fingers were white on the pencil laser. The Consul edged closer
to Silenus, not knowing what to do, imagining the whipping beam of light
fusing his own eyes.
Kassad leaned toward Lamia like two meters of tensed shadow.
'Madam,' said Sol Weintraub from where he sat on the bunk against the
far wall, 'need I remind you that there is a child present?"
Lamia glanced to her right. Weintraub had removed a deep drawer from a
ship's cupboard and had set it on the bed as a cradle. He had bathed
the infant and come in silently just before the poet's recitation. Now
he set the baby softly in the padded nest.
'l'm sorry,' said Brawne Lamia and lowered the small laser." It's just
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

that he makes me so... angry."
Weintraub nodded, rocking the drawer slightly. The gentle roll of the
windwagon combined with the incessant rumble of the great wheel appeared
to have already put the child to sleep. 'We're all tired and tense,'
said the scholar.
'Perhaps we should find our lodgings for the night and turn in."
The woman sighed and tucked the weapon in her belt." I won't sleep,' she
said. 'Things are too... strange."
Others nodded. Martin Silenus was sitting on the broad ledge below the
stern windows. Now he pulled up his legs, took a drink, and said to
Weintraub, 'Tell your story, old man."
'Yes,' said Father Hoyt. The priest looked exhausted to the point of
being cadaverous, but his feverish eyes burned. 'Tell us. We need to
have the stories told and time to think about them before we arrive."
Weintraub passed a hand across his bald scalp. 'It's a dull tale,' he
said." l've been to Hyperion be fore. There are no confrontations with
monsters, no acts of heroism. It's a tale by a man whose idea of epic
adventure is speaking to a class without his notes."
'All the better,' said Martin Silenus. 'We need a soporific."
Sol Weintraub sighed, adjusted his glasses, and nodded.
There were a few streaks of dark in his heard, but most of it had gone
gray. He turned the lantern low over the baby's
bed and moved to a chair in the center of the room.
The Consul turned down the other lamps and poured more coffee for those
who wanted it. Sol Weintraub's voice was slow, careful in phrase and
precise in wording, and before long the gentle cadence of his story
blended with the soft rumble and slow pitchings of the windwagon's
progress north.