THE SCHOLAR'S TALE:
The River Lethe's Taste is Bitter
Sol Weintraub and his wife Sarai had enjoyed their life even before the
birth of their daughter; Rachel made things as close to perfect as the
couple could imagine.
Sarai was twenty-seven when the child was conceived, Sol was
twenty-nine. Neither of them had considered Poulsen treatments because
neither of them could afford it, but even without such care they looked
forward to another fifty years of health.
Both had lived their entire lives on Barnard's World, one of the oldest
but least exciting members of the Hegemony. Barnard's was in the Web,
but it made little difference to Sol and Sarai since they could not
afford frequent farcaster travel and had little wish to go at any rate.
Sol had recently celebrated his tenth year with Nightenhelser College,
where he taught history and classical studies and did his own research
on ethical evolution.
Nightenhelser was a small school, fewer than three thousand students,
but its academic reputation was outstanding and it attracted young
people from all over the Web. The primary complaint of these students
was that Nightenhelser and its surrounding community of Crawford
constituted an island of civilization in an ocean of corn. It was true;
the college was three thousand flat kilometers away from the capital of
Bussard and the terraformed land in between was given over to farming.
There had been no forests to fell, no hills to deal with, and no
mountains to break the flat monotony of cornfields, bean-fields,
cornfields, wheatfields, cornfields, rice paddies, and cornfields. The
radical poet Salmud
Brevy had taught briefly at Nightenhelser before the Glennon-Height
Mutiny, had been fired, and upon far-casting to Renaissance Vector had
told his friends that Crawford County on South Sinzer on Barnard's World
constituted the Eighth Circle of Desolation on the smallest pimple on
the absolute ass-end of Creation.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Sol and Sarai Weintraub liked it. Crawford, a town of twenty-five
thousand, might have been reconstructed from some nineteenth-century
mid-American template.
The streets were wide and over-arched with elms and oaks. (Barnard's
had been the second extrasolar Earth colony, centuries before the
Hawking drive and Hegira, and the seedships then had been huge.) Homes
in Crawford reflected styles ranging from early Victorian to Canadian
Revival, but they all seemed to be white and set far back on
weil-trimmed lawns.
The college itself was Georgian, an assemblage of red brick and white
pillars surrounding the oval common.
Sol's office was on the third floor of Placher Hall, the oldest building
on campus, and in the winter he could look out on bare branches which
carved the common into complex geometries. Sol loved the chalk-dust and
old-wood smell of the place, a smell which had not changed since he was
a freshman there, and each day climbing to his office he treasured the
deeply worn grooves in the steps, a legacy of twenty generations of
Nightenhelser students.
Sarai had been born on a farm halfway between Bussard and Crawford and
had received her PhD in music theory a year before Sol earned his
doctorate. She had been a happy and energetic young woman, making up in
personality what she lacked in accepted norms of physical beauty, and
she carried this attractiveness of person into later life. Sarai had
studied offworld for two years at the University of New Lyons on Deneb
Drei, but she was homesick there: the sunsets were abrupt, the
much-vaunted mountains slicing off the sunlight like a ragged scythe,
and she longed for the hours-long sunsets of home where Barnard's Star
hung on the horizon like a great, tethered, red balloon while the sky
congealed to evening. She missed the perfect flatness where - peering
from her third-floor room under the steep gables- a little girl could
look fifty kilometers across tasseled fields to watch a storm approach
like a bruise-black curtain lit within by lightning bolts. And Sarai
missed her family.
She and Sot met a week after she transferred to Night-enhelser; it was
another three years before he proposed marriage and she accepted. At
first she saw nothing in the short graduate student. She was still
wearing Web fashions then, involved in Post-Destructionist music
theories, reading Obit and Nihil and the most avant-garde magazines from
Renaissance Vector and TC2, feigning sophisticated weariness with life
and a rebel's vocabulary - and none of this jelled with the undersized
.but earnest history major who spilled fruit cocktail on her at Dean
Moore's honors party. Any exotic qualities which might have come from
Sol Weintraub's Jewish legacy were instantly negated by his BW accent,
his Crawford Squire Shop wardrobe, and the fact that he had come to the
party with a copy of Detresque's Solitudes in Variance absentmindedly
tucked under his arm.
For Sol it was love at first sight. He stared at the laughing,
red-cheeked girl and ignored the expensive dress and affected mandarin
nails in favor of the personality which blazed like a beacon to the
lonely junior. Sol had not known he was lonely until he met Sarai, but
after the first time he shook her hand and spilled fruit salad down the
front of her dress he knew that his life would be empty forever if they
did not marry.
They married the week after the announcement of Sol's teaching
appointment at the college. Their honeymoon was on Maui-Covenant, his
first farcast trip abroad, and for three weeks they rented a mobile isle
and sailed alone on it through the wonders of the Equatorial
Archipelago. Sol never forgot the images from those sun-drenched and
wind-filled days, and the secret image he would always most cherish was
of Sarai rising nude from a nighttime swim, the Core stars blazing above
while her own body glowed constellations from the phosphorescence of the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

island's wake.
They had wanted a child immediately but it was to be five years before
nature agreed.
Sol remembered cradling Sarai in his arms as she curled in pain, a
difficult delivery, until finally, incredibly, Rachel Sarah Weintraub
was born at 2:01 A.M. in Crawford County Med Center.
The presence of an infant intruded upon Sol's solipsistic life as a
serious academic and Sarai's profession as music critic for Barnard's
datasphere, but neither minded. The first months were a blend of
constant fatigue and joy. Late at night, between feedings, Sol would
tiptoe into the nursery just to check on Rachel and to stand and gaze at
the baby. More often than not he would find Sarai already there and the
two would watch, arm in arm, at the miracle of a baby sleeping on its
stomach, rump in the air, head burrowed into the bumper pad at the head
of the crib.
Rachel was one of those rare children who managed to be cute without
becoming self-consciously precious; by the time she was two standard
years old her appearance and personality were striking - her mother's
light brown hair, red cheeks, and broad smile, her father's large brown
eyes. Friends said that the child combined the best portions of Sarai's
sensitivity and Sol's intellect.
Another friend, a child psychologist from the college, once commented
that Rachel at age five showed the most reliable indicators of true
giftedness in a young person: structured curiosity, empathy for others,
compassion, and a fierce sense of fair play.
One day in his office, studying ancient files from Old Earth, Sol was
reading about the effect of Beatrice on the world view of Dante
Alighieri when he was struck by a passage written by a critic from the
twentieth or twenty-first century:
She [Beatrice] alone was still real for him, still implied meaning in
the world, and beauty. Her nature became his landmark- what Melville
would call, with more sobriety than we can now muster, his Greenwich
Standard...
Sol paused to access the definition of Greenwich Standard, and then he
read on. The critic had added a personal note:
Most of us, I hope, have had some child or spouse or friend like
Beatrice, someone who by his very nature, his seemingly innate goodness
and intelligence, makes us uncomfortably conscious of our lies when we
lie.
Sol had shut off the display and gazed out at the black geometries of
branches above the common.
Rachel was not insufferably perfect. When she was five standard, she
carefully cut the hair of her five favorite dolls and then cut her own
hair shortest of all. When she was seven, she decided that the migrant
workers staying in their run-down houses on the south end of town lacked
a nutritious diet, so she emptied the house's pantries, cold boxes,
freezers, and synthesizer banks, talked three friends into accompanying
her, and distributed several hundred marks' worth of the family's
monthly food budget.
When she was ten, Rachel responded to a dare from Stubby Berkowitz and
tried to climb to the top of Crawford's oldest elm. She was forty
meters up, less than five meters from the top, when a branch broke and
she fell two thirds of the way to the ground. Sol was paged on his
comlog while discussing the moral implications of Earth's first nuclear
disarmament era and he left the class without a word and ran the twelve
blocks to the Med Center.
Rachel had broken her left leg, two ribs, punctured a lung, and
fractured her jaw. She was floating in a bath of recovery nutrient when
Sol burst in, but she managed to look over her mother's shoulder, smile
slightly, and say through the wire cast on her jaw: 'Dad, I was fifteen
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

feet from the top. Maybe closer. I'll make it next time."
Rachel graduated with honors from secondary tutorials and received
scholarship offers from corporate academies on five worlds and three
universities, including Harvard on New Earth. She chose Nightenhelser.
it was little surprise to Sol that his daughter chose
archaeology as a major. One of his fondest memories of her was the long
afternoons she had spent under the front porch when she was about two,
digging in the loam, ignoring spiders and googlepeds, rushing into the
house to show off every plastic plate and tarnished pfennig she had
excavated, demanding to know where it had come from, what were the
people like who had left it there?"
Rachel received her undergraduate degree when she was nineteen standard,
worked that summer on her grandmother's farm, and farcast away the next
fall. She was at Reichs University on Freeholm for twenty-eight local
months, and when she returned it was as if color had flowed back into
Sol and Sarai's world.
For two weeks their daughter - an adult now, self-aware and secure in
some ways that grown-ups twice her age often failed to be - rested and
reveled in being home.
One evening, walking across the campus just after sunset, she pressed
her father on details of his heritage.
'Dad, do you still consider yourself a Jew?"
Sol had run his hand over his thinning hair, surprised by the question.
'A Jew? Yes, I suppose so. It doesn't mean what it once did, though."
'Am I a Jew?" asked Rachel. Her cheeks glowed in the fragile light.
'If you want to be,' said Sol. 'It doesn't have the same significance
with Old Earth gone."
'If l'd been a boy, would you have had me circumcised?"
Sol had laughed, delighted and embarrassed by the question.
'l'm serious,' said Rachel.
Sol adjusted his glasses. 'I guess I would have, kiddo. I never
thought about it."
'Have you been to the synagogue in Bussard?"
'Not since my bar mitzvah,' said Sol, thinking back to the day fifty
years earlier when his father had borrowed Uncle Richard's Vikken and
had flown the family to the capital for the ritual.
'Dad, why do Jews feel that things are... less important now than
before the Hegira?"
Sol spread his hands - strong hands, more those of a stoneworker than an
academic. 'That's a good question, Rachel. Probably because so much of
the dream is dead.
Israel is gone. The New Temple lasted less time than the first and
second. God broke His word by destroying the Earth a second time in the
way He did. And this Diaspora is... forever."
'But Jews maintain their ethnic and religious identity in some places,'
his daughter insisted.
'Oh, sure. On Hebron and isolated areas of the Concourse you can find
entire communities . . . Hasidic, Orthodox, Hasmonean, you name it...
but they tend to
be... nonvital, picturesque... tourist-oriented." 'Like a theme park?"
'Yes."
'Could you take me to Temple Beth-el tomorrow? I can borrow Khaki's
strat."
'No need,' said Sol. 'We'll use the co!lege's shuttle." He paused.
'Yes,' he said at last, 'I would like to take you to the synagogue
tomorrow."
It was getting dark under the old elms. Streetlights came on up and
down the wide lane which led to their home.
'Dad,' said Rachel, 'l'm going to ask you a question l've asked about a
million times since I was two. Do you believe in God?"
Sol had not smiled. He had no choice but to give her the answer he had
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

given her a million times. 'l'm waiting to,' he said.
Rachel's postgraduate work dealt with alien and pre-Hegira artifacts.
For three standard years Sol and Sarai would receive occasional visits
followed by fatline flim-sies from exotic worlds near but not within the
Web. They all knew that her field work in quest of dissertation would
soon take her beyond the Web, into the Outback where time-debt ate away
at the lives and memories of those left behind.
'Where the hell is Hyperion?" Sarai had asked during Rachei's last
vacation before the expedition left.
'It sounds like a brand name' for some new household product."
'It's a great place, Mom. There are more nonhuman artifacts there than
any place except Armaghast."
'Then why not go to Armaghast?" said Sarai. 'It's only a few months
from the Web. Why settle for second best?"
'Hyperion hasn't become the big tourist attraction yet,' said Rachel.
'Although they're beginning to become a problem. People with money are
more willing to travel outside the Web now."
Sol had found his voice suddenly husky. 'Will you be going to the
labyrinth or the artifacts called the Time Tombs?"
'The Time Tombs, Dad. I'll be.working with Dr Melio Arundez and he
knows more about the Tombs than anyone alive."
'Aren't they dangerous?" asked Sol, framing the question as casually as
he could but heating the edge in his voice.
Rachel smiled. 'Because of the Shrike legend? No.
Nobody's been bothered by that particular legend for two standard
centuries."
'But I've seen documents about the trouble there during the second
colonization..." began Sol.
'Me too, Dad. But they didn't know about the big rock eels that came
down into the desert to hunt. They probably lost a few people to those
things and panicked. You know how legends begin. Besides, the rock
eels have been hunted to extinction."
'Spacecraft don't !and there,' persisted Sol. 'You have to sail to the
Tombs. Or hike. Or some damn thing."
Rachel laughed. 'In the early days, people flying in underestimated the
effects of the anti-entropic fields and there were some accidents. But
there's dirigible service now. They have a big hotel called Keep
Chronos at the north edge of the mountains where hundreds of tourists a
year stay."
'Will you be staying there?" asked Sarai.
'Part of the time. It'll be exciting, Mom."
'Not too exciting, I hope,' said Sarai and all of them had smiled.
During the four years that Rachel was in transit - a few weeks of
cryogenic fugue for her - Sol found that he missed his daughter much
more than if she had been out of touch but busy somewhere in the Web.
The thought that she was flying away from him faster than the speed of
light, wrapped in the artificial quantum cocoon of the Hawking effect,
seemed unnatural and ominous to him.
They kept busy. Sarai retired from the critic business to devote more
time to local environmental issues, but for Sol it was one of the most
hectic times of his life.
His second and third books came out and the second one - Moral Turning
Points - caused such a stir that he was in constant demand at offworld
conferences and symposia. He traveled to a few alone, to a few more
with Sarai, but although both of them enjoyed the idea of traveling, the
actual experience of facing strange foods, different gravities, and the
light from strange suns all paled after a while and Sol found himself
spending more time at home researching his next book, attending
conferences, if he had to, via interactive holo from the college.
It was almost five years after Rachel left on her expedition that Sol
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

had a dream which would change his life.
Sol dreamed that he was wandering through a great structure with columns
the size of small redwood trees and a ceiling lost to sight far above
him, through which red light fell in solid shafts. At times he caught
glimpses of things far off in the gloom to his left or right: once he
made out a pair of stone legs rising like massive buildings through the
darkness; another time he spied what appeared to be a crystal scarab
rotating far above him, its insides ablaze with cool lights.
Finally Sol stopped to rest. Far behind him he could hear what sounded
like a great conflagration, entire cities and forests burning. Ahead of
him glowed the lights he had been walking toward, two ovals of deepest
red.
He was mopping sweat from his brow when an immense voice said to him:
'Sol! Take your daughter, your only daughter Rachel, whom you love, and
go to the world called Hyperion and offer her there as a burnt offering
at one of the places of which I shall tell you."
And in his dream Sol had stood and said, 'You can't be serious." And he
had walked on through darkness, the red orbs glowing now like bloody
moons hanging above an indistinct plain, and when he stopped to rest the
immense voice said:
'Sol! Take your daughter, your only daughter Rachel, whom you love, and
go to the world called Hyperion and offer her there as a burnt offering
at one of the places of which I shall tell you."
And SOl had shrugged off the weight of the voice and had said distinctly
into the darkness, 'I heard you the first time... the answer is still
no."
SO! knew he was dreaming then, and part of his mind enjoyed the irony
of the script, but another part wanted only to waken. Instead, he found
himself on a low balcony looking down on a room where Rachel lay naked
on a broad block of stone. The scene was illuminated by the glow of the
twin red orbs. Sol looked down at his right hand and found a long,
curved knife there. The blade and handle appeared to be made of bone.
The voice, sounding more than ever to Sol like some cut-rate holie
director's shallow idea of what God's voice should sound like, came
again:
'SOl! You must listen well. The future of humankind depends upon your
obedience in this matter.
You must take your daughter, your daughter Rachel whom you love, and go
to the world called Hyperion and offer her there as a burnt offering at
one of the places of which I shall tell you."
And Sol, sick of the whole dream yet somehow alarmed by it, had turned
and thrown the knife far into the darkness.
When he turned back to find his daughter, the
scene had faded. The red orbs hung closer than ever, and now So! could
see that they were multifaceted gems the size of small worlds.
The amplified voice came again:
'So? You have had your chance, SOl Weintraub.
If you change your mind, you know where to find me."
And SOl awakened half laughing, half chilled by the dream. Amused by
the thought that the entire Talmud and the Old Testament might be
nothing more than a cosmic shaggy-dog story.
About the time Sol was having his dream, Rachel was on Hyperion
finishing her first year of research there. The team of nine
archaeologists and six physicists had found Keep Chronos fascinating but
far too crowded with tourists and would-be Shrike pilgrims, so after the
first month spent commuting from the hotel, they had set up a permanent
camp between the ruined city and the small canyon holding the Time
Tombs.
While half the team excavated the more recent site of the unfinished
city, two of Rache!'s colleagues helped her catalogue every aspect of
the Tombs. The physicists were finished with the anti-entropic fields
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

and spent much of their time setting small flags of different colors to
mark the limits of the so-called time tides.
Rachel's team concentrated their work in the structure called the
Sphinx, although the creature represented in stone was neither human nor
lion; it may not have been a creature at all, although the smooth lines
atop the stone monolith suggested curves of a living thing, and the
sweeping appendages made everyone think of wings.
Unlike the other Tombs, which lay open and were easily inspected, the
Sphinx was a mass of heavy blocks honey-combed with narrow corridors,
some of which tightened to impossibility, some of which widened to
auditorium-sized proportions, but none of which led anywhere but back on
themselves. There were no crypts, treasure rooms, plundered sarcophogi,
wall murals, or secret
passages, merely a maze of senseless corridors through sweating stone.
Rachel and her lover, Melio Arundez, began mapping the Sphinx, using a
method which had been in use for at least seven hundred years, having
been pioneered in the Egyptian pyramids sometime in the twentieth
century.
Arranging sensitive radiation and cosmic ray detectors at the lowest
point in the Sphinx, they recorded arrival times and deflection patterns
of the particles passing through the mass of stone above them, watching
for hidden rooms or passages which would not show up even on deep
imaging radar. Because of the busy tourist season and the concern of
the Hyperion Home Rule Council that the Tombs might be damaged by such
research, Rachel and Melio went out to their site every night at
midnight, making the half-hour walk and crawl through the corridor maze
which they had rigged with blue glow-globes.
There, sitting under hundreds of thousands of tons of stone, they would
watch their instruments until morning, listening to their earphones ping
with the sound of particles born in the belly of dying stars.
The time tides had not been a problem with the Sphinx. Of all the
Tombs, it seemed the least protected by the anti-entropic fields and the
physicists had carefully mapped the times when the tide surges might
pose a threat. High tide was at 1000 hours, receding only twenty
minutes later back toward the Jade Tomb half a kilometer to the south.
Tourists were not allowed near the Sphinx until after 1200 hours, and to
leave a margin of safety, the site made sure they were out by 0900. The
physics team had planted chronotropic sensors at various points along
the paths and walkways between the Tombs, both to alert the monitors to
variations of the tides and to warn the visitors.
With only three weeks to go of her year of research on Hyperion, Rachel
awoke one night, left her sleeping lover, and took a ground effect jeep
from the camp to the Tombs. She and Melio had decided that it was
foolish for both of them to monitor the equipment every night; now they
alternated, one working at the site while the other collated data and
prepared for the final project - a radar
mapping of the dunes between the Jade Tomb and the Obelisk.
The night was cool and beautiful. A profusion of stars stretched from
horizon to horizon, four or five times the number Rachel had grown up
looking at from Barnard's World. The low dunes whispered and shifted in
the strong breeze blowing from the mountains in the south.
Rachel found lights still burning at the site. The physics team was
just calling it a day loading their own jeep.
She chatted with them, had a cup of coffee as they drove away, and then
took her backpack and made the twenty-five-minute trip into the basement
of the Sphinx.
For the hundredth time Rachel wondered who had built the Tombs and for
what purpose. Dating of the construction materials had been useless
because of the effect of the anti-entropic field. Only analysis of the
Tombs in relation to the erosion of the canyon and other surrounding
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

geological features had suggested an age of at least half a million
years. The feeling was that the architects of the Time Tombs had been
humanoid, even though nothing but the gross scale of the structures
suggested such a thing. Certainly the passageways in the Sphinx
revealed little: some were human enough in size and shape, but then
meters farther along the same corridor might dwindle to a tube the size
of a sewer pipe and then transform itself into something larger and more
random than a natural cavern. Doorways, if they could be called such
since they opened to nothing in particular, might be triangular or
trapezoidal or ten-sided as commonly as rectangular.
Rachel crawled the last twenty meters down a steep slope, sliding her
backpack ahead of her. The heatless glow-globes gave the rock and her
flesh a bluish, bloodless cast. The 'basement,' when she reached it,
seemed a haven of human clutter and smells. Several folding chairs
filled the center of the small space while detectors, oscilloscopes, and
other paraphernalia lined the narrow table against the north wall. A
plank on sawhorses along the opposite wall held coffee cups, a chess
set, a half-eaten doughnut, two paperbacks, and a plastic toy of some
sort of dog in a grass skirt.
Rachel settled in, set her coffee therm next to the toy, and checked the
cosmic ray detectors. The data appeared to be the same: no hidden rooms
or passages, just a few niches even the deep radar had missed. In the
morning Melio and Stefan would set a deep probe working, getting an
imager filament in and sampling the air before digging further with a
micro-manipulator. So far a dozen such niches had turned up nothing of
interest. The joke at camp was that the next hole, no bigger than a
fist, would reveal miniature sarcophagi, undersized urns, a petite
mummy, or- as Melio put it- 'a teeny-tiny Tutankhamen."
Out of habit, Rachel tried the comm links on her comlog. Nothing. Forty
meters of stone tended to do that. They had talked of stringing
telephone wire from the basement to the surface, but there had been no
pressing need and now their time was almost up. Rachel adjusted the
input channels on her cornlog to monitor the detector data and then
settled back for a long, boring night.
There. was the wonderful story of the Old Earth pharaoh- was it
Cheops?- who authorized his huge pyramid, agreed to the burial chamber
being deep under the center of the thing, and then lay awake nights for
years in a claustrophobic panic, thinking of all those tons of stone
above him for all eternity. Eventually the pharaoh ordered the burial
chamber repositioned two thirds the way up the great pyramid. Most
unorthodox.
Rachel could understand the king's position. She hoped that - wherever
he was - he slept better now.
Rachel was almost dozing herself when - at 0215 -her comlog chirped, the
detectors screamed, and she jumped to her feet. According to the
sensors, the Sphinx had suddenly grown a dozen new chambers, some larger
than the total structure. Rachel keyed displays and the air misted with
models that changed as she watched.
Corridor schematics twisted back on themselves like rotating MObius
strips. The external sensors indicated the upper structure twisting and
bending like polyfiex in the wind - or like wings.
Rachel knew that it was some type of multiple malfunction, but even as
she tried to recalibrate she called data and impressions into her
comlog. Then several things happened at once.
She heard the drag of feet in the corridor above her.
All of the displays went dead simultaneously.
Somewhere in the maze of corridors a time-tide alarm began to blare.
All of the lights went off.
This final event made no sense. The instrument packages held their own
power supplies and would have stayed lit through a nuclear attack. The
lamp they used in the basement had a new ten-year power cell. The
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

glow-globes in the corridors were bioluminescent and needed no power.
Nonetheless, the lights were out. Rachel pulled a flashlight laser out
of the knee pocket of her jumpsuit and triggered it. Nothing happened.
For the first time in her life, terror closed on Rachel Weintraub like a
hand on her heart. She could not breathe. For ten seconds she willed
herself to be absolutely still, not even listening, merely waiting for
the panic to recede. When it had subsided enough for her to breathe
without gasping, she felt her way to the instruments and keyed them.
They did not respond. She lifted her comlog and thumbed the diskey.
Nothing... which was impossible, of course, given the solid-state
invul-nerability and power-cell reliability of the thing. Still,
nothing.
Rachel could hear her pulse pounding now but she again fought back the
panic and began feeling her way toward the only exit. The thought of
finding her way through the maze in absolute darkness made her want to
scream but she could think of no other alternatives.
Wait. There had been old lights throughout the Sphinx maze but the
research team had strung the glow-globes.
Strung them. There was a perIon line connecting them all the way to the
surface.
Fine. Rachel groped her way toward the exit, feeling the cold stone
under her fingers. Was it this cold before?
There came the clear sound of something sharp scraping its way down the
access shaft.
'Melio?" called Rachel into the blackness. 'Tanya?
Kurt?"
The scraping sounded very close. Rachel backed away, knocking over an
instrument and chair in the blackness. Something touched her hair and
she gasped, raised her hand.
The ceiling was lower. The solid block of stone, five meters square,
slid lower even as she raised her other hand to touch it. The opening
to the corridor was halfway up the wall. Rachel staggered toward it,
swinging her hands in front of her like a blind person. She tripped
over a folding chair, found the instrument table, followed it to the far
wall, felt the bottom of the corridor shaft disappearing as the ceiling
came lower. She pulled back her fingers a second before they were
sliced off.
Rachel sat down in the darkness. An oscilloscope scraped against the
ceiling until the table cracked and collapsed under it. Rachel moved
her head in short, desperate arcs. There was a metallic rasp - almost a
breathing sound - less than a meter from her. She began to back away,
sliding across a floor suddenly filled with broken equipment. The
breathing grew louder.
Something sharp and infinitely cold grasped her wrist.
Rachel screamed at last.
There was no fatline transmitter on Hyperion in those days. Nor did the
spinship HS Farraux City have FTL-comm capability. So the first Sol and
Sarai heard of their daughter's accident was when the Hegemony consulate
on Parvati fatlined the college that Rachel had been injured, that she
was stable but unconscious, and that she was being transferred from
Parvati to the Web world of Renaissance Vector via medical torchship.
The trip would take a little over ten days' shiptime with a five-month
time-debt. Those five months were agony for Sol and his wife, and by
the time the medical ship put in at the Renaissance farcaster nexus,
they had imagined the worst a thousand times. It had been eight years
since they had last seen Rachel.
The Med Center in DaVinci was a floating tower sustained by direct
broadcast power. The view over the
Como Sea was breathtaking but neither Sol nor Sarai had time for it as
they went from level to level in search of their daughter. Dr Singh and
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Melio Arundez met them in the
hub of Intensive Care. Introductions were rushed.
'Rachel?" asked Sarai.
'Asleep,' said Dr Singh. She was a tall woman, aristocratic but with
kind eyes. 'As far as we can tell, Rachel has suffered no physical...
ah... injury. But she has been unconscious now for some seventeen
standardweeks, her time. Only in the past ten days have her brain waves
registered deep sleep rather than coma."
' I don't understand,' said Sol."Was there an accident at the site? A
concussion?"
'Something happened,' said Melio Arundez, 'but we're not sure what.
Rachel was in one of the artifacts... alone · . . her comlog and
other instruments recorded nothing out of the ordinary. But there was a
surge in a phenomenon there known as anti-entropic fields..."
'The time tides,' said Sol. 'We know about them.
Go on. '
Arundez nodded and opened his hands as if molding air. 'There was a...
field surge... more like a tsunami than a tide... the Sphinx... the
artifact Rachel was in · . . was totally inundated. I mean, there was
nophysical damage but Rachel was unconscious when we found her · . ."
He turned to Dr Singh for help.
'Your daughter was in a coma,' said the doctor. 'It was not possible to
put her into cryogenic fugue in that condition..."
'So she came through quantum leap without fugue?" demanded Sol. He had
read about the psychological damage to travelers who had experienced the
Hawking effect directly.
'No, no,' soothed Singh. 'She was unconscious in a way
which shielded her quite as well as fugue state."
'Is she hurt?" demanded Sarai.
'We don't know,' said Singh 'All life signs have returned to near
normal. Brain-wave activity is nearing a conscious state. The problem
is that her body appears to have absorbed... that is, the anti-entropic
field appears to have contaminated her."
Sol rubbed his forehead. 'Like radiation sickness?" Dr Singh hesitated.
'Not precisely... ah... this case is quite unprecedented. Specialists
in aging diseases are due in this afternoon from Tau Ceti Center, Lusus,
and Metaxas."
Sol met the woman's gaze. 'Doctor, are you saying that Rachel
contracted some aging disease on Hyperion?" He paused a second to search
his memory. 'Something like Methuselah syndrome or early Alzheimer's
disease?"
'No,' said Singh, 'in fact your daughter's illness has no name. The
medics here are calling it Merlin's sickness.
You see . . . your daughter is aging at a normal rate ... but as far
as we can tell, she is aging backward."
Sarai pulled away from the group and stared at Singh as if the doctor
were insane. 'I want to see my daughter,'
she said, quietly but very firmly. 'I want to see Rachel
tO W. '
Rachel awakened less than forty hours after Sol and Saral arrived.
Within minutes she was sitting up in bed, talking even while the medics
and technicians bustled around her. 'Morn! Dad! What are you doing
here?" Before either could answer, she looked around her and blinked.
'Wait a minute, where's here? Are we in Keats?"
Her mother took her hand. 'We're in a hospital in DaVinci, dear. On
Renaissance Vector."
Rachel's eyes widened almost comically. 'Renaissance.
We're in the Web?" She looked around her in total bewilderment.
'Rachel, what is the last thing you remember?" asked Dr Singh.
The young woman looked uncomprehendingly at the medic. 'The last thing
I... I remember going to sleep next to Melio after..." She glanced at
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

her parents and touched her cheeks with the tips of her fingers. 'Melio?
The others? Are they..."
'Everyone on the expedition is all right,' soothed Dr Singh. 'You had a
slight accident. About seventeen weeks have passed. You're back in the
Web. Safe. Everyone in your party is all right."
'Seventeen weeks..." Under the fading remnant of her tan, Rachel went
very pale.
Sol took her hand. 'How do you feel, kiddo?" The return pressure on his
fingers was heartbreakingly weak.
'I don't know, Daddy,' she managed. 'Tired. Dizzy.
Confused."
Sarai sat on the bed and put her arms around her. 'It's all fight,
baby. Everything's going to be all right."
Melio entered the room, unshaven, his hair rumpled from the nap he had
been taking in the outer lounge.
'Rache?"
Rachel looked at him from the safety of her mother's arm. 'Hi,' she
said, almost shyly. 'l'm back."
SoI's opinion had been and continued to be that medicine hadn't really
changed much since the days of leeches and poultices; nowadays they
whirred one in centrifuges, realigned the body's magnetic field;
bombarded the victim with sonic waves, tapped into the cells to
interrogate the RNA, and then admitted their ignorance without actually
coming out and saying so. The only thing that had changed was that the
bills were bigger.
He was dozing in a chair when Rachel's voice awoke him.
'Daddy?"
He sat up, reached for her hand. 'Here, kiddo." 'Where am I, Dad?
What's happened?"
'You're in a hospital on Renaissance, baby. There was an accident on
Hyperion. You're all right now except it's affecting your memory a
bit."
Rachel clung to his hand. 'A hospital? In the Web?
How'd Iget here? How long have I been here?"
'About five weeks,' whispered Sol. 'What's the last thing you remember,
Rachel?"
She sat back on her pillows and touched her forehead, feeling the tiny
sensors there. 'Melio and I had been at the meeting. Talking with the
team about setting up the search equipment in the Sphinx. Oh ... Dad
... 1 haven't told you about Melio... he's..."
'Yes,' said Sol and handed Rachel her comiog. 'Here, kiddo. Listen to
this." He left the room.
Rachel touched the diskey and blinked as her own voice began talking to
her. 'OK, Rache, you just woke up. You're confused. You don't know
how you got here.
Well, something's happened to you, kid. Listen up.
'I'm recording this on the twelfth day of Tenmonth, year 457 of the
Hegira, A.D. 2739 old reckoning. Yes, I know that's half a standard
year from the last thing you remember. Listen.
'Something happened in the Sphinx. You got caught up in the time tide.
It changed you. You're aging backward, as dumb as that sounds. Your
body's getting younger every minute, although that's not the important
part right now. When you sleep... when we sleep...
you forget. You lose another day from your memory before the accident,
and you lose everything since. Don't ask me why. The doctors don't
know. The experts don't know. If you want an analogy, just think of a
tapeworm virus... one of the old kind... that's chewing up the data in
your comlog... backward from the last entry.
'They don't know why the memory loss hits you when you sleep, either.
They tried stay-awakes, but after about thirty hours you just go
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

catatonic for a while and the virus does its thing anyway. So what the
hell.
'You know something? This talking about yourself in the third person is
sort of therapeutic. Actually, I'm lying here waiting for them to take
me up to imaging, knowing I'll fall asleep when I get back... knowing
VII forget everything again . . . and it scares the shit out of me.
'OK, key the diskey for short-term and you get a prepared spiel here
that should catch you up on everything since the accident. Oh... Mom
and Dad are both here and they know about Melio. But/don't know as much
as I used to. When did we first make love with him, mmm?
The second month on Hyperion? Then we have just a few weeks left,
Rachel, and then we'll be just acquain tances. Enjoy your memories
while you can, girl.
'This is yesterday's Rachel, signing off."
Sol came in to find his daughter sitting upright in the bed, still
grasping the comlog tightly, her face pale and terrified. 'Daddy..."
He went to sit next to her and let her cry... for the twentieth night
in a row.
Eight standard weeks after she arrived on Renaissance, Sol and Sarai
waved goodbye to Rachel and Melio at the Da Vinci farcaster multiport
and then farcast home to Barnard's World.
'l don't think she should have left the hospital,' muttered Sarai as
they took the evening shuttle to Crawford.
The continent was a patchwork of harvest-ready right angles below them.
'Mother,' said Sol, touching her knee, 'the doctors would have kept her
there forever. But they're doing it for their own curiosity now.
They've done everything they can to help her... nothing. She has a
life to live."
'But why go away with... with him?" said Sarai. 'She barely knows
him."
Sol sighed andJeaned back against the cushions of his seat. 'In two
weeks she won't remember him at all,' he said. 'At least in the way
they share now. Look at it from her position, Mother. Fighting every
day to reorient herself in a world gone mad. She's twenty-five years
old and in love. Let her be happy."
Sarai turned her face to the window and together, not speaking, they
watched the red sun hang like a tethered balloon on the edge of evening.
Sol was well into the second semester when Rachel called. It was a
one-way message via farcaster cable from Freeholm and her image hung in
the center of the old holopit like a familiar ghost.
'Hi, Mom. Hi, Dad. Sorry I haven't written or called the past few
weeks. I guess you know that i've left the university. And Melio. It
was dumb to try to take new graduate-level stuff. I'd just forget
Tuesday whatever was discussed Monday. Even with disks and comlog
prompts it was a losing battle. I may enroll in the undergraduate
program again . . . I remember all of it! Just kidding.
'It was just too hard with Melio, too. Or so my notes tell me. It
wasn't his fault, I'm sure of that. He was
gentle and patient and loving to the end. It's just that·..
well, you can't start from scratch on a relationship every day. Our
apartment was filled with photos of us, notes 1 wrote to myself about
us, holos of us on Hyperion, but . . you know. In the morning he
would be an absolute stranger. By afternoon I began to believe what
we'd had, even if I couldn't remember. By evening I'd be crying in his
arms... then, sooner or later, I'd go to sleep. It's better this way."
Rachel's image paused, turned as if she was going to break contact, and
then steadied. She smiled at them.
'So anyway, I've left school for a while. The Freeholm Med Center wants
me full time but they'd have to get in line... I got an offer from the
Tau Ceti Research Institute that's hard to turn down. They offer a... I
think they call it a "research honorarium" . . . that's bigger than
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

what we paid for four years at Nightenhelser and all of Reichs combined.
'I turned them down. I'm still going in as an outpatient, but the RNA
transplant series just leaves me with bruises and a depressed feeling.
Of course, I could just be depressed because every morning I can't
remember where the bruises came from. Ha-ha.
'Anyway, 1'11 be staying with Tanya for a while and then maybe... I
thought maybe I'd come home for a while. Secondmonth's my birthday...
I'll be twenty-two again. Weird, huh? At any rate, it's a lot easier
being around people I know and I met Tanya just after I transferred here
when I was twenty-two ... I think you understand.
'So... is my old room still here, Mom, or have you turned it into a
mah-jongg parlor like you've always threatened? So write or give me a
call. Next time l'll shell out the money for two-way so we can really
talk. I just · . . 1 guess I thought..."
Rachel waved. 'Gottago. See you later, alligators. I love you both."
Sol flew to Bussard City the week before Rachel's birthday to pick her
up at the world's only public farcaster terminex. He saw her first,
standing with her luggage
near the floral clock. She looked young but not noticeably younger than
when they had waved goodbye on Renaissance Vector. No, Sol realized,
there was something less confident about her posture. He shook his head
to rid himself of such thoughts, called to her, and ran to hug her.
The look of shock on her face when he released her was so profound that
he could not ignore it. 'What is it, sweetie? What's wrong?"
It was one of the few times he had ever seen his daughter totally at a
loss for words.
'I... you... I forgot,' she stammered. She shook her head in a
familiar way and managed to laugh and cry at the same instant. 'You
look a little different is all, Dad. I remember leaving here like it
was... literally... yesterday.
When I saw... your hair..." Rachel covered her mouth.
Sol ran his hand across his scalp. 'Ah, yes,' he said, suddenly close
to laughing and crying himself. 'With your school and travels, it's
been more than eleven years. I'm old. And bald." He opened his arms
again. 'Welcome back, little one."
Rachel moved into the protective circle of his embrace.
For several months things went well. Rachel felt more secure with
familiar things around, and for Sarai the heartbreak of their daughter's
illness was temporarily offset by the pleasure of having her home again.
Rachel rose early every morning and viewed her private 'orientation
show' which, Sol knew, contained images of him and Sarai a dozen years
older than she remembered.
He tried to imagine what it was like for Rachel: she awoke in her own
bed, memory fresh, twenty-two years old, home on vacation before going
offworld to graduate school, only to find her parents suddenly aged, a
hundred small changes in the house and town, the news different · . .
years of history having passed her by.
Sol could not imagine it.
Their first mistake was acceding to Rachel's wishes in inviting her old
friends to her twenty-second birthday party: the same crew who had
celebrated the first
time- irrepressible Niki, Don Stewart and his friend Howard, Kathi Obeg
and Marta Tyn, her best friend Linna McKyler - all of them then just out
of college, shucking off cocoons of childhood for new lives.
Rachel had seen them all since her return. But she had slept... and
forgotten. And Sol and Sarai this one time did not remember that she
had forgotten.
Niki was thirty-four standard, with two children of her own - still
energetic, still irrepressible, but ancient by Rachel's standards. Don
and Howard talked about their investments, their children's sports
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

accomplishments, and their upcoming vacations. Kathi was confused,
speaking only twice to Rachel and then as if she was speaking to an
impostor. Marta was openly jealous of Rachel's youth. Linna, who had
become an ardent Zen Gnostic in the years between, cried and left early.
When they had gone, Rachel sat in the postparty ruin of the living room
and stared at the half-eaten cake. She did not cry. Before going
upstairs she hugged her mother and whispered to her father, 'Dad, please
don't let me do anything like that again."
Then she went upstairs to sleep.
It was that spring when Sol again had the dream. He was lost in a
great, dark place, lighted only by two red orbs. It was not absurd when
the flat voice said:
'Sol. Take your daughter, your only Rachel, whom you love, and go to
the world called Hyperion and offer her there as a burnt offering at one
of the places of which I shall tell you."
And Sol had screamed into the darkness:
'You already have her, you son of a bitch! What do I have to do to get
her back? Tell me! Tell me, goddamn you!'
And Sol Weintraub woke sweating with tears in his eyes and anger in his
heart. In the other room he could feel his daughter sleeping while the
great worm devoured her.
In the months which followed Sol became obsessive about obtaining
information on Hyperion, the Time Tombs, and the Shrike. As a trained
researcher, he was astounded that there were so little hard data on so
provocative a topic. There was the Church of the Shrike, of course -
there were no temples on Barnard's World but many in the Web - but he
soon found that seeking hard information in Shrike cult literature was
like trying to map the geography of Sarnath by visiting a Buddhist
monastery. Time was mentioned in Shrike Church dogma, but only in the
sense that the Shrike was supposed to be '... the Angel of Retribution
from Beyond Time' and that true time had ended for the human race when
Old Earth died and that the four centuries since had been 'false time."
Sol found their tracts the usual combination of double talk and navel
lint-gathering common to most religions. Still, he planned to visit a
Shrike Church temple as soon as he had explored more serious avenues of
research.
Melio Arundez launched another Hyperion expedition, also sponsored by
Reichs University, this one with the stated goal of isolating and
understanding the time-tide phenomenon which had inflicted the Merlin
sickness on Rachel. A major development was the Hegemony Protectorate's
decision to send along on that expedition a fatline transmitter for
installation at the Hegemony consulate in Keats. Even so, it would be
more than three years' Web time before the expedition arrived on
Hyperion. SoI's first instinct was to go with Arundez and his team -
certainly any holodrama would have the primary characters returning to
the scene of the action. But Sol overrode the instinctive urge within
minutes. He was a historian and philosopher; any contribution he might
make to the expedition's success would be minute, at best. Rachel still
retained the interest and skills of a we!l-trained undergraduate
archaeologist-to-be, but those skills dwindled a bit each day and Sol
could see no benefit to her returning to the site of the accident. Each
day would be a shock to her, awakening on a strange world, on a mission
which would require skills unknown to her.
Sarai would not allow such a thing.
Sol set aside the book he was working on - an analysis of Kierkegaard's
theories of ethics as compromise morality as applied to the legal
machinery of the Hegemony - and concentrated on collecting arcane data
on time, on Hyperion, and on the story of Abraham.
Months spent carrying on business as usual and collecting information
did little to satisfy his need for action. Occasionally he vented his
frustration on the medical and scientific specialists who came to
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

examine Rachel like streams of pilgrims to a holy shrine.
'How the hell can this be happening!" he screamed at one little
specialist who had made the mistake of being both smug and condescending
to the patient's father.
The doctor had a head so hairless, his face looked like lines painted on
a billiard ball. 'She's begun growing smaller!" Sol shouted, literally
buttonholing the retreating expert. 'Not so one can see, but bone mass
is decreasing. How can she even begin to become a child again? What
the hell does that do to the law of conservation of mass?"
The expert had moved his mouth but had been too rattled to speak. His
bearded colleague answered for him. 'M. Weintranb,' he said, 'sir. You
have to understand that your daughter is currently inhabiting... ah ·..
think of it as a localized region of reversed entropy."
Sol wheeled on the other man. 'Are you saying that she is merely stuck
in a bubble of backwardness?"
'Ah... no,' said the colleague, massaging his chin nervously. 'Perhaps
a better analogy is that ...
biologically at least... the life/metabolism mechanism has been
reversed... ah..."
'Nonsense,' snapped Sol. 'She doesn't excrete for nutrition or
regurgitate her food. And what about all the neurological activity?
Reverse'the electrochemical impulses and you get nonsense. Her brain
works, gentlemen ... it's her memory that is disappearing. Why,
gentlemen? Why?"
The specialist finally found his voice. 'We don't know why, M.
Weintraub. Mathematically, your daughter's body resembles a
time-reversed equation... or perhaps an object which has passed through
a rapidly spinning
black hole· We don't know how this has happened or why the physically
impossible is occurring in this instance, M. Weintraub. We just don't
know enough."
Sol shook each man's hand. 'Fine. That's all I wanted to know,
gentlemen. Have a good trip back." +
On Rachel's twenty-first birthday she came to Sol's door an hour after
they had all turned in. 'Daddy?"
'What is it, kiddo?" Sol pulled on his robe and joined her in the
doorway. 'Can't sleep?"
'I haven't slept for two days,' she whispered. 'Been taking stay-awakes
so 1 can get through all of the brief ing stuff I left in the Wanta
Know? file."
Sol nodded.
'Daddy, would you come downstairs and have a drink with me? I've got
some things I want to talk about."
Sol got his glasses from the nightstand and joined her downstairs.
It proved to be the first and only time that Sol would get drunk with
his daughter. It was not a boisterous drunk- for a while they chatted,
then began telling jokes and making puns, until each was giggling too
hard to continue. Rachel started to tell another story, sipped her
drink just at the funniest part, and almost snorted whiskey out her
nose, she was laughing so hard. Each of them thought it was the
funniest thing that had ever happened.
'I'll get another bottle,' said Sol when the tears had ceased. 'Dean
Moore gave me some Scotch last Christmas...
I think."
When he returned, walking carefully, Rachel had sat up on the couch and
brushed her hair with her fingers.
He poured her a small amount and the two drank in
silence for a while.
'Daddy?" 'Yes?"
'I went through the whole thing. Saw myself, listened to myself, saw
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

the holos of Linna and the others all middle-aged..."
'Hardly middle-aged,' said Sol. 'Liana will be thirty-five next
month..."
'Well, old, you know what ! mean, Anyway, I read the medical briefs,
saw the photos from Hyperion, and
you know what?"
'What?"
'I don't believe any of it, Dad."
Sol put down his drink and looked at his daughter.
Her face was fuller than before, less sophisticated. And even more
beautiful.
'1 mean, I do believe it,' she said with a small, scared laugh. 'It's
not like you and Mom would put on such a cruel joke. Plus there's
your... your age... and the news and all. I know it's real, but I
don't believe it. Do
you know what I mean, Dad?"
'Yes,' said Sol.
'I mean I woke up this morning and I thought, Great . . . tomorrow's
the paleontology exam and l've hardly studied. I was looking forward to
showing Roger Sherman a thing or two... he thinks he's so smart."
Sol took a drink. 'Roger died three years ago in a plane crash south of
Bussard,' he said. He would not have spoken without the whiskey in him,
but he had to find out if there was a Rachel hiding within the Rachel.
'I know,' said Rachel and pulled her knees up to her chin. '1 accessed
everybody I knew. Gram's dead. Professor Eikhardt isn't teaching
anymore. Niki married some... salesman. A lot happens in four years."
'More than eleven years,' said Sol. 'The trip to and from Hyperion left
you six years behind us stay-at-homes."
'But that's normal,' cried Rachel. 'People travel outside the Web all
the time. They cope."
Sol nodded. 'But this is different, kiddo."
Rachel managed a smile and drained the last of her whiskey. 'Boy, what
an understatement." She set the glass down with a sharp, final sound.
'Look, here's what l've decided. I've spent two and a half days going
through all of the stuff she... !... prepared to let me know what's
happened, what's going on... and #just doesn't help."
Sol sat perfectly still, not even daring to breathe.
'I mean,' said Rachel, 'knowing that I'm getting
younger every day, losing the memory of people 1 haven't even met yet...
I mean, what happens next? 1 just keep getting younger and smaller and
less capable until I just disappear someday? Jesus, Dad." Rachel
wrapped her arms more tightly around her knees. 'It's
sort of funny in a weird way, isn't it?"
'No,' Sol said quietly.
'No, I'm sure it's not,' said Rachel. Her eyes, always large and dark,
were moist. 'It must be the worst nightmare in the world for you and
Morn. Every day you have to watch me come down the stairs . . .
confused . . .
waking up with yesterday's memories but hearing my own voice tell me
that yesterday was years ago. That I
had a love affair with some guy named Areclio..." 'Melio,' whispered
Sol.
'Whatever. It just doesn't help, Dad. By the time I can even begin to
absorb it, I'm so worn out that I have to sleep. Then... well, you
know what happens then."
'What ..." began Sol and had to clear his throat.
'What do you want us to do, little one?"
Rachel looked him in the eye and smiled. It was the same smile she had
gifted him with since her fifth week of life. 'Don't tell me, Dad,' she
said firmly. 'Don't let me tell me. It just hurts. I mean, I didn't
live those times
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

' She paused and touched her forehead. 'You know vit I mean, Dad. The
Rachel who went to another planet and fell in love and got hurt ... that
was a different Rachel! I shouldn't have to suffer her pain." She was
crying now. 'Do you understand? Do you?"
'Yes,' said Sol. He opened his arms and felt her warmth and tears
against his chest. 'Yes, I understand."
Fatline messages from Hyperion came frequently the next year but they
were all negative. The nature and source of the anti-entropic fields
had not been found.
No unusual time-tide activity had been measured around the Sphinx.
Experiments with laboratory animals in and around the tidal regions had
resulted in sudden death for some animals, but the Merlin sickness had
not been replicated. Melio ended every message with 'My love to
Rachel."
Sol and Sarai used money loaned from Reichs University to receive
limited Poulsen treatments in Bussard City. They were already too old
for the process to extend their lives for another century, but it
restored the look of a couple approaching fifty standard rather than
seventy.
They studied old family photos and found that it was not too difficult
to dress the way they had a decade and a half before.
Sixteen-year-old Rachel tripped down the stairs with her comlog tuned to
the college radio station. 'Can I have rice cereal?"
'Don't you have it every morning?" smiled Sarai.
'Yes,' grinned Rachel. 'I just thought we might be out
or something. I heard the phone. Was that Niki?" 'No,' said Sol.
'Damn,' said Rachel and glanced at them. 'Sorry. But she promised
she'd call as soon as the standardized scores came in. Three weeks
since tutorials. You'd think l'd have heard something."
'Don't worry,' said Sarai. She brought the coffeepot to the table,
started to pour Rachel a cup, poured it for herself. 'Don't worry,
honey. I promise you that your scores will be good enough to get you
into any school you want."
'More,' sighed Rachel. 'You don't know. It's a dog-eat-dog world out
there." She frowned. 'Have you seen my math ansible? My room was all
messed around. I couldn't find anything."
Sol cleared his throat. 'No classes today, kiddo."
Rachel stared. 'No classes? On a Tuesday? Six weeks from graduation?
What's up?"'
'You've been sick,' Sarai said firmly. 'You can stay home one day. Just
today."
Rachel's frown deepened. 'Sick? I don't feel sick. Just sort of
weird. Like things aren't... aren't right somehow.
Like why's the couch moved around in the media room? And where's Chips?
I called and called but he didn't come."
Sol touched his daughter's wrist. 'You've been sick for a while,' he
said. 'The doctor said you might wake
up with a few gaps. Let's talk while we walk over to the campus. Want
to?"
Rachel brightened. 'Skip classes and go to the college?
Sure." She faked a look of consternation. 'As long as we don't run into
Roger Sherman. He's taking freshman calculus up there and he's such a
pain."
'We won't see Roger,' said Sol. 'Ready to go?"
'Almost." Rachel leaned over and gave her mother a huge hug. ' 'Later
alligator."
' 'While, crocodile,' said Sarai.
'Okay,' grinned Rachel, her long hair bouncing. 'l'm ready."
The constant trips to Bussard City had required the purchase of an EMV
and on a cool day in autumn Sol took the slowest route, far below the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

traffic lanes, enjoying the sight and smell of the harvested fields
below. More than a few men and women working in the fields waved to
him.
Bussard had grown impressively since Sol's childhood, but the synagogue
was still there on the edge of one of the oldest neighborhoods in the
city. The temple was old, Sol felt old, even the yarmulke he put on as
he entered seemed ancient, worn thin by decades of use, but the rabbi
was young. Sol realized that the man was at least forty - his hair was
thinning on either side of the dark skullcap - but to Sol's eyes he was
little more than a boy. Sol was relieved when the younger man suggested
that they finish their conversation in the park across the street.
They sat on a park bench. Sol was surprised to find himself still
carrying the yarmulke, passing the cloth from hand to hand. The day
smelled of burning leaves and the previous night's rain.
'1 don't quite understand, M. Weintraub,' said the rabbi. 'Is it the
dream you're disturbed about or the fact that your daughter has become
ill since you began the dream?"
Sol raised his head to feel the sunlight on his face.
'Neither, exactly,' he said. '1 just can't help but feel that the two
are connected somehow."
The rabbi ran a finger over his lower lip. 'How old is your daughter?"
'Thirteen,' said Sol after an imperceptible pause.
'And is the illness... serious? Life threatening?" 'Not life
threatening,' said Sol. 'Not yet."
The rabbi folded his arms across an ample belly. 'You
don't believe... may I call you Sol?"
'Of course."
'Sol, you don't believe that by having this dream...
that somehow you've caused your little girl's illness.
Do you?"
'No,' said Sol and sat a moment, wondering deep within if he was telling
the truth. 'No, Rabbi, I don't think..."
'Call me Mort, Sol."
'All right, Mort. I didn't come because I believe that I - or the dream
- am causing Rachel's illness. But I believe my subconscious might be
trying to tell me something."
Mort rocked back and forth slightly. 'Perhaps a neuro-specialist or
psychologist could help you more there, Sol. I'm not sure what I..."
'I'm interested in the story of Abraham,' interrupted Sol. 'I mean,
I've had some experience with different ethical systems, but it's hard
for me to understand one which began with the order to a father to slay
his son."
'No, no, no!" cried the rabbi, waving oddly childlike fingers in front
of him. 'When the time came, God stayed Abraham's hand. He would not
have allowed a human sacrifice in His name. It was the obedience to the
will of the Lord that..."
'Yes,' said Sol. 'Obedience. But it says, "Then Abraham put forth his
hand, and took the knife to slay his son." God must have looked into his
soul and seen that Abraham was ready to slay Isaac. A mere show of
obedience without inner commitment would not have appeased the God of
Genesis. What would have happened if Abraham had loved his son more
than he loved .God?"
Mort drummed his fingers on his knee a moment and then reached out to
grasp So!'s upper arm. 'Sol, I can see
you're upset about your daughter's illness. Don't get it mixed up with
a document written eight thousand years ago. Tell me more about your
little girl. I mean, children don't die of diseases anymore. Not in
the Web."
Sol rose, smiled, and stepped back to free his arm. 'I'd like to talk
more, Mort. I want to. But I have to get back.
I have a class this evening."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Will you come to temple this Sabbath?" asked the rabbi, extending
stubby fingers for a final human contact.
Sol dropped the yarmulke into the younger man's hands. 'Perhaps one of
these days, Mort. One of these days I will."
Later the same autumn Sol looked out the window of his study to see the
dark figure of a man standing under the bare elm in front of the house.
The media, thought Sol, his heart sinking. For a decade he had been
dreading the day the secret got out, knowing it would mean the end of
their simple life in Crawford. He walked out into the evening chill.
'Melio!" he said when he saw the tall man's face.
The archaeologist stood with his hands in the pockets of his long blue
coat. Despite the ten standard years since their last contact, Arundez
had aged but little -Sol guessed that he was still in his late twenties.
But the younger man's heavily tanned face was lined with worry. 'Sol,'
he said and extended his hand almost shyly.
Sol shook his hand warmly. 'I didn't know you were back. Come into the
house."
'No." The archaeologist took a half step back. 'I've been out here for
an hour, Sol. I didn't have the courage to come to the door."
Sol started to speak but then merely nodded. He put his hands in his
own pockets against the chill. The first stars were becoming visible
above the dark gables of the house. 'Rachel's not home right now,' he
said at last.
'She went to the library. She . . . she thinks she has a history
paper due."
Melio took a ragged breath and nodded in return.
'Sol,' he said, his voice thick, 'you and Sarai need to understand that
we did everything we could. The team was on Hyperion for almost three
standard years. We would have stayed if the university hadn't cut our
funds.
There was nothing..."
'We know,' said Sol. 'We appreciated the fatline messages."
'I spent months alone in the Sphinx myself,' said Melio. 'According to
the instruments, it was just an inert pile of stones, but sometimes I
thought I felt... something .... ' He shook his head again. 'I failed
her, Sol."
'No,' said Sol and gripped the younger man's shoulder through the wool
coat. 'But I have a question. We've been in touch with our senators...
even talked to the Science Council directors; . . but no one can
explain to me why the Hegemony hasn't spent more time and money
investigating the phenomena on Hyperion. It seems to me that they
should have invested that world into the Web long ago, if only for its
scientific potential.
How can they ignore an enigma like the Tombs?"
'I know what you mean, Sol. Even the early cutoff of our funds was
suspicious. It's as if the Hegemony had a policy to keep Hyperion at
arm's length."
'Do you think . . ." began Sol but at the moment Rachel approached
them in the autumn twilight. Her hands were thrust deep in her red
jacket, her hair was cut short in the decades-old style of adolescents
everywhere, and her full cheeks were flushed with the cold. Rachel was
teetering on the brink of childhood and young adulthood; her long legs
in jeans, sports shoes, and bulky jacket might have been the silhouette
of a boy.
,. She grinned at them. 'Hi, Dad." Stepping closer in the dim light,
she nodded at Melio shyly. 'Sorry, didn't mean to interrupt your
conversation."
Sol took a breath. 'That's all right, kiddo. Rachel, this is Dr
Arundez from Reichs University on Freeholm.
Dr Arundez, my daughter Rachel."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Pleased to meet you,' said Rachel, beaming in earnest now. 'Wow,
Reichs. I've read their catalogues. I'd love to go there someday."
Melio nodded rigidly. Sol could see the stiffness in his
shoulders and torso. 'Do you..." began Melio. 'That is, what would you
like to study there?"
Sol thought the pain in the man's voice must be audible to Rachel but
she only shrugged and laughed.
'Oh, jeez, everything. Old Mr Eikhardt- he's the
paleontology/archaeology tute in the advanced class I take up at the Ed
Center - he says they have a great
classics and ancient artifacts department."
'They do,' managed Melio.
Rachel glanced shyly from her father to the stranger, apparently sensing
the tension there but not knowing the source. 'Well, l'm just
interrupting your conversation more here. l've got to get in and get to
bed. I guess I've had this strange virus... sort of like meningitis,
More says, only it must make me sort of goofy. Anyway, nice to meet
you, Dr Arundez. I hope I'll see you at Reichs someday. '
'I hope that too,' said Melio, staring at her so intensely in the gloom
that Sol had the feeling he was trying to memorize everything about the
instant.
'Okay, well . . ." said Rachel and stepped back, her rubber-soled
shoes squeaking on the sidewalk, 'good
night, then. See you in the morning, Dad."
'Good night, Rachel."
She paused at the doorway. The gaslight on the lawn made her look much
younger than thirteen. ' 'Later, alligators."
' 'While, crocodile,' said Sol and heard Melio whisper it in unison.
They stood awhile in silence, feeling the night settle on the small
town. A boy on a bicycle rode by, leaves crackling under his wheels,
spokes gleaming in the pools of light under the old streetlamps. 'Come
in the house,' Sol said to the silent man. 'Sarai will be very pleased
to see you. Rachel will be asleep."
'Not now,' said Melio. He was a shadow there, his hands still in his
pockets. '1 need to... it was a mistake, Sol." He started to turn
away, looked back. 'I'!1 phone when I get to Freeholm,' he said. 'We'll
get another expedition put together."
Sol nodded. Three years transit, he thought. If they
left tonight she wouM be... not quite ten before they arrive. 'Good,'
he said.
Melio paused, raised a hand in farewell, and walked away along the curb,
ignoring the leaves that crunched underfoot.
Sol never saw him in person again.
The largest Church of the Shrike in the Web was on Lusus and Sol farcast
there a few weeks before Rachel's tenth birthday. The building itself
was not much larger than an Old Earth cathedral, but it seemed gigantic
with its effect of flying buttresses in search of a church, twisted
upper stories, and support walls of stained glass.
Sol's mood was low and the brutal Lusian gravity did nothing to lighten
it. Despite his appointment with the bishop, Sol had to wait more than
five hours before he was allowed into the inner sanctum. He spent most
of the time staring at the slowly rotating twenty-meter, steel and
polychrome sculpture which might have been of the legendary Shrike . .
. and might have been an abstract homage to every edged weapon ever
invented.
What interested Sol the most were the two red orbs floating within the
nightmare space which might have been a skull.
'M. Weintraub?"
'Your Excellency,' said Sol. He noticed that the acolytes, exorcists,
!ectors, and ostiaries who had kept him company during the long wait had
prostrated themselves on the dark tiles at the high priest's entry. Sol
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

managed a formal bow.
'Please, please, do come in, M. Weintraub,' said the priest. He
indicated the doorway to the Shrike sanctuary with a sweep of his robed
arm.
Sol passed through, found himself in a dark and echoing place not too
dissimilar from the setting of his recurrent dream, and took a seat
where the bishop indicated. As the cleric moved to his own place at
what looked like a small throne behind an intricately carved but
thoroughly modern desk, Sol noticed that the high priest was a native
Lusian, gone to fat and heavy in the jowls, but formidable in the way
all Lusus residents
seemed to be. His robe was striking in its redness... a bright,
arterial red, flowing more like a contained liquid than like silk or
velvet, trimmed in onyx ermine. The bishop wore a large ring on each
finger and they alternated red and black, producing a disturbing effect
in Sol.
'Your Excellency,' began Sol, 'I apologize in advance for any breach in
church protocol which I have committed...
or may commit. I confess I.know little about the Church of the Shrike,
but what I do know has brought me here. Please forgive me if I
inadvertently display my ignorance by my clumsy use of titles or terms."
The bishop wiggled his fingers at Sol. Red and black stones flashed in
the weak light. 'Titles are unimportant, M. Weintraub. Addressing us
as "Your Excellency" is quite acceptable for a nonbeliever. We must
advise you, however, that the formal name of our modest group is the
Church of the Final Atonement and the entity whom the world so blithely
calls... the Shrike... we refer to · . . if we take His name at
all... as the Lord of Pain or, more commonly, the Avatar. Please
proceed with the important query you said you had for us."
Sol bowed slightly. 'Your Excellency, I am a teacher..."
'Excuse us for interrupting, M. Weintraub, but you are much more than a
teacher. You are a scholar. We are very familiar with your writings on
moral hermeneutics.
The reasoning therein is flawed but quite challenging.
We use it regularly in our courses in doctrinal apologetics.
Please proceed."
Sol blinked. His work was almost unknown outside the most rarefied
academic circles and this recognition had thrown him. In the five
seconds it took him to recover, Sol found it preferable to believe that
the Shrike bishop wanted to know with whom he spoke and had an excellent
staff. 'Your Excellency, my background is immaterial. 1 asked to see
you because my child... my .daughter... has taken ill as a possible
result of research she was carrying out in an area which is of some
importance to your Church. I speak, of course, of the so-called Time
Tombs on the world of Hyperion."
The bishop nodded slowly. Sol wondered if he knew about Rachel.
'You are aware, M. Weintraub, that the area you referred to . . .
what we call the Covenant Arks . . .
has recently been declared off limits to so-called researchers by the
Home Rule Council of Hyperion?"
'Yes, Your Excellency. I have heard that. I understand that your
Church was instrumental in that legislation being passed."
The bishop showed no response to this. Far off in the incense-layered
gloom, small chimes sounded 'At any rate, Your Excellency, I hoped that
some aspect of your Church's doctrine might shed light on my daughter's
illness."
The bishop inclined his head forward so that the single shaft of light
which illuminated him gleamed on his forehead and cast his eyes into
shadow. 'Do you wish to receive religious instruction in the mysteries
of the Church, M. Weintraub?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Sol touched his beard with a finger. 'No, Your Excellency, unless in so
doing I might improve the wellbeing of my daughter."
'And does your daughter wish to be initiated into the Church of the
Final Atonement?"
Sol hesitated a beat. 'Again, Your Excellency, she wishes to be well.
If joining the Church would heal or help her, it would be a very serious
consideration."
The bishop sat back in a rustle of robes. Redness seemed to flow from
him into the gloom. 'You speak of physical wellbeing, M. Weintraub.
Our Church is the final arbiter of spiritual salvation. Are you aware
that the former invariably flows from the latter?"
'I am aware that this is an old and widely respected proposition,' said
Sol. 'The total wellbeing of our daughter is the concern of my wife and
myself."
The bishop rested his massive head on his fist. 'What is the nature of
your daughter's illness, M. Weintraub?" 'It is... a time-related
illness, Your Excellency."
The bishop sat forward, suddenly tense. 'And at which of the holy sites
did you say your daughter contracted this malady, M. Weintraub?"
'The artifact called the Sphinx, Your Excellency." The bishop stood so
quickly that papers on his desktop were knocked to the floor. Even
without the robes, the man would have massed twice Sol's weight. In the
fluttering red robes, stretched to his full height, the Shrike priest
now towered over Sol like crimson death incarnate. 'You can go!"
bellowed the big man. 'Your daughter is the most blessed and cursed of
individuals.
There is nothing that you or the Church . . . or any agent in this
life... can do for her."
Sol stood . . . or, rather, sat . . . his ground. 'Your
Excellency, if there is any possibility..."
'NO!" cried the bishop, red in the face now, a consummately consistent
apparition. He tapped at his desk.
Exorcists and lectors appeared in the doorway, their black robes with
red trim an ominous echo of the bishop. The all-black ostiaries blended
with the shadows.
'The audience is at an end,' said the bishop with less volume but
infinite finality. 'Your daughter has been chosen by the Avatar to
atone in a way which all sinners and nonbelievers must someday suffer.
Someday very soon."
'Your Excellency, if I can have just five minutes more of your time..."
The bishop snapped his fingers and the exorcists came forward to escort
Sol out. The men were Lusian. One of them could have handled five
scholars So!'s size.
'Your Excellency..." cried Sol after he had shrugged off the first man's
hands. The three other exorcists came to assist with the equally brawny
lectors hovering nearby. The bishop had turned his back and seemed to
be staring into the darkness.
The outer sanctuary echoed to grunts and the scraping of So!'s heels and
to at least one loud gasp as Sol's foot made contact with the least
priestly parts of the lead exorcist. The outcome of the debate was not
affected.
Sol landed in the street. The last ostiary to turn away tossed So!'s
battered hat to him.
Ten more days on Lusus achieved nothing but more gravity fatigue for
Sol. The Temple bureaucracy would not answer his calls. The courts
could offer him no
wedge. The exorcists waited just within the doors of the vestibule.
Sol farcast to New Earth and Renaissance Vector, to Fuji and TC2, to
Deneb Drei and Deneb Vier, but everywhere the Shrike temples were closed
to him.
Exhausted, frustrated, out of money, Sol 'cast home to Barnard's World,
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

got the EMV out of the long-term lot, and arrived home an hour before
Rachel's birthday.
'Did you bring me anything, Daddy?" asked the excited ten-year-old.
Sarai had told her that day that Sol had been gone.
Sol brought out the wrapped package. It was the collected Anne of Green
Gables series. It was not what
he had wanted to bring her.
'Can I open it?"
'Later, little one. With the other things."
'Oh, please, Dad. Just one thing now. Before Niki and the other kids
get here?"
Sol caught Sarai's eye. She shook her head. Rachel remembered inviting
Niki and Linna and her other friends to the party only days before.
Sarai had not yet come up with an excuse.
'All right, Rachel,' he said. 'Just this one before the party."
While Rachel ripped into the small package, Sol saw the giant package in
the living room, secured with red ribbon. The new bike, of course.
Rachel had asked for the new bike for a year before her tenth birthday.
Sol tiredly wondered if she would be surprised tomorrow to find the new
bike here the day before her tenth birthday.
Or perhaps they would get rid of the bike that night, while Rachel
slept.
Sol collapsed onto the couch. The red ribbon reminded him of the
bishop's robes.
Sarai had never had an easy time of surrendering the past. Every time
she cleaned and folded and put away a set of Rachel's outgrown baby
clothes, she had shed secret tears that Sol somehow knew about. Sarai
had treasured every stage of Rachel's childhood, enjoying the day-to-day
normaIcy of things; a normaIcy which
she quietly accepted as the best of life. She had always felt that the
essence of human experience lay not primarily in the peak experiences,
the wedding days and triumphs which stood out in the memory like dates
circled in red on old calendars, but, rather, in the unsetf-conscious
flow of little things - the weekend afternoon with each member of the
family engaged in his or her own pursuit, their crossings and
connections casual, dialogues imminently forgettable, but the sum of
such hours creating a synergy which was important and eternal.
Sol found Sarai in the attic, weeping softly as she went through boxes.
These were not the gentle tears once shed for the ending of small
things. Sarai Weintraub was angry.
'What are you doing, Mother?"
'Rachel needs clothes. Everything is too big. What fit on an
eight-year-old won't fit a seven-year-old. I have some more of her
things here somewhere."
'Leave it,' said Sol. 'We'll buy something new." Sarai shook her head.
'And have her wonder every day where all of her favorite clothes have
gone? No. I've
saved some things. They're here somewhere."
'Do it later."
'Damn it, there/s no later!" shouted Sarai and then turned away from Sol
and raised her hands to her face.
'I'm sorry."
Sol put his arms around her. Despite the limited Poulsen treatments,
her bare arms were much thinner than he remembered. Knots and cords
under rough skin.
He hugged her tightly.
'l'm sorry,' she repeated, sobbing openly now. 'It's just not fair."
'No,' agreed Sol. 'It's not fair." The sunlight coming through the
dusty attic panes had a sad, cathedral quality to it. Sol had always
loved the smell of an attic - the hot and stale promise of a place so
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

underused and filled with future treasures. Today it was ruined.
He crouched next to a box. 'Come, dear,' he said, 'we'll look
together."
Rachel continued to be happy, involved with life, only slightly confused
by the incongruities which faced her each morning when she awoke. As
she grew younger it became easier to explain away the changes that
appeared -to have occurred overnight - the old elm out front gone, the
new apartment building on the corner where M.
Nesbitt used to live in a colonial-era home, the absence of her friends
- and Sol began to see as never before the flexibility of children. He
now imagined Rachel living on the breaking crest of the wave of time,
not seeing the murky depths of the sea beyond, keeping her balance with
her small store of memories and a total commitment to the twelve to
fifteen hours of now allowed her each day.
Neither Sol nor Sarai wanted their daughter isolated from other children
and it was difficult to find ways to make contact. Rachel was delighted
to play with the 'new girl' or 'new boy' in the neighborhood - children
of other instructors, the grandchildren of friends, for a while with
Niki's daughter - but the other children had to grow accustomed to
Rachel greeting them anew each day, remembering nothing of their common
past, and only a few had the sensitivity to continue such a charade for
the sake of a playmate.
The story of Rachel's unique illness was no secret in Crawford, of
course. The fact of it had spread through the college the first year of
Rachel's return and the entire town knew soon after. Crawford reacted
in the fashion of small towns immemorial- some tongues wagged
constantly, some people could not keep the pity and pleasure at someone
else's misfortune out of their voices and gazes - but mostly the
community folded its protective wings around the Weintraub family like
an awkward mother bird shielding its young.
Still, they were allowed to live their lives, and even when Sol had to
cut back classes and then take an early retirement because of trips
seeking medical treatment for Rachel, the real reason was mentioned by
no one.
But it could not last, of course, and on the spring day when Sol stepped
onto the porch and saw his weeping seven-year-old daughter coming back
from the park
surrounded and followed by a pack of newsteeps, their camera implants
gleaming and cornlogs extended, he knew that a phase of their life was
over forever. Sol jumped from the porch and ran to Racbel's side.
'M. Weintraub, is it true that your daughter contracted a terminal time
illness? What's going to happen in seven years? Will she just
disappear?"
'M. Weintraub! M. Weintraub! Rachel says that she thinks Raben
Dowell is Senate CEO and this is the year A.D. 2711. Has she lost
those thirty-four years completely or is this a delusio, caused by the
Merlin sickness?"
'Rachel! Do you remember being a grown woman?
What's it feel like to be a kid again?"
'M. Weintraub! M. Weintraub! Just one still image, please. How
about you get apicture of Rachel when she was older and you and the kid
stand looking at it?"
'M. Weintraub! Is it true that this is the curse of the Time Tombs?
Did Rachel see the Shrike monster?"
'Hey, Weintraub! Sol! Hey, Solly! What're you and the little woman
going to do when the kid's gone?"
There was a newsteep blocking Sol's way to the front door. The man
leaned forward, the stereo lenses of his eyes elongating as they zoomed
in for a close-up of Rachel. Sol grabbed the man's long hair - which
was conveniently tied in a queue - and flung him aside.
The pack brayed and bellowed outside the house for seven weeks. Sol
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

realized what he had known and forgotten about very small communities:
they were frequently annoying, always parochial, sometimes prying on a
one-to-one level, but never had they subscribed to the vicious legacy of
the so-called 'public's right to know."
The Web did. Rather than have his family become permanent prisoners to
the besieging reporters, Sol went on the offensive. He arranged
interviews on the most pervasive farcaster cable news programs,
participated in All Thing discussions, and personally attended the
Concourse Medical Research Conclave. In ten standard months he asked
for help for his daughter on eighty worlds.
Offers poured in from ten thousand sources but the bulk of the
communications were from faith healers, project promoters, institutes
and free-lance researchers offering their services in exchange for the
publicity, Shrike cultists and other religious zealots pointing out that
Rachel deserved the punishment, requests from various advertising
agencies for product endorsements, offers from media agents to 'handle'
Rachel for such endorsements, offers of sympathy from common people -
frequently enclosing credit chips, expressions of disbelief from
scientists, offers from holie producers and book publishers for
exclusive rights to Rachel's life, and a barrage of real estate offers.
Reichs University paid for a team of evaluators to sort the offers and
see if anything might benefit Rachel.
Most of the communications were discarded. A few medical or research
offers were seriously considered. In the end, none seemed to offer any
avenue of research or experimental therapy which Reichs had not already
tried. One fatline flimsy came to Sol's attention. It was from the
Chairman of Kibbutz K'far Shalom on Hebron and read simply:
IF IT BECOMES' TOO MUCH, COME.
It soon became too much. After the first few months of publicity the
siege seemed to lift, but this was only the prelude to the second act.
Faxsimmed tabloids referred to Sol as the 'Wandering Jew,' the desperate
father wandering afar in search of a cure for his child's bizarre
illness- an ironic title given Sol's lifelong dislike of travel. Sarai
inevitably was 'the grieving mother." Rachel was 'the doomed child' or,
in one inspired headline, 'Virgin Victim of the Time Tombs' Curse." None
of the family could go outside without finding a newsteep or imager
hiding behind a tree.
Crawford discovered that there was money to be found in the Weintraubs'
misfortune. At first the town held the line, but when entrepreneurs
from Bussard City moved in with gift shops, T-shirt concessions, tours,
and datachip booths for the tourists who were coming in larger and
larger numbers, the local business people first dithered, then wavered,
then decided unanimously that, if t here was commerce to be carried on,
the profits should not go to outsiders.
After four hundred and thirty-eight standard years of comparative
solitude, the town of Crawford received a farcaster terminex. No longer
did visitors have to suffer the twenty-minute flight from Bussard City.
The crowds grew.
On the day they moved it rained heavily and the streets were empty.
Rachel did not cry, but her eyes were very wide all day and she spoke in
subdued tones. It was ten days before
her sixth birthday." But, Daddy, why do we have to move?" 'We just do,
honey." 'But why?"
'It's something we have to do, little one. You'll like Hebron. There
are lots of parks there."
'But how come you never saidwe were going to move?" 'We did, sweetie.
You must have forgotten."
'But what about Gram and Grams and Uncle Richard
and Aunt Tetha and Uncle Saul and everybody?"
'They can come visit us any time."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'But what about Niki and Linna and my friends?"
Sol said nothing but carried the last of the luggage to the EMV. The
house was sold and empty; furniture had been sold or sent ahead to
Hebron. For a week there had been a steady stream of family and old
friends, college associates, and even some of the Reichs reed team who
had worked with Rachel for eighteen years, but now the street was empty.
Rain streaked the Perspex canopy of the old EMV and ran in complex
rivulets. The three of them sat in the vehicle for a moment, staring at
the house. The interior smelled of wet wool and wet hair.
Rachel clutched the teddy bear Sarai had resurrected from the attic six
months earlier. She said,' It's not fair."
'No,' agreed Sol." It's not fair."
Hebron was a desert world. Four centuries of terra-forming had made the
atmosphere breathable and a few million acres of land arable. The
creatures which had lived
there before were small and tough and infinitely wary, and so were the
creatures imported from Old Earth, including the human kind.
'Ahh,' gasped Sol the day they arrived in the sun-baked village of Dan
above the sun-baked ibbutz of K'far Shalom, 'what masochists we Jews
are. Twenty thousand surveyed worlds fit for our kind when the Hegira
began, and those schmucks came here."
But it was not masochism which brought either the first colonists or Sol
and his family. Hebron was mostly desert, but the fertile areas were
almost frighteningly fertile. Sinai University was respected throughout
the Web and its Med Center brought in wealthy patients and a healthy
income for the cooperative. Hebron had a single farcaster terminex in
New Jerusalem and allowed portals nowhere else. Belonging to neither
the Hegemony nor Protectorate, Hebron taxed travelers heavily for
farcaster privilege and allowed no tourists outside New Jerusalem. For
a Jew seeking privacy, it was perhaps the safest place in three hundred
worlds trod by man.
The kibbutz was more a cooperative by tradition than in operation. The
Weintraubs were welcomed to their own home - a modest place offering
sun-dried adobe, curves instead of right angles, and bare wood floo o,
b.".
also offering a view from the hill which showed an infinite expanse of
desert beyond the orange and olive groves. The sun seemed to dry up
everything, thought Sol, even .worries and bad dreams. The light was a
physical thing. In the evening their house glowed pink for an hour
after the sun had set.
Each morning Sol sat by his daughter's bed until she awoke. The first
minutes of her confusion were always painful to him, but he made sure
that he was the first thing Rachel saw each day. He held her while she
asked her questions.
'Where are we, Daddy?"
'In a wonderful place, little one. I'll tell you all about it over
breakfast."
'How did we get here?"
'By 'casting and flying and walking a bit,' he would say. 'It's not so
far away... but far enough to make it an adventure."
'But my bed's here... my stuffed animals... why don't I remember
coming?"
And Sol would hold her gently by the shoulders and look into her brown
eyes and say, 'You had an accident, Rachel. Remember in The Homesick
Toad where Terrence hits his head and forgets where he lives for a
few days? It was sort of like that."
'Am I better?"
'Yes,' Sol would say, 'you're all better now." And the house would fill
with the smell of breakfast and they would go out to the terrace where
Sarai waited.
Rachel had more playmates than ever. The kibbutz cooperative had a
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

school where she was always the welcomed visitor, greeted anew each day.
In the long afternoons the children played in the orchards and explored
along the cliffs.
Avner, Robert, and Ephraim, the Council elders, urged Sol to work on his
book. Hebron prided itself on the number of scholars, artists,
musicians, philosophers, writers and composers it sheltered as citizens
and long-term residents. The house, they pointed out, was a gift of the
state. Sol's pension, though small by We,b standards, was more than
adequate for their modest needs in K'far Shalom. To Sol's surprise,
however, he found that he enjoyed physical labor. Whether working in
the orchards or clearing stones in the unclaimed fields or repairing a
wall above the city, Sol found that his mind and spirit were freer than
they had been in many years. He discovered that he could wrestle with
Kierkegaard while he waited for mortar to dry and find new insights in
Kant and Vandeur while carefully checking the apples for worms. At the
age of seventy-three standard, Sol earned his first calluses.
In the evenings he would play with Rachel and then take a walk in the
foothills with Sarai as Judy or one of the other neighbor girls watched
their sleeping child.
One weekend they went away to New Jerusalem, just Sol
and Sarai, the first time they had been alone together for that long
since Rachel returned to live with them seventeen standard years before.
But everything was not idyllic. Too frequent were the nights when Sol
awoke alone and walked barefoot down the hall to see Sarai watching over
Rachel in her sleep.
And often at the end of a long day, bathing Rachel in the old ceramic
tub or tucking her in as the walls glowed pinkly, the child would say,
'I like it here, Daddy, but can we go home tomorrow?" And Sol would nod.
And after the good-night story, and the lullaby, and the good-night
kiss, sure that she was asleep, he would begin to tiptoe out of the room
only to hear the muffled · 'Later, alligator' from the blanketed form on
the bed, to which he had to reply ' 'While, crocodile." And lying in bed
himself, next to the softly breathing and possibly sleeping length of
the woman he loved, Sol would watch the strips of pale light from one or
both of Hebron's small moons move across the rough walls and he would
talk to God.
Sol had been talking to God for some months before he realized what he
was doing. The idea amused him. The dialogues were in no way prayers
but took the form of angry monologues which - just short of the point
where they became aliatribes- became vigorous arguments with himself.
Only not just with himself. Sol realized one day that the topics of the
heated debates were so profound, the stakes to be settled so serious,
the ground covered so broad, that the only person he could possibly be
berating for such shortcomings was God Himself.
Since the concept of a personal God, lying awake at night worrying about
human beings, intervening in the lives of individuals, always had been
totally absurd to Sol, the
thought of such dialogues made him doubt his sanity.
But the dialogues continue,'
Sol wanted to know how an 'ical system - much less a religion so
indomitable that it t,td survived every evil mankind could throw at it-
could flow from a command from God for a man to slaughter his on. It
did not matter to Sol that the command had been rescinded at the last
moment. It did not matter that the command was a test of obedience. In
fact, the idea that it was the obedience of Abraham which allowed him to
become the father of all the tribes of Israel was precisely what drove
Sol into fits of fury.
After fifty-five years of dedicating his life and work to the story of
ethical systems, Sol Weintraub had come to a single, unshakable
conclusion: any allegiance to a deity or concept or universal principle
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

which put obedience above decent behavior toward an innocent human being
was evil.
- So define 'innocent'?. came the vaguely amused, faintly
querulous voice which Sol associated with these arguments.
--A child is innocent, thought Sol. Isaac was.
Rachel is.
- 'Innocent' by the mere fact of being a child?
- Yes.
- And there is no situation where the blood of the innocent must
be shed for a greater cause?
- No, thought Sol. None.
- But the 'innocent' are not restricted to children, I presume.
- Sol hesitated, sensing a trap, trying to see where his
subconscious interlocutor was heading. He could not. No, he thought,
the 'innocent' include others as well as children.
- Such as Rachel? At age twenty-four? The innocent shouM not
be sacrificed at any age?
- That's right.
--Perhaps this is part of the lesson which Abraham needed to learn
before he could be
father to the blessed of the nations of the earth.
--What lesson? thought Sol. What lesson? But
the voice in his mind had faded and now there were only the sounds of
night birds outside and the soft breathing of his wife beside him.
Rachel could still read at age five. Sol had trouble remembering when
she had learned to read - it seemed
she always had been able to. 'Four standard,' said Sarai.
'It was early summer... three months after her birthday.
We were picnicking in the field above the college, Rachel was looking at
her Winnie-the-Pooh book, and
suddenly she said, "I hear a voice in my head"."
Sol remembered then.
He also remembered the joy he and Sarai had felt at the rapid
acquisition of new skills Rachel had shown at that age. He remembered
because now they were confronted with the reverse of that process.
'Dad,' said Rachel from where she lay on the floor of his study,
carefully coloring, 'how long has it been since Mom's birthday?"
'It was on Monday,' said Sol, preoccupied with something he was reading.
Sarai's birthday had not yet come but Rachel remembered it.
'I know. But how long has it been since then?"
'Today is Thursday,' said Sol. He was reading a long Talmudic treatise
on obedience.
'I know. But how many days?"
Sol put down. the hard copy. 'Can you name the days of the week?"
Barnard's World had used the old calendar.
'Sure,' said Rachel. 'Saturday, Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday..." 'You said Saturday
already." 'Yeah. But how many days ago?"
'Can you count from Monday to Thursday?"
Rachel frowned, moved her lips. She tried again, counting on her
fingers this time. 'Four days?"
'Good,' said Sol. 'Can you tell me what ten minus four is, kiddo?"
'What does minus mean?"
Sol forced himself to look at his papers again.
'Nothing,' he said. 'Something you'll learn at school."
'When we go home tomorrow?"
'Yes."
One morning when Rachel went off with Judy to play with the other
children - she was too young to attend school any longer - Sarai said:
'Sol, we have to take her to Hyperion."
Sol stared at her. 'What?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'You heard me. We can't wait until she is too young to walk... to
talk. Also, we're not getting any younger." Sarai barked a mirthless
laugh. 'That sounds strange, doesn't it? But we're not. The Poulsen
treatments will be wearing off in a year or two."
'Sarai, did you forget? The doctors all say that Rachel could not
survive cryogenic fugue. No one experiences FTL travel without fugue
state. The Hawking effect can drive one mad... or worse."
'It doesn't matter,' said Sarai. 'Rachel has to return to Hyperion."
'What on earth are you talking about?" said Sol, angered.
Sarai gripped his hand. 'Do you think you're the only
one who has had the dream?"
'Dream?" managed Sol.
She sighed and sat at the white kitchen table. Morning light struck the
plants on the sill like a yellow spotlight.
'The dark place,' she said. 'The red lights above. The voice. Telling
us to... telling us to take... to go to Hyperion. To make... an
offering."
Sol licked his lips but there was no moisture there.
His heart pounded. 'Whose name... whose name is called?"
Sarai looked at him strangely. 'Both of our names. If you weren't
there... in the dream with me... I could never have borne it all these
years."
Sol collapsed into his chair. He looked down at the strange hand and
forearm lying on the table. The knuckles of the hand were beginning to
enlarge with arthritis; the forearm was heavily veined, marked with
liver spots.
It was his hand, of course. He heard himself say: 'You never mentioned
it. Never said a word..."
This time Sarai's laugh was without bitterness. 'As if I had to! All
those times both of us coming awake in the dark. And you covered with
sweat. I knew from the first time that it was not merely a dream. We
have to go, Father. Go to Hyperion."
Sol moved the hand. It still did not feel a part of him.
'Why? For God's sake, why, Sarai? We can't... offer Rachel..."
'Of course not, Father. Haven't you thought about this? We have to go
to Hyperion . . . to wherever the dream tells us to go... and offer
ourselves instead."
'Offer ourselves,' repeated Sol. He wondered if he was having a heart
attack. His chest ached so terribly that he could not take in a breath.
He sat for a full minute in silence, convinced that if he attempted to
utter a word only a sob would escape. After another minute he said:
'How long have you . . . thought about this, Mother?"
'Do you mean known what we must do? A year. A little more. Just after
her fifth birthday."
'A year! Why haven't you said something?"
'I was waiting for you. To realize. To know."
Sol shook his head. The room seemed far away and slightly tilted. 'No.
I mean, it doesn't seem... I have to think, Mother." Sol watched as the
strange hand patted Sarai's familiar hand.
She nodded.
Sol spent three days and nights in the arid mountains, eating only the
thick-crusted bread he had brought and drinking from his condenser
therm.
Ten thousand times in the past twenty years he had wished that he could
take Rachel's illness; that if anyone had to suffer it should be the
father, not the child. Any parent would feel that way - did feel that
way every time his child lay injured or racked with fever. Surely it
could not be that simple.
In the heat of the third afternoon, as he lay half dozing in the shade
of a thin tablet of rock, Sol learned that it was not that simple.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Can that be Abraham's answer to God? That he would be the offering, not
Isaac?
It could have been Abraham's. It cannot be yours.
Why?
As if in answer, Sol had the fever-vision of naked adults filing toward
the ovens past armed men, mothers hiding their children under piles of
coats. He saw' men and women with flesh hanging in burned strips
carrying the dazed children from the ashes of what once had been a city.
Sol knew that these images were no dreams, were the very stuff of the
First and Second Holocausts, and in his understanding knew before the
voice spoke in his mind what the answer was. What it must be.
The parents have offered themselves. That sacrifice already has been
accepted. We are beyond that.
Then what? What!
Silence answered him. Sol stood in the full glare of the sun, almost
fell. A black bird wheeled overhead or in his vision. Sol shook his
fist at the gunmetal sky.
You use Nazis as your instruments. Madmen.
Monsters. You're a goddamn monster yourself.
mtqo.
The earth tilted and Sol fell on his side against sharp rocks. He
thought that it was not unlike leaning against a rough wall. A rock the
size of his fist burned his cheek.
The correct answer for Abraham was obedience, thought Sol. Ethically,
Abraham was a child himself. All men were at that time. The correct
answer for Abraham's children was to become adults and to offer
themselves instead.
What is the correct answer for us?
There was no answer. The ground and sky quit spinning.
After a while Sol rose shakily, rubbed the blood and grit from his
cheek, and walked down to the town in the valley below.
'No,' Sol told Sarai, 'we will not go to Hyperion. It is not the
correct solution."
'You would have us do nothing then." Sarai's lips were white with anger
but her voice was firmly in control.
'No. I would have us not to do the wrong thing." Sarai expelled her
breath in a hiss. She waved toward the window where their four-year-old
was visible playing with her toy horses in the backyard. 'Do you think
she has time for us to do the wrong thing... or anything · . .
indefinitely?"
'Sit down, Mother."
Sarai remained standing. There was the faintest sprinkling of spilled
sugar on the front of her tan cotton dress. Sol remembered the young
woman rising nude from the phosphorescent wake of the motile isle on
Maul-Covenant.
'We have to do something,' she said.
'We've seen over a hundred medical and scientific experts. She's been
tested, prodded, probed, and tortured by two dozen research centers.
l've been to the Shrike Church on every world in this Web; they won't
see me. Melio and the other Hyperion experts at Reichs say that the
Shrike Cult has nothing like the Merlin sickness in their doctrine and
the indigenies on Hyperion have no legends of the malady or clues to its
cure.
Research during the three years the team was on Hyperion showed nothing.
Now research there is illegal.
Access to the Time Tombs is granted only to the so-called pilgrims. Even
getting a travel visa to Hyperion is becoming almost impossible. And if
we take Rachel; the trip may kill her."
Sol paused for breath, touched Sarai's arm again.
'I'm sorry to repeat all this, Mother. But we have done something."
'Not enough,' said Sarai. 'What if we go as pilgrims?" Sol folded his
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

arms in frustration. 'The Church of the Shrike chooses its sacrificial
victims from thousands of volunteers. The Web is full of stupid,
depressed people.
Few of these return."
'Doesn't that prove something?" Sarai whispered quickly, urgently.
'Somebody or something is preying on these people."
'Bandits,' said Sol.
Sarai shook her head· 'The golem."
'You mean the Shrike."
'It's the golem,' insisted Sarai. 'The same one we see in the dream."
Sol was uneasy. 'l don't see a golem in the dream.
What golem?"
'The red eyes that watch,' said Sarai. 'It's the same
golem that Rachel heard that night in the Sphinx." 'How do you know that
she heard anything?"
'It's in the dream,' said Sarai. 'Before we enter the place where the
golem waits."
'We haven't dreamed the same dream,' said Sol.
'Mother, Mother ... why haven't you told me this before?"
'I thought I was going mad,' whispered Sarai.
Sol thought of his secret conversations with God and put his arm around
his wife.
'Oh, Sol,' she whispered against him, 'it hurts so much to watch. And
it's so lonely here."
Sol held her. They had tried to go home- home would always be Barnard's
World - half a dozen times to visit family and friends, but each time
the visits were ruined by an invasion of newsteeps and tourists. It was
no one's fault. News traveled almost instantaneously through the
megadatasphere of a hundred and sixty Web worlds. To scratch the
curiosity itch one had only to pass a universal card across a terminex
diskey and step through a farcaster. They had tried arriving
unannounced and traveling incognito but they were not spies and the
efforts were pitiful. Within twenty-four standard hours of their
reentry to the Web, they were besieged. Research institutes and large
med centers easily provided the security screen for such a visit, but
friends and family suffered. Rachel was NEWS.
'Perhaps we could invite Tetha and Richard again · . ." began Sarai.
'I have a better idea,' said Sol. 'Go yourself, Mother.
You want to see your sister but you also want to see, hear, and smell
home... watch a sunset where there are no iguanas... walk in the
fields. Go."
'Go? Just me? I couldn't be away from Rachel..." 'Nonsense,' said Sol.
'Twice in twenty years - almost forty if we count the good days before .
. . anyway, twice in twenty years doesn't constitute child neglect.
It's a wonder that this family can stand one another, we've been cooped
up together so long."
Sarai looked at the tabletop, lost in thought. 'But wouldn't the news
people find me?"
'I bet not,' said Sol. 'It's Rachel they seem to key on.
If they do hound you, come home. But I bet you can have a week visiting
everyone at home before the teeps catch on."
'A week,' gasped Sarai. 'I couldn't..."
'Of course you can. In fact, you must. It will give me a few days to
spend more time with Rachel and then when you come back refreshed I'll
spend some days selfishly working on the book."
'The Kierkegaard one?"
'No. Something l've been playing with called The Abraham Problem."
'Clumsy title,' said Sarai.
'It's a clumsy problem,' said Sol. 'Now go get packed.
We'll fly you to New Jerusalem tomorrow so you can 'cast out before the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Sabbath begins."
'I'11 think about it,' she said, sounding unconvinced.
'You'll pack,' said Sol, hugging her again. When the hug was completed
he had turned her away from the window so that she faced the hallway and
the bedroom door. 'Go. When you return from home VII have thought of
something we can do."
Sarai paused. 'Do you promise?"
Sol looked at her. 'I promise I will before time destroys everything. I
swear as Rachel's father that VIi find a way."
Sarai nodded, more relaxed than he had seen her in months. 'l'll go
pack,' she said.
When he and the child returned from New Jerusalem the next day, Sol went
out to water the meager lawn while Rachel played quietly inside. When
he came in, the pink glow of sunset infusing the walls with a sense of
sea warmth and quiet, Rachel was not in her bedroom or the other usual
places. 'Rachel?"
When there was no answer he checked the backyard again, the empty
street.
'Rachel!" Sol ran in to call the neighbors but suddenly there was the
slightest of sounds from the deep closet Sarai used for storage. Sol
quietly opened the screen panel.
Rachel sat beneath the hanging clothes, Sarai's antique pine box open
between her legs. The floor was littered with photos and holochips of
Rachel as a high school student, Rachel on the day she set off for
college, Rachel standing in front of a carved mountainside on Hyperion.
Rachel's research comlog lay whispering on the four-year-old Rachel's
lap. Sol's heart seized at the familiar sound of the confident young
woman's voice.
'Daddy,' said the child on the floor, her own voice a tiny frightened
echo of the voice on the comlog, 'you
never told me that I had a sister."
'You don't, little one."
Rachel frowned. 'Is this Mommy when she was . . .
not so big? Uh-uh, it can't be. Her name's Rachel, too, she says. How
can..."
'It's all right,' he said. 'VII explain . . ." Sol realized that the
phone was ringing in the living room, had been ringing. 'Just a moment,
sweetie. I'll be right back."
The holo that formed above the pit was of a man Sol had never seen
before. Sol did not activate his own imager, eager to get rid of the
caller. 'Yes?" he said abruptly.
'M. Weintraub? M. Weintraub who used to live on Barnard's World,
currently in the village of Dan on Hebron?"
Sol started to disconnect and then paused. Their access code was
untiled. Occasionally a salesperson called from New Jerusalem, but
offworld calls were rare. And, Sol suddenly realized, his stomach
feeling a stab of cold, it was past sundown on the Sabbath. Only
emergency holo calls were allowed.
'Yes?" said Sol.
'M. Weintraub,' said the man, staring blindly past Sol, 'there's been a
terrible accident."
When Rachel awoke her father was sitting by the side of her bed. He
looked tired. His eyes were red and his cheeks were gray with stubble
above the line of his beard.
'Good morning, Daddy."
'Good morning, sweetheart."
Rachel looked around and blinked. Some of her dolls and toys and things
were there, but the room was not hers. The light was different. The
air felt different. Her
daddy looked different. 'Where are we, Daddy?" 'We've gone on a trip,
little one." 'Where to?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'It doesn't matter right now. Hop out, sweetie. Your bath is ready and
then we have to get dressed."
A dark dress she had never seen before lay at the base of her bed.
Rachel looked at the dress and then back at her father. 'Daddy, what's
the matter? Where's Mommy?" ·
Sol rubbed his cheek. It was the third morning since the accident. It
was the day of the funeral. He had told her each of the preceding days
because he could not imagine lying to her then; it seemed the ultimate
betrayal- of both Sarai and Rachel. But hc did not think he could do it
again. 'There's been an accident, Rachel,' he said, his voice a pained
rasp. 'Mommy died.
We're going to go say goodbye to her today." Sol paused. He knew by now
that it would take a minute for the fact of her mother's death to become
real for Rachel.
On the first day he had not known if a four-year-old could truly
comprehend the concept of death. He knew now that Rachel could.
Later, as he held the sobbing child, Sol tried to understand the
accident he had described so briefly to her.
EMVs were by far the safest form of personal transportation mankind had
ever designed. Their lifters could fail but, even so, the residual
charge in the EM generators would allow the aircar to descend safely
from any altitude. The basic, failsafe design of an EMV's
collision-avoidance equipment had not changed in centuries. But
everything failed. In this case it was a joy-riding teenage couple in a
stolen EMV outside the traffic lanes, accelerating to Mach 1.5 with all
lights and transponders off to avoid detection, who defied all odds by
colliding with Aunt Tetha's ancient Vikken as it descended toward the
Bussard City Opera House landing apron. Besides Tetha and Sarai and the
teenagers, three others died in the crash as pieces of falling vehicles
cartwheeled into the crowded atrium of the Opera House
itself.
Sarai.
'Will we ever see Mommy again?" Rachel asked between sobs. She had
asked this each time.
'I don't know, sweetheart,' responded Sol truthfully.
The funeral was at the family cemetery in gates County on Barnard's
World. The press did not invade the graveyard itself but teeps hovered
beyond the trees and pressed against the black iron gate like an angry
storm tide.
Richard wanted Sol and Rachel to stay a few days, but Sol knew what pain
would be inflicted on the quiet farmer if the press continued their
assault. Instead, he hugged Richard, spoke briefly to the clamoring
reporters beyond the fence, and fled to Hebron with a stunned and silent
Rachel in tow.
Newsteeps followed to New Jerusalem and then attempted to follow to Dan,
but military police overrode their chartered EMVs, threw a dozen in jail
as an example, and revoked the farcaster visas of the rest.
In the evening Sol walked the ridge lines above the village while Judy
watched his sleeping child. He found that his dialogue with God was
audible now and he resisted the urge to shake his fist at the sky, to
shout obscenities, to throw stones. Instead he asked questions, always
ending with - Why?
There was no answer. Hebron's sun set behind distant ridges and the
rocks glowed as they gave up their heat. Sol sat on a boulder and
rubbed his temples with his palms.
Sarai.
They had lived a full life, even with the tragedy of Rachel's illness
hanging over them. It was too ironic that in Sarai's first hour of
relaxation with her sister... Sol moaned aloud.
The trap, of course, had been in their total absorption with Rache!'s
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

illness. Neither had been able to face the future beyond Racbe!'s...
death? Disappearance? The world had hinged upon each day their child
lived and no thought had been given to the chance of accident, the
perverse antilogic of a sharp-edged universe. Sol was sure that Sarai
had considered suicide just as he had, but neither of them could ever
have abandoned the other. Or Rachel. He had never considered the
possibility of being
alone with Rachel when...
Sarai!
At that moment Sol realized that the often angry dialogue which his
people had been having with God for so many millennia had not ended with
the death of Old Earth... nor with the new Diaspora... but continued
still. He and Rachel and Sarai had been part of it, were part of it
now. He let the pain come. It filled him with the sharp-edged agony of
resolve.
Sol stood on the ridge line and wept as darkness fell.
In the morning he was next to Rachel's bed when sunlight filled the
room.
'Good morning, Daddy." 'Good morning, sweetheart." 'Where are we,
Daddy?"
'We've gone on a trip. It's a pretty place."
'Where's Mommy?"
'She's with Aunt Tetha today."
'Will we see her tomorrow?"
'Yes,' said Sol. 'Now let's get you dressed and I'll make breakfast."
Sol began to petition the Church of the Shrike when Rachel turned three.
Travel to Hyperion was severely limited and access to the Time Tombs had
become all but impossible. Only the occasional Shrike Pilgrimage sent
people to that region.
Rachel was sad that she had to be away from her
mother on her birthday but the visit of several children from the
kibbutz distracted her a bit. Her big present was an illustrated book
of fairy tales which Sarai had picked out in New Jerusalem months
before.
S01 read some of the stories to Rachel before bedtime.
It had been seven months since she could read any of the words herself.
But she loved the stories- especially 'Sleeping Beauty' - and made her
father read it to her twice.
'I'm gonna show Mommy it when we get home,' she said through a yawn as
Sol turned out the overhead light.
'Good night, kiddo,' he said softly, pausing at the door.
'Hey, Daddy?"
'Yes?"
' 'Later, alligator."
' 'While, crocodile."
Rachel giggled into her pillow.
It was, Sol thought during the final two years, not so much different
from watching a loved one falling into old age. Only worse. A thousand
times worse.
Rachel's permanent teeth had fallen out over intervals between her
eighth and second birthdays. Baby teeth replaced them but by her
eighteenth month half of these had receded into her jaw.
Rachei's hair, always her one vanity, grew shorter and thinner. Her
face lost its familiar structure as baby fat obscured the cheekbones and
firm chin. Her coordination failed by degrees, noticeable at first in a
sudden clumsiness as she handled a fork or pencil. On the day she could
no longer walk, Sol put her down in her crib early and then went into
his study to get thoroughly and quietly drunk.
Language was the hardest for him. Her vocabulary loss was like the
burning of a bridge between them, the severing of a final line of hope.
It was sometime after her second birthday receded that Sol tucked her in
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

and, pausing in the doorway, said, ''Later, alligator."
'Huh?"
'See you later, alligator.
Rachel si,led.
'You say- "In a while, crocodile," ' said Sol. He
told her what an alligator and crocodile were.
'In a while, 'acadile,' giggled Rachel.
In the morning she had forgotten.
Sol took Rachel with him as he traveled the Web - no longer caring about
the newsteeps- petitioning the Shrike Church for pilgrimage rights,
lobbying the Senate for a visa and access to forbidden areas on
Hyperion, and visiting any research institute or clinic which might
offer a cure. Months were lost while more medics admitted failure. When
he fled back to Hebron, Rachel was fifteen standard months old; in the
ancient units used on Hebron she weighed twenty-five pounds and measured
thirty inches tall. She could no longer dress herself. Her vocabulary
consisted of twenty-five words, of which her favorites were 'Mommy' and
'Daddy."
SOl loved carrying his daughter. There were times when the curve of her
head against his cheek, her warmth against his chest, the smell of her
skin - all worked to allow him to forget the fierce injustice of it all.
At those times Sol would have been temporarily at peace with the
universe if only Sarai had been there. As it was, there were temporary
cease-fires in his angry dialogue with a God in Whom he did not believe.
What possible reason can there be for this?
What reason has been visible for all of the forms of pain suffered by
humankind?
Precisely, thought Sol, wondering if he had just won a point for the
first time. He doubted it.
The fact of a thing not being visible does not mean it does not exist.
That's clumsy. It shouldn't take three negatives to make a statement.
Especially to state something as nonprofound as that.
- Precisely, Sol. You're beginning to get the drift of all
this.
- What?
There was no answer to his thoughts. Sol lay in his house and listened
to the desert wind blow.
Rachel's last word was 'Mamma,' uttered when she was just over five
months old.
She awoke in her crib and did not - could not - ask where she was. Her
world was one of mealtimes, naps, and toys. Sometimes when she cried
Sol wondered if she was crying for her mother.
Sol shopped in the small stores in Dan, taking the infant with him as he
selected diapers, nursing paks, and the occasional new toy.
The week before Sol left for Tau Ceti Center, Ephraim and the two other
elders came to talk. It was evening and the fading light glowed on
Ephraim's bald scalp. 'Sol, we're worried about you. The next few
weeks will be hard. The women want to help. We want to help."
Sol laid his hand on the older man's forearm. 'It's appreciated,
Ephraim. Everything the last few years is appreciated. This is our
home now, too. $arai would have... would have wanted me to say thank
you. But we're leaving on Sunday. Rachel is going to get better."
The three men on the long bench looked at one another.
Avner said, 'They've found a cure?"
'No,' said Sol, 'but I've found a reason to hope." 'Hope is good,'
Robert said in cautious tones.
Sol grinned, his teeth white against the gray of his beard. 'It had
better be,' he said. 'Sometimes it is all we're given."
The studio holo camera zoomed in for a close-up of Rachel as the infant
sat cradled in Sol's arm on the set of 'Common Talk." 'So you're
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

saying,' said Devon Whiteshire, the show's host and the third-best-known
face in the Web datasphere, 'that the Shrike Church's refusal to allow
you to return to the Time Tombs...
and the Hegemony's tardiness in processing a visa...
these things will doom your child to this... extinction?"
'Precisely,' said Sol. 'The voyage to Hyperion cannot be made in under
six weeks. Rachel is now twelve weeks old.
Any further delay by either the Shrike Church or the Web bureaucracy
will kill this child."
The studio audience stirred. Devon Whiteshire turned toward the nearest
imaging remote. His craggy, friendly visage filled the monitor frame.
'This man doesn't know if he can save his child,' said Whiteshire, his
voice powerful with subtle feeling, 'but all he asks is a chance. Do
you think he... and the baby... deserve one? If so, access your
planetary representatives and your nearest Church of the Shrike temple.
The number of your nearest temple should be appearing now." He turned
back to Sol. 'We wish you luck, M. Weintraub. And' - Whiteshire's
large hand touched Rache!'s cheek - 'we wish you Godspeed, our young
friend."
The monitor image held on Rachel until it faded to black.
The Hawking effect caused nausea, vertigo, headache, and hallucinations.
The first leg of the voyage was the ten-day transit to Parvati on the
Hegemony torchship HS Intrepid.
Sol held Rachel and endured. They were the only people fully conscious
aboard the warship. At first Rachel cried, but after some hours she lay
quietly in SOI's arms and stared up at him with large, dark eyes. Sol
remembered the day she was born - the medics had taken tbe infant from
atop Sarai's warm stomach and handed her to Sol.
Rachel's dark hair was not much shorter then, her gaze no less profound.
Eventually they slept from sheer exhaustion.
Sol dreamed that he was wandering through a structure with columns the
size of redwood trees and a ceiling lost to sight far above him. Red
light bathed cool emptiness. Sol was surprised to find that he still
carried Rachel in his arms.
Rachel as a child had never been in his dream before. The infant looked
up at him and Sol felt the contact of her consciousness as surely as if
she had spoken aloud.
Suddenly a different voice, immense and cold, echoed through the void:
'Sol! Take your daughter, your only daughter Rachel, Whom you love, and
go to the world called Hyperion and offer her there as a burnt offering
at one of the places of which I shall tell you."
Sol hesitated and looked back to Rachel. The baby's eyes were deep and
luminous as she looked up at her father. Sol felt the unspoken yes.
Holding her tightly, he stepped forward into the darkness and raised his
voice against the silence:
'Listen! There will be no more offerings, neither child nor parent.
There will be no more sacrifices for anyone other than our fellow human.
The time of obedience and atonement is past."
Sol listened. He could feel the pounding of his heart and Rachel's
warmth against his arm. From somewhere high above there came the cold
sound of wind through unseen fissures. Sol cupped his hand to his mouth
and shouted:
'That's all! Now either leave us alone or join us as a father rather
than a receiver of sacrifices. You have the choice of Abraham!'
Rachel stirred in his arms as a rumble grew out of the stone floor.
Columns vibrated. The red gloom deepened and then winked out, leaving
only darkness.
From far away there came the boom of huge footsteps.
Sol hugged Rachel to him as a violent wind roared past.
There was a glimmer of light as both he and Rachel awoke on the HS
Intrepid outward bound for Parvati to transfer to the treeship
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Yggdrasill for the planet Hyperion. Sol smiled at his seven-week-old
daughter.
She smiled back.
It was her last and her first smile.
The main cabin of the windwagon was silent when the old scholar finished
his story. Sol cleared his throat and took a drink of water from a
crystal goblet. Rachel slept on in the makeshift cradle of the open
drawer. The windwagon rocked gently on its way, the rumble of the great
wheel and the hum of the main gyroscope a lu!ling background noise.
'My God,' Brawne Lamia said softly. She started to speak again and then
merely shook her head.
Martin Silenus closed his eyes and said:
'Considering that, all hatred driven hence, The soul recovers radical
innocence
And learns at last that it is self-delighting, Self-appeasing,
seif-affrighting,
And that its own sweet will is Heaven's will; She can, though every face
will scowl
And every windy quarter howl
Or every bellows burst, be happy still."
Sol Weintraub asked, 'William Butler Yeats?" Silenus nodded. ' "A
Prayer for My Daughter." '
'I think l'm going up on deck for a breath of air before turning in,'
said the Consul. 'Would anyone care to join me?"
Everyone did. The breeze of their passage was refreshing as the group
stood on the quarterdeck and watched the darkened Sea of Grass rumble
by. The sky was a great, star-splashed bowl above them, scarred by
meteor trails. The sails and rigging creaked with a sound as old as
human travel.
'I think we should post guards tonight,' said Colonel Kassad. 'One
person on watch while the others sleep.
Two-hours intervals."
'I agree,' said the Consul. 'l'il take the first watch." 'In the
morning..." began Kassad.
'Look!" cried Father Hoyt.
They followed his pointing arm. Between the blaze of constellations,
colored fireballs flared- green, violet,
orange, green again- illuminating the great plain of grass around them
like flashes of heat lightning. The stars and meteor trails paled to
insignificance beside the sudden display.
'Explosions?" ventured the priest.
'Space battle,' said Kassad. 'Cislunar. Fusion weapons." He went below
quickly.
'The Tree,' said l-let Masteen, pointing to a speck of light which moved
among the explosions like an ember floating through a fireworks display.
Kassad returned with his powered binoculars and handed them around.
'Ousters?" asked Lamia. 'Is it the invasion?" 'Ousters, almost
certainly,' said Kassad. 'But almost as certainly just a scouting raid.
See the clusters? Those are Hegemony missiles being exploded by the
Ouster ramscouts' countermeasures."
The binoculars came to the Consul. The flashes were quite clear now, an
expanding cumulus of flame. He could see the speck and long blue tail
of at least two scoutships fleeing from the Hegemony pursuers.
'I don't think..." began Kassad and then stopped as the ship and sails
and Sea of Grass glowed bright orange in reflected glare.
'Dear Christ,' whispered Father Hoyt. 'They've hit the treeship."
The Consult swept the glass left. The growing nimbus of flames could be
seen with the naked eye but in the binoculars the kilometer-long trunk
and branch array of the Yggdrasiil was visible for an instant as it
burned and flared, long tendrils of flame arcing away into space as the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

containment fields failed and the oxygen burned.
The orange cloud pulsed, faded, and fell back on itself as the trunk
became visible for a final second even as it glowed and broke up like
the last long ember in a dying fire. Nothing could have survived. The
treeship Yggdrasill with its crew and complement of clones and
semisentient erg drivers was dead.
The Consul turned toward Het Masteen and belatedly held out the
binoculars. 'I'm so ... sorry,' he whispered.
The tall Templar did not take the glasses. Slowly he lowered his gaze
from the skies, pulled forward his cowl, and went below without a word.
The death of the treeship was the final explosion.
When ten minutes had passed and no more flares had disturbed the night,
Brawne Lamia spoke. 'Do you think they got them?"
'The Ousters?" said Kassad. 'Probably not. The scoutships are built
for speed and defense. They're light-minutes away by now."
'Did they go after the treeship on purpose?" asked Silenus. The poet
sounded very sober.
'I think not,' said Kassad. 'Merely a target of opportunity."
'Target of opportunity,' echoed Sol Weintraub. The scholar shook his
head. 'I'm going to get a few hours' sleep before sunrise."
One by one the others went below. When only Kassad and the Consul were
left on deck, the Consul said, 'Where should I stand watch?"
'Make a circuit,' said the Colonel. 'From the main corridor at the base
of the ladder you can see all of the stateroom doors and the entrance to
the mess and galley.
Come above and check the gangway and decks. Keep the
lanterns lit. Do you have a weapon?"
The Consul shook his head.
Kassad handed over his deathwand. 'It's on tight beam - about half a
meter at ten meters' range. Don't use it unless you're sure that
there's an intruder.
The rough plate that slides forward is the safety.
It's on."
The Consul nodded, making sure that his finger stayed away from the
firing stud.
'VII relieve you in two hours,' said Kassad. He checked his comlog.
'It'll be sunrise before my watch is over." Kassad looked at the sky as
if expecting the Yggdrasill to reappear and continue its firefly path
across the sky. Only the stars glowed back. On the northeastern
horizon a moving mass of black promised a storm.
Kassad shook his head. 'A waste,' he said and went below.
The Consul stood there awhile and listened to the wind in the canvas,
the creek of rigging, and the rumble of the wheel. After a while he
went to the railing and stared at darkness while he thought.
FIVE
Sunrise over the Sea of Grass was a thing of beauty. The Consul watched
from the highest point on the aft deck.
After his watch he had tried to sleep, given it up, and come up onto
deck to watch the night fade into day. The stormfront had covered the
sky with low clouds and the rising sun lit the world with brilliant gold
reflected from above and below. The windwagon's sails and lines and
weathered planks glowed in the brief benediction of light in the few
minutes before the sun was blocked by the ceiling of clouds and color
flowed out of the world once again. The wind which followed this
curtain closing was chill, as if it had blown down from the snowy peaks
of the Bridle Range just visible as a dark blur on the northeastern
horizon.
Brawne Lamia and Martin Silenus joined the Consul on the aft deck, each
nursing a cup of coffee from the galley. The wind whipped and tugged at
the rigging.
Brawne Lamia's thick mass of curls fluttered around her face like a dark
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

nimbus.
'Morning,' muttered Silenus, squinting out over his coffee cup at the
wind-rippled Sea of Grass.
'Good morning,' replied the Consul, amazed at how alert and refreshed he
felt for not having slept at all the night before. 'We have a headwind,
but the wagon still seems to be making decent time. We'll definitely be
to the mountains before nightfall."
'Hrrgnn,' commented Silenus and buried his nose in the coffee cup.
'1 didn't sleep at all last night,' said Brawne Lamia, 'just for
thinking about M. Weintraub's story. '
'I don't think..." began the poet and then broke off
as Weintraub came onto deck, his baby peering over the lip of an infant
carrier sling on his chest.
'Good morning, everyone,' said Weintraub, looking around and taking a
deep breath. 'Mmm, brisk, isn't it?"
'Fucking freezing,' said Silenus. 'North of the mountains it'll be even
worse."
'I think l'll go down to get a jacket,' said Lamia, but before she could
move there came a single shrill cry from the deck below.
'Blood!'
There was, indeed, blood everywhere. Het Masteen's cabin was strangely
neat - bed unslept in, travel trunk and other boxes stacked precisely in
one corner, robe folded over a chair - except for the blood which
covered great sections of the deck, bulkhead, and overhead. The six
pilgrims crowded just inside the entrance, reluctant to go farther in.
'I was passing on my way to the upper deck,' said Father Hoyt, his voice
a strange monotone. 'The door was slightly ajar. I caught a glimpse
of... the blood on the wall."
'Is it blood?" demanded Martin Silenus.
Brawn. Lamia stepped into the room, ran a hand through a thick smear on
the bulkhead, and raised her fingers to her lips. 'It's blood." She
looked around, walked to the wardrobe, looked briefly among the empty
shelves and hangers, and then went to the small porthole.
It was latched and bolted from the inside.
Lenar Hoyt looked more ill than usual and staggered to a chair. 'Is he
dead then?"
'We don't know a damn thing except that Captain Masteen isn't in his
room and a lot of blood/s,' said Lamia. She wiped her hand on her pant
leg. 'The thing to do now is search the ship thoroughly."
'Precisely,' said Colonel Kassad, 'and if we do not find the Captain?"
Brawne Lamia opened the porthole. Fresh air dissipated the
slaughterhouse smell of blood and brought in the rumble of the wheel and
the rustle of grass under the hull. 'If we don't find Captain Masteen,'
she
said, 'then we assume that he either left the ship under his own will or
was taken off."
'But the blood..." began Father Hoyt.
'Doesn't prove anything,' finished Kassad.
'M. Lamia's correct. We don't know Masteen's blood type or genotype.
Did anyone see or hear anything?"
There was silence except for negative grunts and the shaking of heads.
Martin Silenus looked around. 'Don't you people recognize the work of
our friend the Shrike when you see it?"
'We don't know that,' snapped Lamia. 'Maybe someone wanted us to think
that it was the Shrike's doing."
'That doesn't make sense,' said Hoyt, still gasping for air.
'Nonetheless,' said Lamia, 'we'll search in twos. Who has weapons
besides myself?."
'I do,' said Colonel Kassad. 'I have extras if needed." 'No,' said
Hoyt.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The poet shook his head.
Sol Weintraub had returned to the corridor with his child. Now he
looked in again. 'I have nothing,' he said.
'No,' said the Consul. He had returned the deathwand to Kassad when his
shift ended two hours before first light.
'All right,' said Lamia, 'the priest will come with me on the lower
deck. Silenus, go with the Colonel. Search the mid-deck. M.
Weintraub, you and the Consul check everything above. Look for anything
out of the ordinary.
Any sign of struggle."
'One question,' said Silenus.
'What?"
'Who the hell elected you queen of the prom?"
'I'm a private investigator,' said Lamia, leveling her gaze on the poet.
Martin Silenus shrugged. 'Hoyt here is a priest of some forgotten
religion. That doesn't mean we have to genuflect when he says Mass."
'All right,' sighed Brawne Lamia. 'I'll give you a better reason." The
woman moved so fast that the Consul
almost missed the action in a blink. One second she was standing by the
open port and in the next she was half* way across the stateroom,
lifting Martin Silenus off the deck with one arm, her massive hand
around the poet's thin neck. 'How about,' she said, 'that you do the
logical
thing because it's the logical thing to do?"
'Gkkrgghh,' managed Martin Silenus.
'Good,' said Lamia without emotion and dropped the poet to the deck.
Silenus staggered a meter and almost sat on Father Hoyt.
'Here,' said Kassad, returning with two small neural stunners. He
handed one to Sol Weintraub. 'What do you have?" Kassad asked Lamia.
The woman reached into a pocket of her loose tunic and produced an
ancient pistol.
Kassad looked at the relic for a moment and then nodded. 'Stay with
your partner,' he said. 'Don't shoot at anything unless it's positively
identified and unquestionably threatening."
'That describes the bitch I plan to shoot,' said Silenus, still
massaging his throat.
Brawne Lamia took a half step toward the poet.
Fedmahn Kassad said, 'Shut up. Let's get this over with." Silenus
followed the Colonel out of the stateroom.
Sol Weintraub approached the Consul, handed him the stunner. 'I don't
want to hold this thing with Rachel.
Shall we go up?"
The Consul took the weapon and nodded.
The windwagon held no further sign of Templar Voice of the Tree Het
Masteen. After an hour of searching, the group met in the stateroom of
the missing man. The blood there seemed darker and drier.
'Is there a chance that we missed something?" said Father Hoyt. 'Secret
passages? Hidden compartments?"
'There's a chance,' said Kassad, 'but l swept the ship with heat and
motion sensors. If there's anything else on board larger than a mouse,
I can't find it."
'If you had these sensors,' said Silenus, 'why the fuck did you have us
crawling through bilge and byways for an hour?"
'Because the right equipment or apparel can hide a man from a
heat-'n'-beat search."
'So, in answer to my question,' said Hoyt, pausing a second as a visible
wave of pain passed through him, 'with the right equipment or apparel,
Captain Masteen might be hiding in a secret compartment somewhere."
'Possible but improbable,' said Brawne Lamia. 'My guess is that he's no
longer aboard."
'The Shrike,' said Martin Silenus in a disgusted tone.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

It was not a question.
'Perhaps,' said Lamia. 'Colonel, you and the Consul were on watch
through those four hours. Are you sure
that you heard and saw nothing?"
Both men nodded.
'The ship was quiet,' said Kassad. 'I would have heard a struggle even
before I went on watch."
'And I didn't sleep after my watch,' said the Consul.
'My room shared a bulkhead with Masteen's. I heard nothing."
'Well,' said Silenus, 'we've heard from the two men who were creeping
around in the dark with weapons when the poor shit was killed. They say
they're innocent.
Next case! '
'If Masteen was killed,' said Kassad, 'it was with no deathwand. No
silent modern weapon I know throws that much blood around. There were
no gunshots heard -no bullet holes found- so I presume M. Lamia's
automatic pistol is not suspect. If this is Captain Masteen's blood,
then I would guess an edged weapon was used."
'The Shrike/s an edged weapon,' said Martin Silenus.
Lamia moved to the small stack of luggage. 'Debating isn't going to
solve anything. Let's see if there's anything in Masteen's belongings."
Father Hoyt raised a hesitant hand. 'That's... well, private, isn't
it? I don't think we have the right."
Brawne Lamia crossed her arms. 'Look, Father, if Masteen's dead, it
doesn't matter to him. If he's still alive, looking through this stuff
might give us some idea where he was taken. Either way, we have to try
to find a clue."
Hoyt looked dubious but nodded. In the end, there was little invasion
of privacy. Masteen's first trunk held only a few changes of linen and
a copy of Muir's Book of Life. The second bag held a hundred separately
wrapped seedlings, flash-dried and nestled in moist soil.
'Templars must plant at least a hundred offspring of the Eternal Tree on
whatever. world they visit,' explained the Consul. 'The shoots rarely
take, but it's a ritual."
Browne Lamia moved toward the large metal box which had sat at the
bottom of the pile.
'Don't touch that!" snapped the Consul.
'Why not?"
'It's a MObius cube,' responded Colonel Kassad for the Consul. 'A
carbon-carbon-shell set around a zero impedance containment field folded
back on itself."
'So?" said Lamia. 'MObius cubes seal artifacts and stuff in. They
don't explode or anything."
'No,' agreed the Consul, 'but what they contain may explode. May
already have exploded, for that matter."
'A cube that size could hold a kiloton nuclear explosion in check as
long as it was boxed during the nanosecond of ignition,' added Fedmahn
Kassad.
Lamia scowled at the trunk. 'Then how do we know that something in
there didn't kill Masteen?"
Kassad pointed to a faintly glowing green strip along the trunk's only
seam. 'It's sealed. Once unsealed, a MObius cube has to be reactivated
at a place where containment fields can be generated. Whatever's in
there didn't harm Captain Masteen."
'So there's no way to tell?" mused Lamia.
'I have a good guess,' said the Consul.
The others looked at him. Rachel began to cry and Sol pulled a heating
strip on a nursing pak.
'Remember,' said the Consul, 'at Edge yesterday when M. Masteen made a
big deal out of the cube? He
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

talked about it as if it were a secret weapon?"
'A weapon?" said Lamia.
'Of course!" Kassad said suddenly. 'An erg!'
'Erg?" Martin Silenus stared at the small crate. 'l thought ergs were
those forcefield critters that Templars use on their treeships."
'They are,' said the Consul. 'The things were found about three
centuries ago living on asteroids around Aldebaran. Bodies about as big
as a cat's spine, mostly a piezoelectric nervous system sheathed in
silicon gristle, but they feed on... and manipulate... forcefields as
large as those generated by small spinships."
'So how do you get all that into such a little box?" asked Silenus,
staring at the MObius cube. 'Mirrors?"
'In a sense,' said Kassad. 'The thing's field would be damped ...
neither starving nor feeding. Rather like cryogenic fugue for us. Plus
this must be a small one. A cub, so to speak."
Lamia ran her hand along the metal sheath. 'Templars control these
things? Communicate with them?"
'Yes,' said Kassad. 'No one is quite sure how. It's one of the
Brotherhood secrets. But Het Masteen must have been confident that the
erg would help him with..."
'The Shrike,' finished Martin Silenus. 'The Templar thought that this
energy imp would be his secret weapon when he faced the Lord of Pain."
The poet laughed.
Father Hoyt cleared his throat. 'The Church has accepted the Hegemony's
ruling that... these creatures ·.. ergs... are not sentient beings...
and thus not candidates for salvation."
'Oh, they're sentient, all right, Father,' said the Consul.
'They perceive things far better than we could ever imagine. But if you
meant intelligent... self-aware...
then you're dealing with something along the lines of a smart
grasshopper. Are grasshoppers candidates for salvation?"
Hoyt said nothing. Brawne Lamia said, 'Well, evidently Captain Masteen
thought this thing was going to be his salvation. Something went
wrong." She looked around at the bloodstained bulkheads and at the
drying stains on the deck. 'Let's get out of here."
The windwagon tacked into increasingly strong winds as the storm
approached from the northeast. Ragged banners of clouds raced white
beneath the low, gray ceiling of stormfront. Grasses whipped and bent
under gusts of cold wind. Ripples of lightning illuminated the horizon
and were followed by rolls of thunder sounding like warning shots across
the windwagon's bow. The pilgrims watched in silence until the first
icy raindrops drove them below to the large stateroom in the stern.
'This was in his robe pocket,' said Brawne Lamia, holding up a slip of
paper with the number $ on it.
'So Masteen would have told his story next,' muttered the Consul.
Martin Silenus tilted his chair until his back touched the tall windows.
Storm light made his satyr's features appear slightly demonic. 'There's
another possibility,' he said. 'Perhaps someone who hasn't spoken yet
had the fifth spot and killed the Templar to trade places."
Lamia stared at the poet. 'That would have to be the
Consul or me,' she said, her voice flat.
Silenus shrugged.
Brawne Lamia pulled another piece of paper from her tunic. 'I have
number six. What would I have achieved? I go next anyway."
'Then perhaps it's what Masteen would have said that needed to be
silenced,' said the poet. He shrugged again.
'Personally, I think the Shrike has begun harvesting us.
Why did we think we'd be allowed to get to the Tombs when the thing's
been slaughtering people halfway from here to Keats?"
'This is different,' said Sol Weintraub. 'This is the
Shrike Pilgrimage."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

,So?,
In the silence that followed, the Consul walked to the windows.
Wind-driven torrents of rain obscured the Sea and rattled the leaded
panes. The wagon creaked and leaned heavily to starboard as it began
another leg of its tack.
'M. Lamia,' asked Colonel Kassad, 'do you want to tell your story now?"
Lamia folded her arms and looked at the rain-streaked glass. 'No. Let's
wait until we get off this damned ship. It stinks of death."
The windwagon reached the port of Pilgrims' Rest in midafternoon but the
storm and tired light made it feel
like late evening to the weary passengers. The Consul had expected
representatives from the Shrike Temple to meet them here at the
beginning of the penultimate stage of their journey but Pilgrims' Rest
appeared to the Consul to be as empty as Edge had been.
The approach to the foothills and the first sight of the Bridle Range
was as exciting as any !andfall and brought all six of the would-be
pilgrims on deck despite the cold rain which continued to fall. The
foothills were sere and sensuous, their brown curves and sudden
upthrustings contrasting strongly with the verdant monochrome of the Sea
of Grass. The nine-thousand-meter peaks beyond were only hinted at by
gray and white planes soon intersected by low clouds, but even so
truncated were powerful to behold. The snow line came down to a point
just above the collection of burned-out hovels and cheap hotels which
had been Pilgrims' Rest.
'If they destroyed the tramway, we're finished,' muttered the Consul.
The thought of it, forbidden until now, made his stomach turn over.
'I see the first five towers,' said Colonel Kassad, using
his powered glasses. 'They seem intact."
'Any sign of a car?"
'No... wait, yes. There's one in the gate at the station platform."
'Any moving?" asked Martin Silenus, who obviously understood how
desperate their situation would be if the
tramway was not intact.
'No."
The Consul shook his head. Even in the worst weather with no
passengers, the cars had been kept moving to keep the great cables
flexed and free of ice.
The six of them had their luggage on deck even before the windwagon
reefed its sails and extended a gangplank.
Each now wore a heavy coat against the elements - Kassad in FORCE-issue
thermouflage cape, Brawne Lamia in a long garment called a trenchcoat
for reasons long forgotten, Martin Silenus in thick furs which rippled
now sable, now gray with the vagaries of wind, Father Hoyt in long black
which made him more of a scarecrow figure than ever, Sol Weintraub in a
thick
goosedown jacket which covered him and the child, and the Consul in the
thinning but serviceable greatcoat his wife had given him some decades
before.
'What about Captain Masteen's things?" asked Sol as they stood at the
head of the gangplank. Kassad had gone ahead to reconnoiter the
village.
'I brought them up,' said Lamia. 'We'll take them with us."
'It doesn't seem right somehow,' said Father Hoyt.
'Just going on, I mean. There should be some... service.
Some recognition that a man has died."
'May have died,' reminded Lamia, easily lifting a forty-kilo backpack
with one hand.
Hoyt looked incredulous. 'Do you really believe that M. Masteen might
be alive?"
'No,' said Lamia. Snowflakes settled on her black hair.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Kassad waved to them from the end of the dock and they carried their
luggage off the silent windwagon. No one looked back.
'Empty?" called Lamia as they approached the Colonel.
The tall man's cloak was still fading from its gray
and black chameleon mode.
'Empty." 'Bodies?"
'No,' said Kassad. He turned toward Sol and the Con sul. 'Did you get
the things from the galley?"
Both men nodded.
'What things?" asked Silenus.
'A week's worth of food,' said Kassad, turning to look up the hill
toward the tramway station. For the first time the Consul noticed the
long assault weapon in the crook of the Colonel's arm, barely visible
under the cloak.
'We're not sure if there are any provisions beyond this point."
Will we be alive a week from now? thought the Consul.
He said nothing.
They ferried the gear to the station in two trips. Wind whistled
through the open windows and shattered domes of the dark buildings. On
the second trip, the Consul carried one end of Masteen's M6bius cube
while Lunar Hoyt puffed and panted under the other end.
'Why are we taking the erg thing with us?" gasped Hoyt as they reached
the base of the metal stairway leading to the station. Rust streaked
and spotted the platform like orange lichen.
'I don't know,' said the Consul, gasping for breath himself.
From the terminal platform they could see far out over the Sea of Grass.
The windwagon sat where they had left it, sails reefed, a dark and
lifeless thing. Snow squalls moved across the prairie and gave the
illusion of whitecaps on the numberless stalks of high grass.
'Get the material aboard,' called Kassad. 'I'11 see if the running gear
can be reset from the operator's cabin up there."
'Isn't it automatic?" asked Martin Silenus, his small head almost lost
in thick furs. 'Like the windwagon?"
'I don't think so,' said Kassad. 'Go on, I'll see if I can get it
started up."
'What if it leaves without you?" called Lamia at the Colonel's
retreating back.
'It won't."
The interior of the tramcar was cold and bare except for metal benches
in the forward compartment and a dozen rough bunks in the smaller, rear
area. The car was big -at least eight meters long by five wide. The
rear compartment was partitioned from the front cabin by a thin metal
bulkhead with an opening but no door. A small commode took up a
closet-sized corner of this aft compartment.
Windows rising from waist height to the roof-line lined the forward
compartment.
The pilgrims heaped their luggage in the center of the wide floor and
stomped around, waved their arms, or otherwise worked to stay warm.
Martin Silenus lay full length on one of the benches, with only his feet
and the top of his head emerging from fur. '1 forgot,' he said, 'how
the fuck do you turn on the heat in this thing?"
The Consul glanced at the dark lighting panels. 'It's electrical. It'll
come on when the Colonel gets us moving."
'If the Colonel gets us moving,' said Silenus.
Sol Weintraub had changed Rachei's diaper. Now he bundled her up again
in an infant's thermsuit and rocked her in his arms. 'Obviously l've
never been here before,'
he said. 'Both of you gentlemen have?"
'Yeah,' said the poet.
'No,' said the Consul. 'But I've seen pictures of the tramway."
'Kassad said he returned to Keats once this way,' called Brawne Lamia
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

from the other room.
'I think ..." began Sol Weintraub and was interrupted by a great
grinding of gears and a wild lurch as the long car rocked sickeningly
and then swung forward under the suddenly moving cable. Everyone rushed
to the window on the platform side.
Kassad had thrown his gear aboard before climbing the long ladder to the
operator's cabin. Now he appeared in the cabin's doorway, slid down the
long ladder, and ran toward the car. The car was already passing beyond
the loading area of the platform.
'He isn't going to make it,' whispered Father Hoyt.
Kassad sprinted the last ten meters with legs that looked impossibly
long, a cartoon stick figure of a mall
The tramcar slid out of the loading notch, swung free of the station.
Space opened between the car and the station. It was eight meters to
the rocks below. The platform deck was streaked with ice. Kassad ran
full speed ahead even as the car pulled away.
'Come on!" screamed Brawne Lamia. The others picked up the cry.
The Consul looked up at sheaths of ice cracking and dropping away from
the cable as the tramcar moved up and forward. He looked back. There
was too much space. Kassad could never make it.
Fedmahn Kassad was moving at an incredible speed when he reached the
edge of the platform. The Consul was reminded for the second time of
the Old Earth jaguar he had seen in a Lusus zoo. He half expected to
see the Colone!'s feet slip on a patch of ice, the long legs flying out
horizontal, the man failing silently to the snowy boulders below.
Instead, Kassad seemed to fly for
an endless moment, long arms extended, cape flying out behind. He
disappeared behind the car.
There came a thud, followed by a long minute when no one spoke or moved.
They were forty meters high now, climbing toward the first tower. A
second later Kassad became visible at the corner of the car, pulling
himself along a series of icy niches and handholds in the metal.
Brawne Lamia flung open the cabin door. Ten hands helped pull Kassad
inside.
'Thank God,' said Father Hoyt.
The Colonel took a deep breath and smiled grimly.
'There was a dead man's brake. I had to rig the lever with a sandbag. I
didn't want to bring the car back for a second try."
Martin Silenus pointed to the rapidly approaching support tower and the
ceiling of clouds just beyond. The cable stretched upward into
oblivion. 'I guess we're
crossing the mountains now whether we want to or not." 'How long to make
the crossing?" asked Hoyt.
'Twelve hours. A little less perhaps. Sometimes the operators would
stop the cars if the wind rose too high or the ice got too bad."
'We won't be stopping on this trip,' said Kassad.
'Unless the cable's breached somewhere,' said the poet. 'Or we hit a
snag."
'Shut up,' said Lamia. 'Who's interested in heating some dinner?"
'Look,' said the Consul.
They moved to the forward windows. The tram rose a hundred meters above
the last brown curve of foothills.
Kilometers below and behind they caught a final glimpse of the station,
the haunted hovels of Pilgrims' Rest, and the motionless windwagon.
Then snow and thick cloud enveloped them.
The tramcar had no real cooking facilities but the aft bulkhead offered
a cold box and a microwave for reheating. Lamia and Weintraub combined
various meats and vegetables from the windwagon's galley to produce a
passable stew. Martin Silenus had brought along wine bottles from the
Benares and the windwagon
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

and he chose a Hyperion burgundy to go with the stew.
They were nearly finished with their dinner when the gloom pressing
against the windows lightened and then lifted altogether. The Consul
turned on his bench to see the sun suddenly reappear, filling the
tramcar with a transcendent golden light.
There was a collective sigh from the group. It had seemed that darkness
had fallen hours before, but now, as they rose above a sea of clouds
from which rose an island chain of mountains, they were treated to a
brilliant sunset. Hyperion's sky had deepened from its daytime glaucous
glare to the bottomless lapis !azuli of evening while a red-gold sun
ignited cloud towers and great summits of ice and rock. The Consul
looked around. His fellow pilgrims, who had seemed gray and small in
the dim light of half a minute earlier, now glowed in the gold of
sunset.
Martin Silenus raised his glass. 'That's better, by God."
The Consul looked up at their line of travel, the massive cable
dwindling to threadlike thinness far ahead and then to nothing at all.
On a summit several kilometers beyond, gold light glinted on the next
support tower.
'One hundred and ninety-two pylons,' said Silenus in a singsong tour
guide's bored tones. 'Each pylon is constructed of duralloy and
whiskered carbon and stands eighty-three meters high."
'We must be high,' said Brawne Lamia in a low voice.
'The high point of the ninety-six-kilometer tramcar voyage lies above
the summit of Mount Dryden, the fifth highest peak in the Bridle Range,
at nine thousand two hundred forty-six meters,' droned on Martin
Silenus.
Colonel Kassad looked around. 'The cabin's pressur ized. I felt the
change-over some time ago."
'Look,' said Brawne Lamia.
The sun had been resting on the horizon line of clouds for a long
moment. Now it dipped below, seemingly igniting the depths of storm
cloud from beneath and casting a panoply of colors along the entire
western edge of the world. Snow cornices and glaze ice still glowed
along the western side of the peaks, which rose a
kilometer or more above the rising tramcar. A few brighter stars
appeared in the deepening dome of sky.
The Consul turned to Brawne Lamia. 'Why don't you tell your story now,
M. Lamia? We'll want to sleep later, before arriving at the Keep."
Lamia sipped the last of her wine. 'Does everyone want to hear it now?"
Heads nodded in the roseate twilight. Martin Silenus shrugged.
'All right,' said Brawne Lamia. She set down her empty glass, pulled
her feet up on the bench so that her elbows rested on her knees, and
began her tale.