THE PRIEST'S TALE: 'The Man Who Cried God'
'Sometimes there is a thin line separating orthodox zeal from apostasy,'
said Father Lenar Hoyt.
So began the priest's story. Later, dictating the tale into his
cornlog, the Consul remembered it as a seamless whole, minus the pauses,
hoarse voice, false starts, and small redundancies which were the
timeless failings of human speech.
Lenar Hoyt had been a young priest, born, raised, and only recently
ordained on the Catholic world of Pacem, when he was given his first
offworld assignment: he was ordered to escort the respected Jesuit
Father Paul Dur into quiet exile on the colony world of Hyperion.
In another time, Father Paul Dur certainly would have become a bishop
and perhaps a pope. Tall, thin, ascetic, with white hair receding from
a noble brow and eyes too filled with the sharp edge 'of experience to
hide their pain, Paul Dur was a follower of St Tellhard as well as an
archaeologist, ethnologist, and eminent Jesuit theologian. Despite the
decline of the Catholic Church into what amounted to a half-forgotten
cult tolerated because of its quaintness and isolation from the
mainstream of Hegemony life, Jesuit logic had not lost its bite. Nor
had Father Dur lost his conviction that the Holy Catholic Apostolic
Church continued to be humankind's last, best hope for immortality.
To Lenar Hoyt as a boy, Father Dur had been a somewhat godlike figure
when glimpsed during his rare visits to the preseminary schools, or on
the would-be seminarian's even rarer visits to the New Vatican. Then,
during the years of Hoyt's study in seminary, Dur had been on an
important Church-sponsored archaeological dig on the nearby world of
Armaghast. When the Jesuit returned, a few weeks after Hoyt's
ordination, it had been under a cloud. No one outside the highest
circles of the New Vatican knew precisely what had happened, but there
were whispers of excommunication and even of a hearing before the Holy
Office of the Inquisition, dormant the four centuries since the
confusion following the death of Earth.
Instead, Father Dur had asked for a posting to Hyperion, a world most
people knew of only because of the bizarre Shrike cult which had
originated there, and Father Hoyt had been chosen to accompany him. It
would be a thankless job, traveling in a role which combined the worst
aspects of apprentice, escort, and spy without even the satisfaction of
seeing a new world; Hoyt was under orders to see Father Dur down to the
Hyperion spaceport and then reboard the same spinship for its return
voyage to the Worldweb. What the bishopric was offering Lenar Hoyt was
twenty months in cryogenic fugue, a few weeks of in-system travel at
either end of the voyage, and a time-debt which would return him to
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Pacem eight years behind his former classmates in the quest for Vatican
careers and missionary postings.
Bound by obedience and schooled in discipline, Lenar Hoyt accepted
without question.
Their transport, the aging spinship HS Nadia Oleg, was a pockmarked
metal tub with no artificial gravity of any sort when it was not under
drive, no viewports for the passengers, and no on-board recreation
except for the stimsims piped into the datalink to keep passengers in
their hammocks and fugue couches. After awakening from fugue, the
passengers - mostly offworld workers and economy-rate tourists with a
few cult mystics and would-be Shrike suicides thrown in for good measure
-slept in those same hammocks and fugue couches, ate recycled food in
featureless mess decks, and generally tried to cope with spacesickness
and boredom during their twelve-day, zero-g glide from their spinout
point to Hyperion.
Father Hoyt learned little from Father Dur during those days of forced
intimacy, nothing at all about the events on Armaghast which had sent
the senior priest into exile. The younger man had keyed his comlog
implant to seek out as much data as it could on Hyperion and, by the
time they were three days out from planet fall,
Father Hoyt considered himself somewhat of an expert on the world.
'There are records of Catholics coming to Hyperion but no mention of a
diocese there,' said Hoyt one evening as they hung talking in their
zero-g hammocks while most of their fellow passengers lay tuned into
erotic stimsims. '1 presume you're going down to do some mission work?"
'Not at all,' replied Father Dur. 'The good people of Hyperion have
done nothing to foist their religious opinions on me, so I see no reason
to offend them with my proselytizing. Actually, I hope to travel to the
southern continent- Aquila- and then find a way inland from the city of
Port Romance. But not in the guise of a missionary. I plan to set up
an ethnological research station along the Cleft."
'Research?" Father Hoyt had echoed in surprise. He closed his eyes to
key his implant. Looking again at Father Dur, he said, 'That section of
the Pinion Plateau isn't inhabited, Father. The flame forests make it
totally inaccessible most of the year."
Father Dur smiled and nodded. He carried no implant and his ancient
condog had been in his luggage for the duration of the trip. 'Not quite
inaccessible,' he said softly. 'And not quite uninhabited. The Bikura
live there."
'Bikura,' Father Hoyt said and closed his eyes. 'But they're just a
legend,' he said at last.
'Hmmm,' said Father Dur. 'Try cross-indexing through Mamet Spedling."
Father Hoyt closed his eyes again. General Index told him that Mamet
Spedling had been a minor explorer affiliated with the Shackleton
Institute on Renaissance Minor who, almost a standard century and a half
earlier, had filed a short report with the Institute in which he told of
hacking his way inland from the then newly settled Port Romance, through
swamplands which had since been reclaimed for fiberplastic plantations,
passing through the flame forests during a period of rare quietude, and
climbing high enough on the Pinion Plateau to encounter the Cleft and a
small tribe of humans who fit the profile of the legendary Bikura.
Spedling's brief notes hypothesized that the humans were survivors of a
missing seedship colony from three centuries earlier and clearly
described a group suffering all of the classic retrograde cultural
effects of extreme isolation, inhreeding, and overadaptation. In
Spedling's blunt words, '. · even after less than two days here it is
obvious that the Bikura are too stupid, lethargic, and dull to waste
time describing." As it turned out, the flame forests then began to show
some signs of becoming active and Spedling had not wasted any more time
observing his discovery but had rushed to reach the coast, losing four
indigenie bearers, all of his equipment and records, and his left arm to
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

the 'quiet' forest in the three months it took him to escape.
'My God,' Father Hoyt had said as he lay in his hammock on the Nadia
Oleg, 'why the Bikura?"
'Why not?" had been Father Dur's mild reply. 'Very little is known
about them."
'Very little is known about most of Hyperion,' said the younger priest,
becoming somewhat agitated. 'What about the Time Tombs and the
legendary Shrike north of the Bridle Range on Equus?" he said. 'They're
famous!'
'Precisely,' said Father Dur6. 'Lenar, how many learned papers have
been written on the Tombs and the Shrike creature? Hundreds?
Thousands?" The aging priest had tamped in tobacco and now lighted his
pipe: no small feat in zero-g, Hoyt observed. 'Besides,' said Paul
Dur6, 'even if the Shrike-thing is real, it is not human. I am partial
to human beings."
'Yes,' said Hoyt, ransacking his mental arsenal for potent arguments,
'but the Bikura are such a small mystery. At the most you're going to
find a few dozen indigenies living in a region so cloudy and smoky and
... unimportant that even the colony's own mapsats haven't noticed
them. Why choose them when there are big mysteries to study on
Hyperion.. · like the labyrinths!' Hoyt had brightened. 'Did you know
that Hyperion is one of the nine labyrinthine worlds, Father?"
'Of course,' said Dur. A rough hemisphere of smoke expanded from him
until air currents broke it into tendrils and tributaries. 'But the
labyrinths have their researchers and admirers throughout the Web,
Lenar, and the tunnels have been there - on all nine worlds -for how
long? Half a million standard years? Closer to three quarters of a
million, I believe. Their secret will last. But how long will the
Bikura culture last before they're absorbed into modern colonial society
or, more likely, are simply wiped out by circumstances?"
Hoyt shrugged. 'Perhaps they're already gone. It's been a long time
since Spedling's encounter with them and there haven't been any other
confirmed reports. If they are extinct as a group, then all of your
time-debt and labor and pain of getting there will be for nothing."
'Precisely,' was all that Father Paul Dur had said and puffed calmly on
his pipe.
It was in their last hour together, during the dropship ride down, that
Father Hoyt had gained the slightest glimpse into his companion's
thoughts. The limb of Hyperion had been glowing white and green and
lapis above them for hours when suddenly the old dropship had cut into
the upper layers of atmosphere, flame had briefly filled the window, and
then they were flying silently some sixty kilometers above dark cloud
masses and starlit seas with the hurtling terminator of Hyperion's
sunrise rushing toward them like a spectral tidal wave of light.
'Marvelous,' Paul Dur had whispered, more to himself than to his young
companion. 'Marvelous. It is at times like this that I have the
sense... the slightest sense · . . of what a sacrifice it must have
been for the Son of God to condescend to become the Son of Man."
Hoyt had wanted to talk then, but Father Dur had continued to stare out
the window, lost in thought. Ten minutes later they had landed at Keats
Interstellar, Father Dur was soon swept into the whirlpool of customs
and luggage rituals, and twenty minutes after that a thoroughly
disappointed Lenar Hoyt was rising toward space and the Nadia Oleg once
again.
'Five weeks later of my time, I returned to Pacem,' said Father Hoyt. 'I
had mislaid eight years but for some reason my sense of loss randeeper
than that simple fact.
Immediately upon my return, the bishop informed me that there had been
no word from Paul Dur during the four years of his stay on Hyperion. The
New Vatican had spent a fortune on fatline inquiries, but neither the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

colonial authorities nor the consulate in Keats had been able to locate
the missing priest."
Hoyt paused to sip from his water glass and the Consul said, 'I remember
the search. I never met Dur6, of course, but we did our best to trace
him. Theo, my aide, spent a lot of energy over the years trying to
solve the case of the missing cleric. Other than a few contra-dietory
reports of sightings in Port Romance, there was no trace of him. And
those sightings went back to the weeks right after his arrival, years
before. There were hundreds of plantations out there with no radios or
cornlines, primarily because they were harvesting bootleg drugs as well
as fiberplastic. I guess we never talked to the people at the right
plantation. At least I know Father Dur's file was still open when I
left."
Father Hoyt nodded. 'I landed in Keats a month after your replacement
had taken over at the consulate. The bishop had been astonished when I
volunteered to return. His Holiness himself granted me an audience. I
was on Hyperion less than seven of its local months. By the time I left
to return to the Web, I had discovered the fate of Father Dur6." Hoyt
tapped the two stained leather books on the table. 'If I am to complete
this,' he said, his voice thick, '1 must read excerpts from these."
The treeship Yggdrasill had turned so the bulk of the tree had blocked
the sun. The effect was to plunge the dining platform and the curved
canopy of leaves beneath it into night, but instead of a few thousand
stars dotting the sky, as would have been the case from a planet's
surface, literally a million suns blazed above, beside, and beneath the
group at the table. Hyperion was a distinct sphere now, hurtling
directly at them like some deadly missile.
'Read,' said Martin Silenus.
FROM THE JOURNAL OF FATHER PAUL DURI :
Day l:
So begins my exile.
I am somewhat at a loss as to how to date my new journal. By the
monastic calendar on Pacere, it is the seventeenth day of Thomasmonth in
the Year of Our Lord 2732. By Hegemony Standard, it is October 12, 589
p.c. By Hyperion reckoning, or so I am told by the wizened little clerk
in the old hotel where I am staying, it is the twentyzthird day of
Lycius (the last of their seven forty-day months), either 426 A.D.C.
(after dropship crash!) or the hundred and twenty-eighth year of the
reign of Sad King Billy, who has not reigned for at least a hundred of
those years.
To hell with it. I'll call it Day I of my exile.
Exhausting day. (Strange to be tired after months of sleep, but that is
said to be a common reaction after awakening from fugue. My cells feel
the fatigue of Ihese past months of travel even if I do not remember
them. I don't remember feeling this tired from travel when I was
younger.)
I felt bad about not getting to know young Hoyt better. He seems a
decent sort, all proper catechism and bright eyes. It's no fault of
youngsters like him that the Church is in its final days. It's just
that his brand of happy naivet6 can do nothing to arrest that slide into
oblivion which the Church seems destined for.
Well, my contributions have not helped either.
Brilliant view of my new world as the dropship brought us down. I was
able to make out two of the three continents- Equus and Aquila. The
third one, Ursa, was not visible.
Planetfall at Keats and hours of effort getting through customs and
taking ground transit into the city. Confused images: the mountain
range to the north with its shifting, blue haze, foothills forested with
orange and yellow trees, pale sky with its green-blue undercoating, the
sun too small but more brilliant than Pacem's.
Colors seem more vivid from a distance, dissolving and scattering as one
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

approaches, like a pointi!!ist's palette.
The great sculpture of Sad King Billy which I had heard so much about
was oddly disappointing. Seen from the highway, it looked raw and
rough, a hasty sketch chiseled from the dark mountain, rather than the
regal figure I had expected. It does brood over this ramshackle city of
half a million people in a way that the neurotic poet-king probably
would have appreciated.
The town itself seems to be separated into the sprawling maze of slums
and saloons which the locals call Jacktown and Keats itself, the
so-called Old City although it dates back only four centuries, all
polished stone and studied sterility. I will take the tour soon.
I had scheduled a month in Keats but already I am eager to press on. Oh,
Monsignor Edouard, if you could see me now. Punished but still
unrepentant. More alone than ever but strangely satisfied with my new
exile. If my punishment for past excesses brought about by my zeal is
to be banishment to the seventh circle of desolation, then Hyperion was
well chosen. I could forget my self-appointed mission to the distant
Bikura (are they real? 1 think not this night) and content myself with
living out the remainder of my years in this provincial capital on this
godforsaken backwater world. My exile would be no less complete.
Ah, Edouard, boys together, classmates together (although I was not so
brilliant nor so orthodox as you), now old men together. But now you
are four years wiser and I am still the mischievous, unrepentant boy you
remember. I pray that you are alive and well and praying for me.
Tired. Will sleep. Tomorrow, take the tour of Keats, eat well, and
arrange transport to Aquila and points south.
Day $:
There is a cathedral in Keats. Or, rather, there was one. It has been
abandoned for at least two standard centuries. It lies in ruins with
its transept open to the green-blue skies, one of its western towers
unfinished, and the other tower a skeletal framework of tumbled stone
and rusted reinforcement rods.
I stumbled upon it while wandering, lost, along the banks of the Hoolie
River in the 'sparsely populated section of town where the Old City
decays into Jacktown amid a jumble of tall warehouses which prevent even
a glimpse of the ruined towers of the cathedral until one turns a corner
onto a narrow cul-de-sac and there is the shell of the cathedral; its
chapter house has half fallen away into the river, its facade is pocked
with remnants of the mournful, apocalyptic statuary of the post-Hegira
expansionist period.
I wandered through the latticework of shadows and fallen blocks into the
nave. The bishopric on Paccm had not mentioned any history of
Catholicism on Hyperion, much less the presence of a cathedral. It is
almost inconceivable that the scattered seedship colony of four
centuries ago could have supported a large enough congregation to
warrant the presence of a bishop, much less a cathedral. Yet there it
was.
I poked through the shadows of the sacristy. Dust and powdered plaster
hung in the air like incense, outlining two shafts of sunlight streaming
down from narrow windows high above. I stepped out into a broader patch
of sunlight and approached an altar stripped of all decoration except
for chips and cracks caused by falling masonry. The great cross which
had hung on the east wall behind the altar had also fallen and now lay
in ceramic splinters among the heap of stones there. Without conscious
thought ! stepped behind the altar, raised my arms, and began the
celebration of the Eucharist.
There was no sense of parody or melodrama in this act, no symbolism or
hidden intention; it was merely the automatic reaction of a priest who
had said Mass almost daily for more than forty-six years of his life and
who
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

now faced the prospect of never again participating in the reassuring
ritual of that celebration.
It was with some shock that I realized I had a congregation.
The old woman was kneeling in the fourth row of pews. The black of her
dress and scarf blended so perfectly with the shadows there that only
the pale oval of her face was visible, lined and ancient, floating
disembodied in the darkness. Startled, I stopped speaking the litany of
consecration. She was looking at me but something about her eyes, even
at a distance, instantly convinced me that she was blind. For a moment
I could not speak and stood there mute, squinting in the dusty light
bathing the altar, trying to explain this spectral image to myself while
at the same time attempting to frame an explanation of my own presence
and actions.
When I did find my voice and called to her- the words echoing in the
great hall - I realized that she had moved. I could hear her feet
scraping on the stone floor.
There was a rasping sound and then a brief flare of light illuminated
her profile far to the right of the altar. I shielded my eyes from the
shafts of sunlight and began picking my way over the detritus where the
altar railing had once stood. I called to her again, offered
reassurances, and told her not to be afraid, even though it was I who
had chills coursing up my back. I moved quickly but when I reached the
sheltered corner of the nave she was gone. A small door led to the
crumbling chapter house and the riverbank. There was no sign of her. 1
returned to the dark interior and would have gladly attributed her
appearance to my imagination, a waking dream after so many months of
enforced cryogenic dreamlesshess, but for a single, tangible proof of
her presence. There in the cool darkness burned a lone red votive
candle, its tiny flame flickering to unseen drafts and currents.
I am tired of this city. I am tired of its pagan pretensions and false
histories. Hyperion is a poet's world devoid of poetry. Keats itself
is a mixture of tawdry, false classicism and mindless, boomtown energy.
There are three Zen Gnostic assemblies and four High Muslim mosques in
the town, but the real houses
of worship are the countless saloons and brothels, the huge marketplaces
handling the fiberplastic shipments from the south, and the Shrike Cult
temples where lost souls hide their suicidal hopelessness behind a
shield of shallow mysticism. The whole planet reeks of mysticism
without revelation.
To hell with it.
Tomorrow I head south. There are skimmers and other aircraft on this
absurd world but, for the Common Folk, travel between these accursed
island continents seems restricted to boat- which takes forever, I am
told- or one of the huge passenger dirigibles which de!arts from Keats
only once a week.
I leave early tomorrow by dirigible.
Day 10:
Animals.
The firstdown team for this planet must have had a f',ation on animals.
Horse, Bear, Eagle. For three days we were creeping down the east coast
of Equus over an irregular coastline called the Mane. We've spent the
last day making the crossing of a short span of the Middle Sea to a
large island called Cat Key. Today we are offloading passengers and
freight at Felix, the 'major city' of the island. From what I can see
from the observation promenade and the mooring tower, there can't be
more than five thousand people living in that random collection of
hovels and barracks.
Next the ship will make its eight-hundred-kilometer crawl down a series
of smaller islands called the Nine Tails and then take a bold leap
across seven hundred kilometers of open sea and the equator. The next
land we see then is the northwest coast of Aquila, the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

so-called Beak.
Animals.
To call this conveyance a 'passenger dirigible' is an exercise in
creative semantics. It is a huge lifting device with cargo holds large
enough to carry the town of Felix out to sea and still have room for
thousands of bales of
fiberplastic. Meanwhile, the less important cargo - we passengers -
make do wherewe can. I have set up a cot near the aft loading portal
.and made a rather comfortable niche for myself with my personal luggage
and three large trunks of expedition gear. Near me is a family of
eight- indigenie plantation workers returning from a biannual shopping
expedition of their own to Keats -and although I do not mind the sound
or scent of their caged pigs or the squeal of their food hamsters, the
incessant, confused crowing of their poor befuddled rooster is more than
I can stand some nights.
Animals!
Day 11:
Dinner tonight in the salon above the promenade deck with Citizen
Heremis Denzel, a retired professor from a small planters' college near
Endymion. He informed me that the Hyperion firstdown team had no animal
fetish after all; the official names of the three continents are not
Equus, Ursa, and Aquila, but Creighton, Allensen, and Lopez. He went on
to say that this was in honor of three middle-level bureaucrats in the
old Survey Service.
Better the animal fetish!
It is after dinner. I am alone on the outside promenade to watch the
sunset. The walkway here is sheltered by the forward cargo modules so
the wind is little more than a salt-tinged breeze. Above me curves the
orange and green skin of the dirigible. We are between islands; the sea
is a rich lapis shot through with verdant undertones, a reversal of sky
tones. A scattering of high cirrus catches the last light of Hyperion's
too-small sun and ignites like burning coral. There is no sound except
for the faintest hum of the electric turbines. Three hundred meters
below, the shadow of a huge, mantalike undersea creature keeps pace with
the dirigible. A second ago an insect or bird the size and color of a
hummingbird but with gossamer wings a meter across paused five meters
out to inspect me before diving toward the sea with folded wings.
Edouard, 1 feel very alone tonight. !t would help if 1 knew you were
alive, still wbrking in the garden, writing evenings in your study. I
thought my travels would stir my-old beliefs in St Teilhard's concept of
the God in Whom the Christ of Evolution, the Personal, and the
Universal, the En Haut and the En.4 vant are joined, but no such renewal
is forthcoming.
It is growing dark. I am growing old. I feel something ·.. not yet
remorse . .. at my sin of falsifying the evidence on the Armaghast
dig. But, Edouard, Your Excellency, if the artifacts had indicated the
presence of a Christ-oriented culture there, six hundred light-years
from Old Earth, almost three thousand years before man left the surface
of the homeworld...
Was it so dark a sin to interpret such ambiguous data in a way which
would have meant the resurgence of Christianity in our life-time?
Yes, it was. But not, I think, because of the sin of tampering with the
data, but the deeper sin of thinking that Christianity could be saved.
The Church is dying, Edouard. And not merely our beloved branch of the
Holy Tree, but all of its offshoots, vestiges and cankers.
The entire Body of Christ is dying as surely as this poorly used body of
mine, Edouard. You and I knew this in Armaghast, where the blood-sun
illuminated only dust and death. We knew it that cool, green summer at
the College when we took our first vows. We knew it as boys in the
quiet playfields of Villefranche-sur-SaSne. We know it now.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The light is gone now; I must write by the slight glow from the salon
windows a deck above. The stars lie in strange constellations. The
Middle Sea glows at night with a greenish, unhealthy phosphorescence.
There is a dark mass on the horizon to the southeast. It may be a storm
or it may be the next island in the chain, the third of the nine
'tails." (What mythology deals with a cat with nine tails? I know of
none.)
For the sake of the bird I saw earlier - if it was a bird - I pray that
it is an island ahead and not a storm.
Day 28:
I have been in Port Romance eight days and I have seen three dead men.
The first was a beached corpse, a bloated, white parody of a man, that
had washed up on the mud flats beyond the mooring tower my first evening
in town.
Children threw stones at it.
The second man I watched being pulled from the burned wreckage of a
methane-unit shop in the poor section of town near my hotel. His body
was charred beyond recognition and shrunken by the heat, his arms and
legs pulled tight in the prizefighter posture burning victims have been
reduced to since time immemorial. I had been fasting all day and I
confess with shame that I began to salivate when the air filled with the
rich, frying-fat odor of burned flesh.
The third man was murdered not three meters from me. I had just emerged
from the hotel onto the maze of mud-splattered planks that serve as
sidewalks in this miserable town when shots rang out and a man several
paces ahead of me lurched as if his foot had slipped, spun toward me
with a qui=ical look on his face, and fell sideways into the mud and
sewage.
He had been shot three times with some sort of projectile weapon. Two
of the bullets had struck his chest, the third entered just below the
left eye.
Incredibly, he was still breathing when I reached him.
Without thinking about it, I removed my stole from my carrying bag,
fumbled for the vial of holy water 1 had carried for so long, and
proceeded to perform the sac-rameut of Extreme Unction. No one in the
gathering crowd objected. The fallen man stirred once, cleared his
throat as if he were about to speak, and died. The crowd dispersed even
before the body was removed.
The man was middle-aged, sandy-haired, and slightly overweight. He
carried no identification, not even a universal card or comlog. There
were six silver coins in his pocket.
For some reason, I elected to stay with the body the rest of that day.
The doctor was a short and cynical man
who allowed me to stay during the required autopsy. !
suspect that he was starved for conversation.
'This is what the whole thing's worth,' he said as he opened the poor
man'd belly like a pink satchel, pulling the folds of skin and muscle
back and pinning them down like tent flaps.
'What thing?" I asked.
'His life,' said the doctor and pulled the skin of the corpse's face up
and back like a greasy mask. 'Your life.
My life." The red and white stripes of overlapping muscle turned to blue
bruise around the ragged hole just above the cheekbone.
'There has to be more than this,' I said.
The doctor looked up from his grim work with a bemused smile. 'Is
there?" he said. 'Please show me." He lifted the man's heart and seemed
to weigh it in one hand. 'In the Web worlds, this'd be worth some money
on the open market. There're those too poor to keep vat-grown, cloned
parts in store, but too well off to die just for want of a heart. But
out here it's just offal."
'There has to be more,' I said, although I felt little conviction. I
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

remembered the funeral of His Holiness Pope Urban XV shortly before I
left Pacem. As has been the custom since pre-Heglra days, the corpse
was not embalmed. It waited in the anteroom off the main basilica to be
fitted for the plain wooden coffin. As I helped Edouard and Monsignor
Frey place the vestments on the stiffened corpse I noticed the browning
skin and slackening mouth.
The doctor shrugged and finished the perfunctory autopsy. There was the
briefest of formal inquiries. No suspect was found, no motive put
forward. A description of the murdered man was sent to Keats but the
man himself was buried the next day in a pauper's field between the mud
flats and the yellow jungle.
Port Romance is a jumble of yellow, weirwood structures set on a maze of
scaffolds and planks stretching far out onto the tidal mud flats at the
mouth of the Kans.
The river is almost two kilometers wide here where it spills out into
Toschahai Bay, but only a few channels are navigable and the dredging
goes on day and night. !
lie awake each night in my cheap room with the window open to the
pounding of the dredge-hammer sounding like the booming of this vile
city's heart, the distant susurration of the surf its wet breathing.
Tonight I listen to the city breathe and cannot help but give it the
flayed face of the murdered man.
The companies keep a skimmerport on the edge of town to ferry men and
matriel inland to the larger plantations, but 1 do not have enough money
to bribe my way aboard. Rather, I could get myself aboard but cannot
afford to transport my three trunks of medical and scientific gear. I
am still tempted. My service among the Bikura seems more absurd and
irrational now than ever before. Only my strange need for a destination
and a certain masochistic determination to complete the terms of my
self-imposed exile keep me moving upriver.
There is a riverboat departing up the Kans in two days. I have booked
passage and will move my trunks onto it tomorrow. It will not be hard
to leave Port Romance behind.
Day 41:
The Emporotic Girandole continues its slow progress upriver. No sight
of human habitation since we left Melton's Landing two days ago. The
jungle presses down to the riverbank like a solid wall now; more, it
almost completely overhangs us in places where the river narrows to
thirty or forty meterS. The light itself is yellow, rich as liquid
butter, filtered as it is through foliage and fronds eighty meters above
the brown surface of the Kans. I sit on the rusted tin roof of the
center passenger barge and strain to make out my first glimpse of a
tesla tree. Old Kady sitting nearby pauses in his whittling, spits over
the side through a gap in his teeth, and laughs at me. 'Ain't going to
be no flame trees this far down,' he says. 'If they was the forest sure
all hell wouldn't look like this. You got to get up in the Pinions
before you see a tesla. We ain't out of the rain forest yet, Padre."
It rains every afternoon. Actually, rain is too gentle a term for the
deluge that strikes us each day, obscuring the shore, pounding the tin
roofs of the barges with a deafening roar, and slowing our upstream
crawl until it seems we are standing still. It is ns if the river
becomes a vertical torrent each afternoon, a waterfall which the ship
must climb if we are to go on.
The Oirandole is an ancient, flat-bottomed tow with five barges lashed
around it like ragged children clinging to their tired motheris skins.
Three of the two-level barges carry bales of goods to be traded or sold
at the few plantations and settlements along the river. The other two
offer a simulacrum of lodging for the indigenies traveling upriver,
although I suspect that some of the barge's residents are permanent. My
own berth boasts a stained mattress on the floor and lizard-like insects
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

on the walls.
After the rains everyone gathers on the decks to watch the evening mists
rise from the cooling river. The air 'is very hot and supersaturated
with moisture most of the day now. Old Kady tells me that I have come
too late to make the climb through the rain and flame forests before the
tesla trees become active. We shall see.
Tonight the mists rise like the spirits of all the dead who sleep
beneath the river's dark surface. The last tattered remnants of the
afternoon's cloud cover dissipate through the treetops and color returns
to the world. I watch ns the dense forest shifts from chrome yellow to
a translucent saffron and then slowly fades through ocher to umber to
gloom. Aboard the Girandole, Old Kady lights the lanterns and
candle-globes hanging from the sagging second tier and, as if not to be
outdone, the darkened jungle begins to glow with the faint
phosphorescence of decay while glowbirds and multihued gossamers can be
seen floating from branch to branch in the darker upper regions.
Hyperion's small moon is not visible tonight but this world moves
through more debris than is common for a planet so close to its sun and
the night skies are illuminated by frequent meteor showers. Tonight the
heavens are especially fertile and when we move onto wide sections of
the river we can see a tracery of brilliant meteor trails weaving the
stars together. Their images burn the retina after a while and I look
down at the river only to see the same optic echo there in the dark
waters.
There is a bright glow on the eastern horizon and Old Kady tells me that
this is from the orbital mirrors which give light to a few of the larger
plantations.
It is too warm to return to my cabin. I spread my thin mat on the
rooftop of my barge and watch the celestial light show while clusters of
indigenie families sing haunting songs in an argot I have. not even
tried to learn. I wonder about the Bikura, still far away from here,
and a strange anxiety rises in me.
Somewhere in the forest an animal screams with the voice of a frightened
woman.
Day60:
Arrived Perecebo Plantation. Sick.
Day 62:
Very ill. Fever, fits of shaking. All yesterday ! was vomiting black
bile. The rain is deafening. At night the clouds are !it from above by
orbital mirrors. The sky seems to be on fire. My fever is very high.
A woman takes care of me. Bathes me. Too sick to be ashamed. Her hair
is darker than most indigenies'. She says little. Dark, gentle eyes.
Oh, God, to be sick so far from home.
Day
sheis waiting spying comesin from the rain the thin shirt
on purpose to tempt me, knows what iam my skin burning on fire thin
cotton nipples dark against it i
knowwho they are they are watching, here hear their voices at night they
bathe me in poison burns me they think I dont know but i hear their
voices above the rain when the screaming stops stop stop
My skin is almost gone. red underneath can feel the hole in my cheek.
when I find the bullet iwill spit it out it out.
agnusdeiquitolispecattamundi miserer nobis misere nobis miserere
Day 65:
Thank you, dear Lord, for deliverance from illness.
Day 66:
Shaved today. Was able to make it to the shower.
Semfa helped me prepare for the administrator's visit. I expected him
to be one of the large, gruff types I've seen out the window working in
the sorting compound, but he was a quiet black man with a slight lisp.
He was most helpful. I had been concerned about paying for my medical
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

care but he reassured me that there would be no charge. Even better -
he will assign a man to lead me into the high country! He says it is
late in the season but if I can travel in ten days we should be able to
make it through the flame forest to the Cleft before the tesla trees are
fully active.
After he left I sat and talked to Semfa a bit. Her husband died here
three local months ago in a harvesting accident. Semfa herself had come
from Port Romance; her marriage to Mikel had been a salvation for her
and she has chosen to stay on here doing odd jobs rather than go back
downriver. I do not blame her.
After a massage, I will sleep. Many dreams about my mother recently.
Ten days. I will be ready in ten days.
Day 75:
Before leaving with Tuk, I went down to the matrix paddies to say
goodbye to Semfa. She said little but 1 could see in her eyes that she
was sad to see me go.
Without premeditation, I blessed her and then kissed her on the
forehead. Tuk stood nearby, smiling and bobbing. Then we were off,
leading the two packbrids.
Supervisor Orlandi came to the end of the road and waved as we entered
the narrow lane hacked into the
aureate foliage.
Domine, dirige nos.
Day 82:
After a week on the trail - what trail? - after a week in the
trackless, yellow rain forest, after a week of exhausting climb up the
ever steeper shoulder of the.
Pinion Plateau, we emerged this morning onto a rocky outcropping that
allowed us a view back across an expanse of jungle toward the Beak and
the Middle Sea.
The plateau here is almost three thousand meters above sea level and the
view was impressive. Heavy rain clouds spread out below us to the foot
of the Pinion Hills, but through gaps in the white and gray carpet of
cloud we caught glimpses of the Kans in its leisurely uncoiling toward
Port R. and the sea, chrome-yellow swatches of the forest we had
struggled through, and a hint of magenta far to the east that Tuk swore
was the lower matrix of fiberplastic fields near Perecebo.
We continued onward and upward late into the evening.
Tuk is obviously worried that we will be caught in the flame forests
when the tesla trees become active. I struggle to .keep up, tugging at
the heavily laden 'brid and saying silent prayers to keep my mind off my
aches, pains, and general misgivings.
Day 83:
Loaded and moving before dawn today. The air smells of smoke and ashes.
The change in vegetation here on the Plateau is startling.
No longer evident are the ubiquitous weirwood and leafy chalma. After
passing through an intermediate zone of short evergreens and everblues,
then after climbing again through dense strands of mutated lodgepole
pines and triaspen, we came into the flame forest proper with its groves
of tall prometheus, trailers of ever present phoenix, and round stands
of amber !ambents. Occasionally we encountered impenetrable breaks of
the white-fibrous, bifurcated bestos plants that Tuk picturesquely
referred to as '... looking like de rotting cocks o' some dead giants
what be buried shallow here, dat be sure." My guide has a way with
words.
It was late afternoon before we saw our first tesla tree. For half an
hour we had been trudging over an ash-covered forest floor, trying not
to tread on the tender shoots of phoenix and firewhip gamely pushing up
through the sooty soil, when suddenly Tuk stopped and pointed.
The tesla tree, still half a kilometer away, stood at least a hundred
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

meters tall, half again as high as the tallest prometheus. Near its
crown it bulged with the distinctive onion-shaped dome of its
accumulator gall.
The radial branches above the gall trailed dozens of nimbus vines, each
looking silver and metallic against the clear green and lapis sky. The
whole thing made me think of some elegant High Muslim mosque on New
Mecca irreverently garlanded with tinsel.
'We got to get de 'brids and our asses de hell out o' here,' grunted
Tuk. He insisted that we change into flame forest gear right then and
there. We spent the rest of the afternoon and evening trudging on in
our osmosis masks and thick, rubber-soled boots, sweating under layers
of leathery gamma-cloth. Both of the 'brids acted nervous, their long
ears pricking at the slightest sound. Even through my mask i could
smell the ozone; it reminded me of electric trains I had played with as
a child oj lazy Christmas Day afternoons in Vi!!efranche-sur-Sa6ne.
We are camping as close as we can to a bestos break this night. Tuk
showed me how to set out the ring of arrestor rods, all the time
clucking dire warnings to himself and searching the evening sky for
clouds.
I plan to sleep well in spite of everything.
Day 84:
0400 hours- Sweet Mother of Christ.
For three hours we have been caught up in the middle of the end of the
world.
The explosions started shortly after midnight, mere lightning crashes at
first, and against our better judgment Tuk and I slid our heads through
the tent flap to watch the pyrotechnics. I am used to the Matthew-month
monsoon storms on Pacem, so the first hour of lightning displays did not
seem too unusual. Only the sight of distant tesla trees as the unerring
focus of the aerial discharge was a bit unnerving. But soon the forest
behemoths were glowing and spitting with their own accumulated energy
and then - just as I was drifting off to sleep despite the continued
noise - true Armageddon was unleashed.
At least a hundred arcs of electricity must have been released in the
first ten seconds of the tesla trees' opening spasms of violent energy.
A prometheus less than thirty meters from us exploded, dropping flaming
brands fifty meters to the forest floor. The arrestor rods glowed,
hissed, and deflected arc after arc of blue-white death over and around
our small campsite. Tuk screamed something but no mere human sound was
audible over the onslaught of light and noise. A patch of trailing
phoenix burst into flame near the tethered 'brids and one of the
terrified animals - hobbled and blindfolded as it was - broke free and
lunged through the circle of glowing arrestor rods. Instantly half a
dozen bolts of lightning from the nearest tesla arced to the hapless
animal. For a mad second l could have sworn !
saw the beast's skeleton glowing through boiling flesh and then it
spasreed high into the air and simply ceased to be.
For three hours we have watched the end of the world.
Two of the arrestor rods have fallen but the other eight continue to
function. Tuk and I huddle in the hot cave of our tent, osmosis masks
filtering enough cool oxygen out of the superheated, smoky air to allow
us to breathe. Only the lack of undergrowth and Tuk's skill in placing
our tent away from other targets and near the sheltering bestos plants
have allowed us to survive. That and the eight whiskered-alloy rods
that stand between us and eternity.
'They seem to be holding up well!" I shout to Tuk over the hiss and
crackle, crash and split of the storm.
'Dey be made to stand de hour, mebbe two,' grunts my guide. 'Any time,
mebbe sooner, dey fuse, we die."
I nod and sip at lukewarm water through the slipstrip of my osmosis
mask. If I survive this night, I shall always thank God for His
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

generosity in allowing me to see this sight.
Day 8 7:
Tuk and I emerged from the smoldering northeastern edge of the flame
forest at noon yesterday, promptly set up camp by the edge of a small
stream, and slept for eighteen hours straight; making up for three
nights of no sleep and two grueling days moving without rest through a
nightmare of flame and ash. Everywhere we looked as we approached the
hogback ridge that marked the terminus of the forest, we could see
seedpods and cones burst open with new life for the various fire species
that had died in the conflagration of the previous two nights. Five of
our arrestor rods still functioned, although neither Tuk nor l was eager
to test them another night. Our surviving packbrid collapsed and died
the instant the heavy load was lifted off its back.
I awoke this morning at dawn to the sound of running water. I followed
the small stream a kilometer to the northeast, following a deepening in
its sound, until suddenly it dropped from sight.
The Cleft! I had almost forgotten our destination.
This morning, stumbling through the fog, leaping from one wet rock to
another alongside the widening stream, I took a leap to a final boulder,
teetered there, regained my balance, and looked straight down above a
waterfall that dropped almost three thousand meters to mist, rock, and
river far below.
The Cleft was not carved out of the rising plateau as was the legendary
Grand Canyon on Old Earth or World Crack on Hebron. In spite of its
active oceans and seemingly earthlike continents, Hyperion is
tectonically quite dead; more like Mars, Lusus, or Armaghast in its
total lack of continental drift. And like Mars and Lusus, HYperion is
afflicted with its Deep Ice Ages, although here the periodicity is
spread to thirty-seven million years by the long ellipse of the
currently absent binary dwarf. The comlog compares the Cleft to the
pre-tCrraformed Mariner Valley on Mars, both being caused by the
weakening of crust through periodic freeze and thaw over the aeons,
followed by the flow of subterranean rivers such as the Kans. Then the
massive collapse, running like a long scar through the moun-tainons wing
of the continent Aquila.
Tuk joined me as I stood on the edge of the Cleft. 1 was naked, rinsing
the ash smell from my traveling clothes and cassock. I splashed cold
water over my pale flesh and laughed out loud as the echoes of Tuk's
shouts came back from the North Wall two thirds of a kilometer away.
Because of the nature of the crust collapse, Tuk and I stood far out on
an overhang that hid the South Wall below us. Although perilously
exposed, we assumed that the rocky cornice which had defied gravity for
millions of years would last a few more hours as we bathed, relaxed,
shouted echoing hallos until we were hoarse, and generally acted like
children liberated from school. Tuk confessed that he had never
penetrated the full width of the flame forest- nor known anyone who had
in this season - and announced that, now that the tesla trees were
becoming fully
dozen bolts of lightning from the nearest tesla arced to the hapless
animal. For a mad second I could have sworn !
saw the beast's skeleton glowing through boiling flesh and then it
spasmed high into the air and simply ceased to be.
For three hours we have watched the end of the world.
Two of the arrestor rods have fallen but the other eight continue to
function. Tuk and I huddle in the hot cave of our tent, osmosis masks
filtering enough c°°! oxygen out of the superheated, smoky air to allow
us to breathe. Only the lack of undergrowth and Tuk's skill in placing
our tent away from other targets and near the sheltering bestos plants
have allowed us to survive. That and the eight whiskered-alloy rods
that stand between us and eternity.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'They seem to be holding up well!" I shout to Tuk over the hiss and
crackle, crash and split of the storm.
'Dey be made to stand de hour, mebbe two,' grunts my guide. 'Any time,
mebbe sooner, dey fuse, we die."
I nod and sip at lukewarm water through the slipstrip of my osmosis
mask. If I survive this night, I shall always thank God for His
generosity in allowing me to see this sight.
Day87:
Tuk and I emerged from the smoldering northeastern edge of the flame
forest at noon yesterday, promptly set up camp by the edge of a small
stream, and slept for eighteen hours straight; making up for three
nights of no sleep and two grueling days moving without rest through a
nightmare of flame and ash. Everywhere we looked as we approached the
hogback ridge that marked the terminus of the forest, we could see
seedpods and cones burst open with new life for the various fire species
that had died in the conflagration of the previous two nights. Five of
our arrestor rods still functioned, although neither Tuk nor I was eager
to test them another night. Our surviving packbrid collapsed and died
the instant the heavy load was lifted off its back.
I awoke this morning at dawn to the sound of running water. ! followed
the small stream a kilometer to the northeast, following a deepening in
its sound, until suddenly it dropped from sight.
The Cleft! I had almost forgotten our destination.
This morning, stumbling through the fog, leaping from one wet rock to
another alongside the widening stream, I took a leap to a final boulder,
teetered there, regained my balance, and looked straight down above a
waterfall that dropped almost three thousand meters to mist, rock, and
river far below.
The Cleft was not carved out of the rising plateau as was the legendary
Grand Canyon on Old Earth or World Crack on Hebron. In spite of its
active oceans and seemingly earthlike continents, Hyperion is
tectonically quite dead; more like Mars, Lusus, or Armaghast in its
total lack of continental drift. And like Mars and Lusus, HYPerion is
afflicted with its Deep Ice Ages, although here the periodicity is
spread to thirty-seven million years by the long ellipse of the
currently absent binary dwarf. The comlog compares the Cleft to the
pre-terraformed Mariner Valley on Mars, both being caused by the
weakening of crust through periodic freeze and thaw over the aeons,
followed by the flow of subterranean rivers such as the Kans. Then the
massive collapse, running like a long scar through the mountainous wing
of the continent Aquila.
Tuk joined me as I stood on the edge of the Cleft. 1 was naked, rinsing
the ash smell from my traveling clothes and cassock. I splashed cold
water over my pale flesh and laughed out loud as the echoes of Tuk's
shouts came back from the North Wall two thirds of a kilometer away.
Because of the nature of the crust collapse, Tuk and I stood far out on
an overhang that hid the South Wall below us. Although perilously
exposed, we assumed that the rocky cornice which had defied gravity for
millions of years would last a few more hours as we bathed, relaxed,
shouted echoing hallos until we were hoarse, and generally acted like
children liberated from school. Tuk confessed that he had never
penetrated the full width of the flame forest- nor known anyone who had
in this season - and announced that, now that the tesla trees were
becoming fully
active, he would have at least a three-month wait until he could return.
He did not seem too sorry and I was glad to have him with me.
In the afternoon we transported my gear in relays, setting up camp near
the stream a hundred meters back from the cornice and stacking my
flowfoam boxes of scientific gear for further sorting in the morning.
It was cold this evening. After dinner, just before sunset, I pulled on
my thermal jacket and walked alone to a rocky ledge southwest of where I
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

had first encountered the Cleft. From my vantage point far out over the
river, the view was memorable. Mists rose from unseen waterfalls
tumbling to the river far below, spray rising in shifting curtains of
mist to multiply the setting sun into a dozen violet spheres and twice
that many rainbows.
I watched as each spectrum was born, rose toward the darkening dome of
sky, and died. As the cooling air settled into the cracks and caverns
of the plateau and the warm air rushed skyward, pulling leaves, twigs,
and mist upward in a vertical gale, a sound ebbed up out of the Cleft as
if the continent itself was calling with the voices of stone giants,
gigantic bamboo flutes, church organs the size of palaces, the clear,
perfect notes ranging from the shrillest soprano to the deepest bass. I
speculated on wind vectors against the fluted rock wails, on caverns far
below venting deep cracks in the motionless crust, and on the illusion
of human voices that random harmonics can generate. But in the end l
set aside speculation and simply listened as the Cleft sang its farewell
hymn to the sun.
I walked back to our tent and its circle of biolumi-nescent lantern
light as the first fusillade of meteor showers burned the skies overhead
and distant explosions from the flame forests rippled along the southern
and western horizons like cannon fire from some ancient war on
pre-Hegira Old Earth.
Once in the tent I try the long-range comlog bands but there is nothing
but static. I suspect that even if the primitive comsats that serve the
fiberplastic plantations were ever to broadcast this far east, anything
but the tightest laser or fatline beams would be masked by the mountains
and tesla activity. On Pacem, few of us at the monastery wore or
carried personal comlogs, but the datasphere was always there if we
needed to tap into it. Here there is no choice.
I sit and listen to the last notes from the canyon wind die, watch the
skies simultaneously darken and blaze, smile at the sound of Tuk's
snoring from his bedroll outside the tent, and I think to myself, If
this is exile, so belt.
Day 88:
Tuk is dead. Murdered.
I found his body when I left the tent at sunrise. He had been sleeping
outside, not more than four meters from me. He had said that he wished
to sleep under the stars.
The murderers cut his throat while he slept. I heard no cry. I did
dream, however: dreams of Semfa ministering to me during my fever.
Dreams of cool hands touching my neck and chest, touching the crucifix 1
have worn since childhood. I stood over Tuk's body, staring at the
wide, dark circle where his blood had soaked into Hyperion's uncaring
soil, and I shivered at the thought that the dream had been more than a
dream - that hands had touched me in the night.
I confess that I reacted more like a frightened old fool than as a
priest. I did administer Extreme Unction, but then the panic struck me
and I left my poor guide's body, desperately searched through the
supplies for a weapon, and took away the machete I had used in the rain
forest and the low-voltage maser with which I had planned to hunt small
game. Whether I would have used a weapon on a human being, even to save
my own life, I do not know. But, in my panic, I carried the machete,
the maser, and the powered binoculars to a high boulder near the Cleft
and searched the region for any signs of the murderers. Nothing stirred
except the tiny arboreais and gossamers we had seen flitting through the
trees yesterday. The forest itself seemed
abnormally thick and dark. The Cleft offered a hundred terraces,
ledges, and rock balconies to the northeast for entire bands of savages.
An army could have hidden there in the crags and ever present mists.
After-thirty minutes of fruitless vigilance and foolish cowardice, I
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

returned to the campsite and prepared Tuk's body for burial. It took me
well over two hours to dig a proper grave in the rocky soil of the
plateau.
When it was filled and the formal service was finished, I could think of
nothing personal to say about the rough, funny little man who had been
my guide. 'Watch over him, Lord,' I said at last, disgusted at my own
hypocrisy, sure in my heart that I was mouthing words only to myself.
'Give him safe passage. Amen."
This evening 1 have moved my camp half a kilometer north. My tent is
pitched in an open area ten meters away but I am wedged with my back
against the boulder, sleeping robes pulled around, the machete and maser
nearby. After Tuk's funeral I went through the supplies and boxes of
equipment. Nothing had been taken except for the few remaining'
arrestor rods.
Immediately I wondered if someone had followed us through the flame
forest in order to kill Tuk and strand me here, but I could think of no
motive for such an elaborate action. Anyone from the plantations could
have killed us as we slept in the rain forest or - better yet from a
murderer's point of view - deep in the flame forest where no one would
wonder at two charred corpses. That left the Bikura. My primitive
charges.
I considered returning through the flame forest without the rods but
soon abandoned the idea. It is probable death to stay and certain death
to go.
Three months before the teslas become dormant. One hundred twenty of
the twenty-six-hour local days. An eternity.
Dear Christ, why has this come to me.9 And why was I spared last night
if I am merely to be offered up this night... or next?
I sit here under the darkening crag and I listen to the suddenly ominous
moaning rising with the night wind
from the Cleft and I pray as the sky lights with the blood-red streaks
of meteor trails.
Mouthing words to myself.
Day 9.5:
The terrors of the past week have largely abated. I find that even fear
fades and becomes commonplace after days of anticlimax.
I used the machete to cut small trees for a lean-to, covering the roof
and side with gamma-cloth and caulking between the logs with mud. The
back wall is the solid stone of the boulder. I have sorted through my
research gear and set some of it out, although I suspect that I will
never use it now.
I have begun foraging to supplement my quickly diminishing cache of
freeze-dried food. By now, according to the absurd schedule drawn up so
long ago on Pacem, I was to have been living with the Bikura for some
weeks and trading small goods for local food. No matter. Besides my
diet of bland but easily boiled chalma roots, I have found half a dozen
varieties of berries and larger fruits that the comlog assures me are
edible; so far only one has disagreed with me enough to keep me
squatting all night near the edge of the nearest ravine.
I pace the confines of the region as restlessly as one of those caged
pelops that were so prized by the minor padishahs on Armaghast. A
kilometer to the south and four to the west, the flame forests are in
full form. In the morning, smoke vies with the shifting curtains of
mist to hide the sky. Only the near-solid breaks of bestos, the rocky
soil here on the summit plateau, and the hogback ridges running like
armor-plated vertebrae northeast from here keep the teslas at bay.
To the north, the plateau widens out and the undergrowth becomes denser
near the Cleft for some fifteen kilometers until the way is blocked by a
ravine a third as deep and half as wide as the Cleft itself. Yesterday
1 reached this northernmost point and stared across the
gaping barrier with some frustration. I will try again someday,
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

detouring to the east to find a crossing point, but from the telltale
signs of phoenix across the chasm and the pall of smoke along the
northeastern horizon, I suspect I will find only the chalma-fi!led
canyons and steppes of flame forest that are roughed in on the orbital
survey map 1 carry.
Tonight I visited Tuk's rocky grave as the evening wind began to wail
its aeolian dirge. I knelt there and tried to pray but nothing came.
Edouard, nothing came. I am as empty as those fake sarcophagi that you
and I unearthed by the score from the sterile desert sands near Tarum
bel Wadi.
The Zen Gnostics would say that this emptiness is a good sign; that it
presages openness to a new level of
awareness, new insights, new experience.
Merde.
My emptiness is only... emptiness.
I have found the Bikura. Or, rather, they have found me. I will write
what I can before they come to rouse me from my 'sleep."
Today I was doing some detail mapping a mere four kilometers north of
camp when the mists lifted in the midday warmth and I noticed a series
of terraces on my side of the Cleft that had been hidden until then. 1
was using my powered glasses to inspect the terraces - actually a series
of !addered ledges, spires, shelves, and tussocks extending far out onto
the overhang - when i realized that I was staring at man-made
habitations.
The dozen or so huts were crude- rough hovels of heaped chalma fronds,
stones, and spongeturf- but they were unmistakably of human origin.
I was standing there irresolute, binoculars still lifted, trying to
decide whether to climb down to the exposed ledges and confront the
inhabitants or to retreat to my camp, when I felt that lifting chill
along the back and neck that tells one with absolute certainty that he
is no
longer alone. 1. lowered the binoculars and turned slowly. The Bikura
were there, at least thirty of them, standing in a semi-circle that left
me no retreat to the forest.
I do not know what I expected; naked savages, perhaps, with fierce
expressions and necklaces of teeth.
Perhaps I had half expected to find the kind of bearded, wild-haired
hermits that travelers sometimes encountered in the Mosh6 Mountains on
Hebron. Whatever 1 had held in mind, the reality of the Bikura did not
fit the template.
The people who had approached me so silently were short - none came
higher than my shoulder - and swathed in roughly woven dark robes that
covered them from neck to toe. When they moved, as some did now, they
seemed to glide over the rough ground like wraiths.
From a distance, their appearance reminded me of nothing so much as a
gaggle of diminutive Jesuits at a New Vatican enclave.
I almost giggled then, but realized that such a response might well be a
sign of rising panic. The Bikura showed no outward signs of aggression
to cause such a panic; they carried no weapons, their small hands were
empty. As empty as their expressions.
Their physiognomy is hard to describe succinctly.
They are bald. All of them. That baldness, the absence of any facial
hair, and the loose robes that fell in a straight line to the ground,
all conspired to make it very difficult to tell the men from the women.
The group now confronting me- more than fifty by this time - looked to
be all of roughly the same age: somewhere between forty and fifty
standard years. Their faces were smooth, the skin tinged with a
yellowish cast that I guessed might be associated with generations of
ingesting trace minerals in the chalma and other local plant life.
One might be tempted to describe the round faces of the Bikura as
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

cherubic until, upon closer inspection, that impression of sweetness
fades and is replaced by another interpretation- placid idiocy. As a
priest, I have spent enough time on backward worlds to see the
effects of an ancient genetic disorder variously called Down's syndrome,
mongolism, or generation-ship legacy. This, then, was the overall
impression created by the sixty or so dark-robed little people who had
approached me - I was being greeted by a silent, smiling band of bald,
retarded children.
I reminded myself that these were almost certainly the same group of
'smiling children' who had slit Tuk's throat while he slept and left him
to die like a butchered pig.
The closest Bikura stepped forward, stopped five paces from me, and said
something in a soft monotone.
'Just a minute,' I said and fumbled out my cornlog. I tapped in the
translator function.
'Beyetet ota menna !or cresfem ket?" asked the short man in front of me.
I slipped on the hearplug just in time to hear the comlng's translation.
There was no lag time. The apparently foreign.language was a simple
corruption of archaic seedship English not so far removed from the
indigene argot of the plantations. 'You are the man who belongs to the
cross shape/cruciform,' interpreted the cornlog, giving me two choices
for the final noun.
'Yes,' I said, knowing now that these were the ones who had touched me
the night I slept through Tuk's murder. Which meant that these were the
ones who had murdered Tuk.
! waited. The hunting maser was in my pack. The pack was set against
a small chalma not ten paces from me. Half a dozen Bikura stood between
me and it. It did not matter. I knew at that instant that I would not
use a weapon against another human being, even a human being who had
murdered my guide and might well be planning to murder me at any second.
I closed my eyes and said a silent Act of Contrition. When 1 opened my
eyes, more of the Bikura had arrived.. There was a cessation of
movement, as if a quorum had been filled, a decision reached.
'Yes,' I said again into the silence, '1 am the one who wears the
cross." I heard the cornlog speaker pronounce the last word 'cresfem."
The Bikura nodded in unison and - as if from long practice as altar
boys- all went to one knee, robes rustling softly, in a perfect
genuflection.
I opened my mouth to speak and found that I had nothing to say. 1
closed my mouth.
The Bikura stood. A breeze moved the brittle chalma fronds and leaves
together to make a dry, end-of-summer sound above us. The Bikura
nearest to me on the left stepped closer, grasped my forearm with a
touch of cool, strong fingers, and spoke a soft sentence that my comlog
translated as, 'Come. It is time to go to the houses and sleep."
It was midafternoon. Wondering if the comlog had translated the word
'sleep' properly or if it might be an idiom or metaphor for 'die,' I
nodded and followed them toward the village at the edge of the Cleft.
Now I sit in the hut and wait. There are rustling sounds. Someone else
is awake now. 1 sit and wait.
Day 97:
The Bikura call themselves the 'Three Score and Ten."
I have spent the past twenty-six hours talking to them, observing,
making notes when they take their two-hour, midafternoon 'sleep,' and
generally trying to record as much data as I can before they decide to
slit my throat.
Except now I am beginning to believe that they will not hurt me.
I spoke to them yesterday after our 'sleep." Sometimes they do not
respond to questions and when they do the responses are little better
than the grunts or divergent answers one receives from slow children.
After their initial question and invitation at our first encounter, none
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

of them originated a single query or comment my way.
! questioned them subtly, carefully, cautiously, and with the
professional calm of a trained ethnologist. 1 asked the simplest, most
factual questions possible to
make sure that the'comlog was functioning properly. It was. But the
sum total of the answers left me almost as ignorant as I had been
twenty-some hours before.
Finally, tired in body and spirit, I abandoned professional subtlety and
asked the group I was sitting with, 'Did you kill my companion?"
My three interlocutors did not look up from the weaving they were doing
on a crude loom. 'Yes,' said the one I have come to think of as Alpha
because he had been the first to approach me in the forest, 'we cut your
companion's throat with sharpened stones and held him down and silent
while he struggled. He died the true death."
'Why?" I asked after a moment. My voice sounded as dry as a corn husk
crumbling.
'Why did he die the true death?" said Alpha, still not looking up.
'Because all of his blood ran out and he stopped breathing."
'No,' I said. 'Why did you kill him?"
Alpha did not respond, but Betty - who may or may not be female and
Alpha's mate - looked up from her
loom and said simply, 'To make him die."
'Why?"
The responses invariably came back and just as invariably failed to
enlightened me one iota. After much questioning, I had ascertained that
they had killed Tuk to make him die and that he had died because he had
been killed.
'What is the difference between death and true death?" I asked, not
trusting the cornlog or my temper at this point.
The third Bikura, Del, grunted a response that the comlog interpreted
as, 'Your companion died the true death. You did not."
Finally, in frustration far too close to rage, I snapped, 'Why not? Why
didn't you kill me?"
All three stopped in the middle of their mindless weaving and looked at
me. 'You cannot be killed because you cannot die,' said Alpha. 'You
cannot die because you belong to the cruciform and follow the way of the
cross."
I had no idea why the damn machine would translate cross as 'cross' one
second and as 'cruciform' the next.
Because you belong to the cruciform.
A chill went through me, followed by the urge to laugh. Had I stumbled
into that old adventure ho10 clich - the lost tribe that worshiped the
'god' that had tumbled into their jungle until the poor bastard cuts
himself shaving or something, and the tribespeople, assured and a bit
relieved at the obvious mortality of their visitor, offer up their
erstwhile deity as a sacrifice?
It would have been funny if the image of Tuk's bloodless face and
raw-rimmed, gaping wound was not so fresh.
Their reaction to the cross certainly suggested that l had encountered a
group of survivors of a once Christian colony - Catholics? - even
though the data in the comiog insisted that the dropship of seventy
colonists who had crashed on this plateau four hundred years ago had
held only Neo-Kerwin Marxists, all of whom should have been indifferent
if not openly hostile to the old religions.
I considered dropping the matter as being far too dangerous to pursue,
but my stupid need to know drove me on. 'Do you worship Jesus?" I
asked.
Their blank expressions left no need for a verbal negative.
'Christ?" I tired again. 'Jesus Christ? Christian? The
Catholic Church?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

No interest.
'Catholic? Jesus? Mary? St Peter? Paul? St Tellhard?"
The comiog made noises but the words seemed to have no meaning for them.
'You follow the cross?" I said, flailing for some last contact.
All three looked at me. 'We belong to the cruciform,' said Alpha.
I nodded, understanding nothing.
This evening I fell asleep briefly just before sunset and when I awoke
it was to the organ-pipe music of the Cleft's nightfall winds. It was
much louder here on the
village ledges. Even the hovels seemed to join the chorus as the rising
gusts whistled and whined through stone gaps, flapping fronds, and crude
smokeholes.
Something was wrong. It took me a groggy minute to realize that the
village was abandoned. Every hut was empty. I sat on a cold boulder
and wondered if my presence had sparked some mass exodus. The wind
music had ended and meteors were beginning their nightly show through
cracks in low clouds when I heard a sound behind me and turned to find
all seventy of the Three Score and Ten behind me.
They walked past without a word and went to their huts. There were no
lights. I imagined them sitting in their hovels, staring.
I stayed outside for some time before returning to my own hut. After a
while I walked to the edge of the grassy shelf and stood where rock
dropped away into the abyss. A cluster of vines and roots clung to the
cliff face but appeared to end a few meters into space and hang there
above emptiness. No vine could have been long enough to offer a way to
the river two kilometers below.
But the Bikura had come from this direction.
Nothing made sense. I shook my head and went back to my hut.
Sitting here, writing by the light of the cornlog diskey, I try to think
of precautions I can take to insure that I will see the sunrise.
I can think of none.
Day 103:
The more I learn, the less 1 understand.
I have moved most of my gear to the hut they leave empty for me here in
the village.
I have taken photographs, recorded video and audio chips, and imaged a
full holoscan of the village and its inhabitants. They do not seem to
care. I project their images and they walk right through them, showing
no interest. 1 play back their words to them and they smile
and go back into their hovels to sit for hours, doing nothing, saying
nothing. I offer them trade trinkets and they take them without
comment, check to see if they are edible, and then leave them lying. The
grass is littered with plastic beads, mirrors, bits of colored cloth,
and cheap pens.
I have set up the full medical lab but to no avail; the Three Score and
Ten will not let me examine them, will not let me take blood samples,
even though I have repeatedly shown them that it is painless, will not
let me scan them with the diagnostic equipment - will not, in short,
cooperate in any way. They do not argue. They do not explain. They
simply turn away and go about their nonbusiness.
After a Week I still cannot tell the males from the females. Their
faces remind me of those visual puzzles that shift forms as you stare;
sometimes Betty's face looks undeniably female and ten seconds later the
sense of gender is gone and I think of her (him?) as Beta again. Their
voices undergo the same shift. Soft, well modulated, sexless ... they
remind me of the poorly programmed homecomps one encounters on backward
worlds.
I find myself hoping to catch a glimpse of a naked Bikura. This is not
easy for a Jesuit of forty-eight standard years to admit. Still, it
would not be an easy task even for a veteran voyeur. The nudity taboo
seems absolute. They wear the long robes while awake and during their
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

two-hour midday nap. They leave the village area to urinate and
defecate, and I suspect that they do not remove the loose robes even
then. They do not seem to bathe. One would suspect that this would
cause olfactory problems, but there is no odor about these primitives
except for the slight, sweet smell of chalma. 'You must undress
sometimes,' I said to Alpha one day, abandoning delicacy in favor of
information.
'No,' said AI and went elsewhere to sit and do nothing while fully
dressed.
They have no names. I found this incredible at first, but now I am
sure.
'We are all that was and will be,' said the shortest
Bikura, one I think of as female and call Eppie. 'We are the Three
Score and Ten."
i searched the cornlog records and confirmed what I suspected: in more
than sixteen thousand known human societies, none are listed where there
are no individual names at all. Even in the Lusus hive societies,
individuals respond to their class category followed by a simple code.
I tell them my name and they stare. 'Father Paul Dur, Father Paul Dur,'
repeats the cornlog translator but there is no attempt at even simple
repetition.
Except for their mass disappearances each day before sunset and their
common two-hour sleep time, they do very little as a group. Even their
lodging arrangements appear random. AI will spend one naptime with
Betty, the next with Gam, and the third with Zelda or Pete. No system
or schedule is apparent. Every third day the entire group of seventy
goes into the forest to forage and returns with berries, chalma roots
and bark, fruit, and whatever else might be edible. I was sure they
were vegetarians until I saw Del munching on the cold corpse of an
infant arboreal. The little primate must have fallen from the high
branches. It seems then that the Three Score and Ten do not disdain
meat; they simply are too stupid to hunt and kill it.
When the Bikura are thirsty they walk almost three hundred meters to a
stream that cascades into the Cleft.
In spite of this inconvenience, there are no signs of water skins, jugs,
or any type of pottery. I keep my reserve of water in ten-gallon
plastic containers but the villagers take no notice. In my plummeting
respect for these people, I do not find it unlikely that they have spent
generations in a village with no handy water source.
'Who built the houses?" I ask. They have no word for viiiaBe.
'The Three Score and Ten,' responds Will. I can tell him from the
others only by a broken finger that did not mend well. Each of them has
at !cast one such distinguishing feature, although sometimes I think it
would be easier to tell crows apart.
'When did they build them?" I ask, although I should know by now that
any question that starts with 'when'
will not receive an answer.
I receive no answer.
They do go into the Cleft each evening. Down the vines. On the third
evening, I tried to observe this exodus but six of them turned me back
from the edge and gently but persistently brought me back to my hut.
It was the first observable action of the Bikura that had hinted at
aggression and I sat in some apprehension after they had gone.
The next evening as they departed I went quietly to my hut, not even
peering out, but after they returned I retrieved the imager and its
tripod from where I had left them near the edge. The timer had worked
perfectly.
The hOlos showed the Bikura grabbing the vines and scrambling down the
cliff face as nimbly as the little arboreals that fill the chalma and
weirwood forest.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Then they disappeared under the overhang.
'What do you do when you go down the cliff each evening?" I asked AI the
next day.
The native looked at me with the seraphic, Buddha smile I have learned
to hate. 'You belong to the cruciform,' he said as if that answered
everything.
'Do you worship when you go down the cliff?." 1 asked.
No answer.
I thought a minute. 'I also follow the cross,' I said, knowing that it
would be translated as 'belong to the cruciform." Any day now I will not
need the translator program. But this conversation was too important to
leave to chance. 'Does this mean that I should join you when you go
down the cliff face?"
For a second I thought that AI was thinking. His brow furrowed and I
realized that it was the first time that I had seen one of the Three
Score and Ten come close to frowning. Then he said, 'You cannot. You
belong to the cruciform but you are not of the Three Score and Ten."
I realized that it had taken every neuron and synapse in his brain to
frame that distinction.
'What would you do if ! did go down the cliff face?" 1 asked, expecting
no response. Hypothetical questions almost always had as much luck as
my time-based queries.
This time he did respond. The seraphic smile and untroubled countenance
returned and Alpha said softly, 'If you try to go down the cliff we will
hold you down on the grass, take sharpened stones, cut your throat, and
wait until your blood stops flowing and your heart stops beating."
I said nothing. I wondered if he could hear the pounding of my heart at
that moment. Well, 1 thought, at least you don't have to worry any
longer that they think you are a .god.
The silence stretched. Finally AI added one more sentence that I have
been thinking about ever since. 'And if you did it again,' he said, 'we
would have to kill you again."
We stared at each other for some time after that; each convinced, I am
sure, that the other was a total idiot.
Day 104:
Each new revelation adds to my confusion.
The absence of children here has bothered me since my first day in the
village. Looking back through my notes, 1 find frequent mention of it
in the daily observations I have dictated to my comlog, but no record of
it in the personal mishmash here that I call a journal. Perhaps the
implications were too frightening.
To my frequent and clumsy attempts at piercing this mystery, the Three
Score and Ten have offered their usual enlightenment. The person
questioned smiles beatifically and responds in some non sequitur that
would make the babble of the Web's worst village idiot seem like sage
aphorisms in comparison. More often than not, they do not answer at
all.
One day I stood in front of the one I have tagged as Dei, stayed there
until he had to acknowledge my presence, and asked, 'Why are there no
children?"
'We are the Three Score and Ten,' he said softly.
'Where are the babies?"
No response. No sense of evading the question, merely a blank stare.
i took a breath. 'Who is the youngest among you?" Del appeared to be
thinking, wrestling with the concept.
He was overmatched. I wondered if the Bikura had lost their time sense
so completely that any such question was doomed. After a minute of
silence, however, Del pointed to where AI was crouched in the sunlight,
working with his crude hand loom, and said, 'There is the last one to
return."
'To return?" I said. 'From where?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Del stared at me with no emotion, not even impatience.
'You belong to the cruciform,' he said. 'You must know the way of the
cross."
I nodded. I knew enough to recognize that in this direction lay one of
the many conversational illogic-loops that usually derailed our
dialogues. I hunted for some way to keep a grasp of the thin thread of
information.
'Then AI,' I said and pointed, 'is the last to be born. To return. But
others will... return?"
I was not sure that I understood my own question.
How does one inquire about birth when the interviewee has no word for
child and no concept of time? But Del seemed to understand. He nodded.
Encouraged, I asked, 'Then when will the next of the Three Score and Ten
be born? Return?"
'No one can return until one dies,' he said.
Suddenly I thought I understood. 'So no new children...
no one will be returned until someone dies,' I said. 'You replace the
missing one with another to keep the group at Three Score and Ten?"
Del responded with the type of silence 1 had come to interpret as
assent.
The pattern seemed clear enough. The Bikura were quite serious about
their Three Score and Ten. They kept the tribal population at seventy -
the same number recorded on the passenger list of the dropship that
crashed here four hundred years ago. Little chance of coincidence
there. When someone died, they allowed a
child .to be born to replace the adult. Simple.
Simple but impossible. Nature and biology do not work that neatly.
Besides the problem of minimum-herd population, there were other
absurdities. Even though it is difficult to tell the ages of these
smooth-skinned people, it is obvious that no more than ten years
separates the oldest from the youngest. Although they act like
children, I would guess their average age to be in the late thirties or
mid-forties in standard years.
So where are the very old? Where are the parents, aging uncles, and
unmarried aunts? At this rate, the entire tribe will enter old age at
approximately the same time.
What happens when they all pass beyond childbearing age and it comes
time to replace members of the tribe?
The Bikura lead dull, sedentary lives. The accident rate-even while
living on the very edge of the Cleft - must be low. There are no
predators. the seasonal variations are minimal and the food supply
almost certainly remains stable. But, granted all this, there must have
been times in the four-hundred-year history of this baffling group when
disease swept the village, when more than the usual number of vines gave
way and dropped citizens into the Cleft, or when something caused that
abnormal cluster of sudden deaths that insurance companies have dreaded
since time immemorial.
And then what? Do they breed to make up the difference and then revert
to their current sexless behavior?
Are the Bikura so different from every other recorded human society that
they have a rutting period once every few years - once a decade? - once
in a lifetime?
It is doubtful.
I sit here in my hut and review the possibilities. One is that these
people live very long lifetimes and can reproduce during most of that
time, allowing for simple replacement of tribal casualties. Only this
does not explain their common ages. And there is no mechanism to
explain any such longevity. The best anti-aging drugs the Hegemony has
to offer only manage to extend an active lifetime a bit over the hundred
standard-year mark. Preventive health measures have spread the vitality
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

of early middle age well into the late sixties - my age - but except for
clonal transplants, bioengi-neering, and other perqs for the very rich,
no one in the Worldweb can expect to begin planning a family when they
are seventy or expect to dance at their hundred-and-tenth birthday
party. if eating chalma roots or breathing the pure air of the Pinion
Plateau had a dramatic effect on retarding aging, it would be a sure bet
that everyone on Hyperion would be living here munching chalma, that
this planet would have had a farcaster centuries ago, and that every
citizen of the Hegemony who has a universal card would be planning to
spend vacations and retirement here.
No, a more logical conclusion is that the Bikura live normal-length
lives, have children at a normal rate, but kill them unless a
replacement is required. They may practice abstinence or birth control-
other than slaughtering the newborn- until the entire band reaches an
age where new blood will soon be needed. A mass-birthing time explains
the apparent common age of the members of the tribe.
But who teaches the young? What happens to the parents and other older
people? Do the Bikura pass along the rudiments of their crude excuse
for a culture and then allow their own deaths? Would this be a 'true
death' - the rubbing out of an entire generation? Do the Three Score
and Ten murder individuals at both ends of the be!l-shaped age curve?
This type of speculation is useless. I am beginning to get furious at
my own lack of problem-solving skills.
Let's form a strategy here and act on it, Paul. Get off your lazy,
Jesuit ass.
PROBLEM: How to tell the sexes apart?
SOLUTION." Cajole or coerce a few of these poor devils into a medical
exam. Find out what all the sex-role mystery and nudity taboo is about.
A society that depends upon years of rigid sexual abstinence for
population control is consistent with my new theory.
PROBLEM: Why are they so fanatical about maintaining the same Three
Score and Ten population that the lost dropship colony started with?
SOLUTION: Keep pestering them until you find out.
PROBLEM: Where are the children?
SOLUTION: Keep pressing and poking until you find out. Perhaps the
evening excursion down the cliff is related to all of this. There may
be a nursery there. Or a pile of small bones.
PROBLEM: What/s this 'belong to the cruciform' and 'way of the cross'
business if not a contorted vestige of the original colonists' religious
belief?.
SOLUTION: Find out by going to the source. Could
their daily descent down the cliff be religious in nature?
PROBLEM: 'What/S down the cliff face?
SOLUTION: GO down and see.
Tomorrow, if their pattern holds true, all threescore and ten of the
Three Score and Ten will wander into the woods for several hours of
foraging. This time I will go with them.
This time I am going over the edge and down the cliff.
Day 105:
0930 hours o Thank you, O Lord, for allowing me to see what 1 have seen
today.
Thank you, O Lord, for bringing me to this place at
this time to see the proof of Your Presence.
1125 hours - Edouard... Edouard!
I have to return. To show you all! To show ,everyone.
l've packed everything I need, putting the imager disks and film in a
pouch I wove from bestos leaves. I have food, water, the maser with its
weakening charge.
Tent. Sleep robes.
If only the arrestor rods had not been stolen!
The Bikura might have kept them. No, i've searched the hovels and the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

nearby forest. They would have no use for them.
It doesn't matter!
I'll leave today if I can. Otherwise, as soon as I can.
Edouard! I have it all here on the film and disks.
"00- There is no way through the flame forests today. The smoke drove
me back even before I penetrated the edge of the active zone.
I returned to the village and went over the holos.
There is no mistake. The miracle is real.
1530 hours- The Three Score and Ten will return any moment.
What if they know... what ff they can tell by looking
at me that I have been there?
I could hide.
No, there is no need to hide. God did not bring me this far and let me
see what I have seen only to let me
die at the hands of these poor children.
1615 hours- The Three Score and Ten returned and went to their huts
without giving me a glance.
I sit here in the doorway of my own hut and cannot keep from smiling,
from laughing, and from praying.
Earlier I walked to the edge of the Cleft, said Mass, and took
Communion. The villagers did not bother to watch.
How soon can I leave? Supervisor Orlandi and Tuk had said that the
flame forest was fully active for three local months - a hundred and
twenty days - then relatively quiet for two. Tuk and I arrived here on
Day $? ....
I cannot wait another hundred days to bring the news to the world... to
all of the worlds.
If only a skimmer would brave the weather and flame forests and pluck me
out of here. If only I could access one of the datafix sats that serve
the plantations.
Anything is possible. More miracles will occur.
2350 hours- The Three Score and Ten have gone down into the Cleft. The
voices of the evening wind choir are rising all around.
How 1 wish I could be with them now! There, below.
I will do the next best thing. I will drop to my knees here near the
cliff edge and pray while the organ notes of the planet and sky sing
what I now know is a hymn to a real and present God.
Day i06:
i awoke today to a perfect morning. The sky was a deep turquoise; the
sun was a sharp, blood-red stone set within.
I stood outside my hut as the mists cleared, the arboreals ended their
morning screech concert, and the air began to warm. Then I went in and
viewed my tapes and disks.
I realize that in yesterday's excited scribblings I mentioned nothing of
what I found down the cliff. I will do so now. I have the disks,
filmtapes, and comlog notes, but there is always the chance that only
these personal journals will be found.
I lowered myself over the cliff edge at approximately 0730 hours
yesterday morning. The Bikura were all foraging in the forest. The
descent on vines had looked simple enough - they were bound around one
another sufficiently to create a sort of ladder in most places - but as
I swung out and began to let myself down, I could feel my heart pounding
hard enough to be painful. There was a sheer three-thousand-meter drop
to the rocks and river below. I kept a tight grip on at least two vines
at all'times and centimetered my way down, trying not to look at the
abyss beneath my feet.
It took me the better part of an hour to descend the hundred and fifty
meters that I am sure the Bikura can cover in ten minutes. Eventually I
reached the curve of an overhang.
Some vines trailed away into space but most of them curled under the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

sheer slab of rock toward the cliff wall thirty meters in. Here and
there the vines 'appeared to have been braided to form crude bridges
upon which the Bikura probably walked with little or no help from their
hands. I crawled along these braided strands, clutching other vines for
support and uttering prayers i had not said since my boyhood. I stared
straight ahead as if ! could forget that there was only a seemingly
infinite expanse of air under those swaying, creaking strands of
vegetable matter.
There was a broad ledge along the cliff wall. I allowed three meters of
it to separate me from the gulf before i squeezed through the vines and
dropped two and a half meters to the stone.
The ledge was about five meters wide and it terminated a short distance
to the northeast where the great mass of the overhang began. I followed
a path along the ledge to the southwest and had gone twenty or thirty
paces before I stopped in shock. It was a path. A path worn out of
solid stone. Its shiny surface had been pushed centimeters below the
level of the surrounding rock. Farther on, where the path descended a
curving lip of ledge to a lower, wider level, steps had been cut into
the stone but even these had been worn to the point that they seemed to
sag in the middle.
I sat down for a second as the impact of this simple fact struck me.
Even four centuries of daily travel by the Three Score and Ten could not
account for such erosion of solid rock. Someone or something had used
this path long before the Bikura colonists crashed here.
Someone or something had used this path for millennia.
I stood and walked on. There was little noise except for the wind
blowing gently along the half-kilometer-wide Cleft. I realized that I
could hear the soft sound of the river far below.
The path curved left around a section of cliff and ended. I stepped out
onto a broad apron of gently descending stone and stared. I believe I
made the sign of the cross without thinking.
Because this ledge ran due north and south for a hundred-meter cut of
cliff, I could look due west along a thirty-kilometer slash of Cleft to
open sky where the plateau ended. I realized at once that the setting
sun would illuminate this slab of cliff wall under the overhang each
evening. It would not have surprised me if -on the spring or autumn
solstice- Hyperion's sun would, from this vantage point, appear to set
directly into the Cleft, its red sides just touching the pink-toned rock
walls.
I turned left and stared at the cliff face. The worn path led across
the wide ledge to doors carved into the vertical slab of stone. No,
these were not merely doors, they were portals, intricately carved
portals with elaborate stone casements and lintels. To either side of
these twin doors spread broad windows of stained glass, rising
at least twenty meters toward the overhang. i went closer and inspected
the facade. Whoever had built this had done so by widening the area
under the overhang, slicing a sheer, smooth wail into the granite of the
plateau, and then tunneling directly into the cliff face. l ran my hand
over the deeply cut folds of ornamental carving around the door. Smooth.
Everything had been smoothed and worn and softened by time, even here,
hidden away from most of the elements by the protective lip of overhang.
How many thousands of years had this... temple... been carved into the
south wail of the Cleft?
The stained glass was neither glass nor plastic but some thick,
translucent substance that seemed as hard as the surrounding stone to
the touch. Nor was the window a composite of panels; the colors
swirled, shaded, melded, and blended into one another like oil on water.
I removed my flashlight from the pack, touched one of the doors, and
hesitated as the tail portai swung inward with frictionless ease.
I entered the vestibule- there is no other word for it- crossed the
silent ten-meter space, and paused in front of another wall made from
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

the same stained-glass materiai that even now glowed behind me, filling
the vestibule with thick light of a hundred subtle hues. 1 reaiized
instantly that at the sunset hour the direct rays of the sun would fill
this room with incredibly deep shafts of color, would strike the
stained-glass wail in front of me, and would illuminate whatever lay
beyond.
I found the single door, outlined by thin, dark metal set into the
stained-glass stone, and 1 passed through it.
On Pacem we have - as best we could from ancient photos and holos-
rebuilt the basilica of St Peter's exactly as it stood in the ancient
Vatican. Almost seven hundred feet long and four hundred and fifty feet
wide, the church can hold fifty thousand worshipers when His Holiness
says Mass. We have never had more than five thousand faithful there
even when the Council of Bishops of All the Worlds is in assembly every
forty-three years. In the central apse near our copy of Bernini's
Throne of St Peter, the great dome rises more than a hundred and thirty
meters above the floor of the altar.
It is an impressive space.
This space was larger.
In the dim light I used the beam of my flashlight to ascertain that !
was in a single great room - a giant hall hollowed out of solid stone. I
estimated that the smooth walls rose to a ceiling that must be only a
few meters beneath the surface of the crag where the Bikura had set
their huts. There was no ornamentation here, no furniture, no sign of
any concession to form or function except for the object that sat
squarely in the center of this huge, echoing cave of a room.
Centered in the great hail was an altar - a five-meter-square slab of
stone left when the rest was hollowed out - and from this altar rose a
cross.
Four meters high, three meters wide, carved in the old style of the
elaborate crucifixes of Old Earth, the cross faced the stained-glass
wall as if awaiting the sun and the explosion of light that would ignite
the inlaid diamonds, sapphires, blood crystals, lapis beads, queen's
tears, onyxes, and other precious stones that I could make out in the
light of the flashlight as 1 approached.
I knelt and prayed. Shutting off the flashlight, 1 waited several
minutes before my eyes could discern the cross in the dim, smoky light.
This was, without a doubt, the cruciform of which the Bikura spoke. And
it had been set here a minimum of many thousands of years ago- perhaps
tens of thousands- long before mankind first left Old Earth. Almost
certainly before
Christ taught in Galilee.
I prayed.
Today ! sit out in the sunlight after reviewing the holodisks. I have
confirmed what I barely noticed during my return up the cliff after
discovering what I now think of as 'the basilica." On the ledge outside
the basilica there are steps descending farther into the Cleft.
Although not as worn as the path leading to the basilica, they are
equally intriguing. God alone knows what other wonders wait below.
I must let the worlds know of this find!
The irony of my being the one t°discover this is not lost on me. I f it
had not been for Armaghast and my exile, this discovery might have
waited more centuries. The Church might have died before this
revelation could have brought new life to it.
But I have found it.
One way or the other, I will leave or get my message out.
Day 107:
I am a prisoner.
This morning I was bathing in my usual place near where the stream drops
over the cliff edge when I heard a sound and looked up to see the Bikura
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

I call Del staring at me with wide eyes. I called a greeting but the
little Bikura turned and ran. It was perplexing. They rarely hurry.
Then I realized that even though I had been wearing trousers at the
time, I had undoubtedly violated their nudity taboo by allowing Del to
see me naked from the waist up.
I smiled, shook my head, finished dressing, and returned to the village.
If I- had known what awaited me there, I would not have been amused.
The entire Three Score and Ten stood watching as 1 approached. I
stopped a dozen paces from Al. 'Good morning,' I said.
Alpha pointed and half a dozen of the Bikura lunged toward me, seized my
arms and legs, and pinned me to the ground. Beta stepped forward and
removed a sharp-edged stone from his or her robes. As I struggled in
vain to pull free, Beta cut my clothes down the front and pulled apart
the shreds until I was all but naked.
I ceased struggling as the mob pressed forward. They stared at my pale,
white body and murmured to themselves.
I could feel my heart pounding. 'l am sorry if I have offended your
laws,' I began, 'but there is no reason..."
'Silence,' said Alpha and spoke to the talt Bikura with the scar on his
palm - the one I call Zed. 'He is notof the cruciform."
Zed nodded.
'Let me explain,' i began again, but Alpha silenced me
with a backhanded slap that left my lip bleeding and my ears ringing.
There had been no more sense of hostility in his action than i would
have shown in silencing a comlog by throwing a switch.
'What are we to do with him?" asked Alpha.
'Those who do not follow the cross must die the true death,' said Beta
and the crowd shifted forward. Many had sharpened stones in their
hands. 'Those not of the cruciform must die the true death,' said Beta
and her voice held the tone of complacent finality common to
oft-repeated formulae and religious litanies.
'l follow the cross!" I cried out as the crowd tugged me to my feet. I
grabbed at the crucifix that hung around my neck and struggled against
the pressure of many arms. Finally I managed to lift the little cross
over my head.
Alpha held up his hand and the crowd paused. In the sudden silence I
could hear the river three kilometers below in the Cleft. 'He does
carry a cross,' said Alpha.
Del pressed forward. 'But he is not of the cruciform! I saw. It was
not as we thought. He is not of the cruciform!" There was murder in his
voice.
I cursed myself for being careless and stupid. The future of the Church
depended upon my survival and l had thrown both away by beguiling myself
into believing that the Bikura were dull, harmless children.
'Those who do not follow the cross must die the true death,' repeated
Beta. It was a final sentencing.
Stones were being raised by seventy hands when l shouted, knowing that
it was either my last chance or my final condemnation. 'i have been
down the cliff and worshiped at your altar! i follow the cross!'
Alpha and the mob hesitated. I could see that they were wrestling with
this new thought. It was not easy for them.
'! follow the cross and wish to be of the cruciform,' !
said as calmly as I could. '! have been to your altar."
'Those who do not follow the cross must die the true death,' called
Gamma.
'But he follows the cross,' said Alpha. 'He has prayed in the room."
'This cannot be,' said Zed. 'The Three Score and Ten pray there and he
is not of the Three Score and Ten."
'We knew before this that he is not of the Three Score and Ten,' said
Alpha, frowning slightly as he dealt with the concept of past tense.
'He is not of the cruciform,' said Delta-two.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Those who are not of the cruciform must die the true death,' said Beta.
'He follows the cross,' said Alpha. 'Can he not then become of the
cruciform?"
An outcry arose. In the general babble and shuffle of forms I pulled
against restraining hands but their grips remained firm.
'He is not of the Three Score and Ten and is not of the cruciform,' said
Beta, sounding more puttied than hostile now. 'How is it that he should
not die the true death?
We must take the stones and open his throat so that the blood flows
until his heart stops. He is not of the cruciform."
'He follows the cross,' said Alpha. 'Can he not become of the
cruciform?"
This time silence followed the question.
'He follows the cross and has prayed at the room of the cruciform,' said
Alpha, 'He must not die the true death."
'All die the true death,' said a Bikura whom I did not recognize. My
arms were aching from the strain of holding the crucifix above my head.
'Except the Three Score and Ten,' finished the anonymous Bikura.
'Because they followed the cross, prayed at the room, and became of the
cruciform,' said Alpha. 'Must he not then become of the cruciform?"
I stood there gripping the cold metal of the small cross and awaited
their verdict. I was afraid to die - l felt afraid - but the larger
part of my mind seemed almost detached. My greatest regret was that I
would not be able to send out the news of the basilica to an unbelieving
universe.
'Come, we will talk of this,' Beta said to the group and they pulled me
with them as they trod silently back to the village.
They have imprisoned me here in my hut. There was no chance to try for
the hunting maser; several of them held me down while they emptied the
hut of most of my possessions. They took my clothing, leaving me only
one of their rough-woven robes to cover myself with.
The longer I sit here the more angry and anxious 1 become. They have
taken my comlog, imager, disks, chips... everything. I have a single,
unopened crate of medical diagnostic equipment left up at the old site,
but that cannot help me document the miracle in the Cleft. If they
destroy the things they have taken- and then
destroy me - there will be no record of the basilica.
If I had a weapon I could kill the guards and
Oh dear God what am I thinking? Edouard, what am I to do?
And even if I survive this- make my way back to Keats- arrange travel
back to the Web- who would believe me?-'after nine years' absence from
Pacem because of the quantum-leap time-debt- just an old man returning
with the same lies he was exiled for- Oh, dear God, if they destroy the
data let them destroy me as well.
Day 110:
' After three days they have decided my fate.
Zed and the one I think of as Theta-Prime came to get me shortly after
midday. I blinked as they led me out into the light. The Three Score
and Ten stood in a wide.
semicircle near the cliff edge. I fully expected to be thrown over that
edge. Then I noticed the bonfire.
I had assumed that the Bikura were so primitive that they had lost the
art of making and using fire. They did not warm themselves with fire
and their huts were always dark. I had never seen them cook a meal, not
even the rare corpse of an arboreal they devoured. But now the fire was
burning strongly and they were the only ones who could have started it.
I looked to see what fueled the flames.
They were burning my clothes, my comiog, my field
notes, the tape cassettes,- video chips, data disks, the imager ...
everything that had held information. 1 screamed at them, tried to
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

throw myself at the fire, and called them names I had not used since the
street days of my childhood. They ignored me.
Finally Alpha came close. 'Yu will become of the cruciform,' he said
softly.
I did not care. They led me back to my hut where l wept for an hour.
There is no guard at the door. A minute ago I stood at the doorway and
considered running for the flame forests. Then I thought of a much
shorter but no less fatal run to the Cleft.
I did nothing.
The sun will be setting in a short time. Already the winds are rising.
Soon. Soon.
Day 112:
Has it been only two days? It has been forever.
It did not come off this morning. It did not come off.
The medscanner's image wafer is right here in front of me but I Still
cannot believe it. And yet I do. I am of the cruciform now.
They came for me just before sunset. All of them. I did not struggle
as they led me to the edge of the Cleft.
They were more agile on the vines than I could have imagined. I slowed
them down but they were patient, showing me the easiest footholds, the
fastest route.
Hyperion's sun had dropped below low clouds and was visible above the
rim wall to the west as we walked the final few meters to the basilica.
The evening windsong was louder than I had anticipated; it was as if we
were caught amid the pipes of a gigantic church organ. The notes rose
from bass growls so deep that my bones and teeth resonated in sympathy
to high, piercing screams that slid easily into the ultrasonic.
Alpha opened the outer doors and we passed through the antechamber into
the central basilica. The Three Score and Ten made a wide circle around
the altar and its tall cross. There was no litany. There was no
singing.
There was no ceremony. We simply stood there in silence as the wind
roared through the fluted columns outside and echoed in the great empty
room carved into the stone - echoed and resonated and grew in volume
until I clapped my hands over my ears. And all the while the streaming,
horizontal rays of sunlight f'dled the hall with deepening hues of
amber, gold, lapis, and then amber again- colors so deep that they made
the air thick with light and lay like paint against the skin. l watched
as the cross caught this light and held it in each of its thousand
precious stones, held it- it seemed - even after the sun had set and the
windows had faded to a twilight gray. It was as if the great crucifix
had absorbed the light and was radiating it toward us, into us. Then
even the cross was dark and the winds died and in the sudden dimness
Alpha said softly, 'Bring him along."
We emerged onto the wide ledge of stone and Beta was there with torches.
As Beta passed them out to a selected few, I wondered if the Bikura
reserved fire for ritual purposes only. Then Beta was leading the way
and we descended the narrow staircase carved into the stone.
At first I crept along, terrified, clutching at the smooth rock and
searching for any reassuring projection of root or stone. The drop to
our right was so sheer and endless that it bordered on being absurd.
Descending the ancient staircase was far worse than clutching at vines
on the cliff face above. Here I had to look down each time I placed a
foot on the narrow, age-slickened slabs. A slip and fall at first
seemed probable, then inevitable.
I had the urge to stop then, to return at least to the safety of the
basilica, but most of the Three Score and Ten were behind me on the
narrow staircase and there seemed little chance that they would stand
aside to let me pass. Besides this, and even greater than my fear, was
the nagging curiosity about what was at the bottom of the staircase. I
did pause long enough to glance up at the .
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

lip of the Cleft three hundred meters above and to see
that the clouds were gone, the stars were out, and the nightly ballet of
meteor trails was bright against a sable sky. Then I lowered my head,
began a whispered recitation
of the rosary, and followed the torchlight and the Bikura into the
treacherous depths.
I could not believe that the staircase would take us all the way to the
bottom of the Cleft, but it did. When, sometime after midnight, I
realized that we would be descending all the way down to the level of
the river, 1 estimated that it would take us until noon of the next day,
but it did not.
We reached the base of the Cleft shortly before sunrise. The stars
still shone in the aperture of sky between cliff walls that rose an
impossible distance on either side. Exhausted, staggering downward step
by step, recognizing slowly that there were no more steps, I stared
upward and wondered stupidly if the stars remained visible there in the
daylight as they did in a well I had lowered myself into once as a child
in Villefranche-sur-SaSne.
'Here,' said Beta. It was the first word uttered in many hours and was
barely audible over the roar of the river. The Three Score and Ten
stopped where they were and stood motionless. I collapsed to my knees
and fell on my side. There was no possibility that I could climb that
stairway we had just descended. Not in a day. Not in a week. Perhaps
never. l closed my eyes to sleep but the dull fuel of nervous tension
continued to burn inside me. I looked out across the floor of the
ravine. The river here was wider than I had anticipated, at least
seventy meters across, and the noise of it was beyond mere noise; I felt
that I was being consumed by a great beast's roar.
I sat up and stared at a patch of darkness in the opposing cliff wall.
It was a shadow darker than the shadows, more regular than the serrated
patchwork of buttresses and crevices and columns that mottled the face
of the cliff. it was a perfect square of darkness, at least thirty
meters to a side. A door or hole in the cliff wall. I struggled to my
feet and looked downriver along the wall we had just descended; yes, it
was there. The other entrance, the one toward which Beta and the others
even now were walking, was faintly visible in the starlight.
l had found an entrance to Hyperion's labyrinth.
'Did you know that Hyperion was one of the nine labyrinthine worlds?"
someone had asked me on the dropship. Yes, it was the young priest
named Hoyt. l had said yes and dismissed the fact. I was interested in
the Bikura - actually more in the self-inflicted pain of my own exile -
not the labyrinths or their builders.
Nine worlds have labyrinths. Nine out of a hundred seventy-six
Webworlds and another two hundred-some colonial and protectorate
planets. Nine worlds out of eight thousand or more worlds explored -
however cursorily - since the Hegira.
There are planetary archaeohistorians who devote their lives to the
study of the labyrinths. Not I. I had always found them a sterile
topic, vaguely unreal. Now I walked toward one with the Three Score and
Ten as the Kans River roared and vibrated and threatened to douse our
torches with its spray.
The labyrinths were dug ... tunneled ... created more than three
quarters of a million standard years ago. The details were inevitably
the same, their origins inevitably unsoived.
Labyrinthine worlds are always Earthlike, at least to 7.9 on the Solmev
Scale, always circling a G-type star, and yet always restricted to
worlds that are tectonically dead, more like Mars than Old Earth. The
tunnels themselves are set deep- usually a minimum of ten kilometers but
often as deep as thirty - and they catacomb the crust of the planet. On
Svoboda, not far from Pacem's system, over eight hundred thousand
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

kilometers of labyrinth have been explored by remotes.
The tunnels on each world are thirty meters square and carved by some
technology still not available to the Hegemony. I read once in an
archaeological journal that Kemp-HS!tzer and Weinstein had postulated a
'fusion tunneler' that would explain the perfectly smooth walls and lack
of tailings, but their theory did not explain where the Builders or
their machines had come from or why they had devoted centuries to such
an apparently aimless engineering task. Each of the labyrinthine
worlds- including Hyperion- has been probed and researched. Nothing has
ever been found. No signs of
excavation machinery, no rusting miners' helmets, not a single piece of
shattered plastic or decomposing stimstick wrapper. Researchers have
not even identified entrance and exit shafts. No suggestion of heavy
metals or precious ores has been sufficient to explain such a monumental
effort. No legend or artifact of the Labyrinth Builders has survived.
The mystery had mildly intrigued me over the years but never concerned
me.
Until now.
We entered the tunnel mouth. It was not a perfect square. Erosion and
gravity had turned the perfect tunnel into a rough cave for a hundred
meters into the cliff wall. Beta stopped just where the tunnel floor
grew smooth and extinguished his torch. The other Bikura did likewise.
It was very dark. The tunnel had turned enough to block out any
starlight that might have entered. I had been in caves before. With
the torches extinguished, I did not expect my eyes to adapt to the
near-total darkness.
But they did.
Within thirty seconds I began to sense a roseate glow, dim at first,
then ever richer until the cave was brighter than the canyon had been,
brighter than Pacem under the glow of its triune moons. The light came
from a hundred sources- a thousand sources. I was able to make out the
nature of these sources just as the Bikura dropped reverently to their
knees.
The cave walls and ceiling were encrusted with crosses ranging in size
from a few millimeters to almost a meter long. Each glowed with a deep,
pink light of its own.
Invisible in the torchlight, these glowing crosses now suffused the
tunnel with light. I approached one embedded in the wall nearest me.
Thirty or so centimeters across, it pulsed with a soft, organic flow.
This was not something that had been carved out of stone or attached to
the wall; it was definitely organic, definitely alive, resembling soft
coral. It was slightly warm to the touch.
There came the slightest whisper of sound - no, not sound, a disturbance
in the cool air, perhaps - and 1 turned in time to see something enter
the chamber.
The Bikura were still kneeling, their heads down, eyes lowered. I
remained standing. My gaze never left the thing which moved among the
kneeling Bikura.
It was vaguely man-shaped but in no way human. It stood at least three
meters tall. Even when it was at rest, the silvered surface of the
thing seemed to shift and flow like mercury suspended in midair. The
reddish glow from the crosses set into the tunnel walls reflected from
sharp surfaces and glinted on the curved metal blades protruding from
the thing's forehead, four wrists, oddly jointed elbows, knees, armored
back, and thorax. It flowed between the kneeling Bikura, and when it
extended four long arms, hands extended but fingers clicking into place
like chrome scalpels, I was absurdly reminded of His Holiness on Pacem
offering a benediction to the faithful.
I had no doubt that I was looking at the legendary Shrike.
At that moment I must have moved or made a sound, for large red eyes
turned my way and I found myself hypnotized by the dance of light within
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

the multifaceted prisms there: not merely reflected light but a fierce,
blood-bright glow which seemed to burn within the creature's barbed
skull and pulse in the terrible gems set where God meant eyes to be.
Then it moved ... or, rather, it did not move but ceased being there
and was here, leaning less than a meter from me, its oddly jointed arms
encircling me in a fence of body-blades and liquid silver steel. Panting
hard but unable to take a breath, I saw my own reflection, face white
and distorted, dancing across the surface of the thing's metallic shell
and burning eyes.
I confess that I felt something closer to exaltation than fear.
Something inexplicable was happening. Forged in Jesuit logic and
tempered in the cold bath of science, !
nevertheless understood at that second the ancient obsession of the
God-fearing for another kind of fear: the thrill of exorcism, the
mindless whirl of Dervish possession, the puppet-dance ritual of Tarot,
and the almost erotic surrender of sance, speaking in tongues, and Zen
Gnostic trance. I realized at that instant just
how surely the affirmation of demons or the summoning of Satan somehow
can affirm the reality of their mystic antithesis - the God of Abraham.
Thinking none of this but feeling all of it, I awaited the embrace of
the Shrike with the imperceptible tremble of a virgin bride.
It disappeared.
There was no thunderclap, no sudden smell of brimstone, not even a
scientifically sound inrush of air. One second the thing was there,
surrounding me with its beautiful certainty of sharp-edged death, and
the next instant it was gone.
Numbed, I stood there and blinked as Alpha rose and approached me in the
Bosch-tinted gloom. He stood where the Shrike had stood, his own arms
extended in a pathetic imitation of the deadly perfection I had just
witnessed, but there was no sign on Alpha's bland, Bikura face that he
had seen the creature. He made an awkward, open-handed gesture which
seemed to include the labyrinth, cave wall, and scores of glowing
crosses embedded there.
'Cruciform,' said Alpha. The Three Score and Ten rose, came closer, and
knelt again. I looked at their placid faces in the soft light and I
also knelt.
'You will follow the cross all of your days,' said Alpha, and his voice
carried the cadence of litany. The rest of the Bikura repeated the
statement in a tone just short of a chant.
'You wR! be of the cruciform all of your days,' said Alpha, and as the
others repeated this he reached out and pulled a small cruciform away
from the cave wall. It was not more than a dozen centimeters long and
it came away from the wall with the faintest of snaps. Its glow faded
even as I watched. Alpha removed a small thong from his robe, tied it
around small knobs at the top of the cruciform, and held the cross above
my head. 'You
will be of the cruciform now and forever,' he said.
'Now and forever,' echoed the Bikura.
'Amen,' I whispered.
Beta signaled that I should open the front of my robe.
Alpha lowered the-small cross until it hung around my
neck. It eit cool against my chest; the back of it was perfectly flat,
perfectly smooth.
The Bikura stood and wandered toward the cave entrance, apparently
apathetic and indifferent once again. I watched them leave and then I
gingerly touched the cross, lifted and inspected it. The cruciform was
cool, inert. If it had truly been living a few seconds earlier, it
showed no sign of it now. It continued to feel more like coral than
crystal or rock; there was no sign of any adhesive material on the
smooth back of it. I speculated on photochemical effects that would
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

have created the luminescent quality. I speculated on natural phos-
phors, bioluminescence, and on the chances that evolution would shape
such things. I speculated on what, if anything, their presence here had
to do with the labyrinth and on the aeons necessary to raise this
plateau so the river and canyon could slice through one of the tunnels.
I speculated on the basilica and its makers, on the Bikura, on the
Shrike, and on myself. Eventually I ceased speculating and closed my
eyes to pray.
When I emerged from the cave, the cruciform cool against my chest under
the robe, the Three Score and Ten were .obviously ready to begin the
three-kilometer climb up the staircase. I looked up to'see a pale slash
of morning sky between the walls of the Cleft.
'No!" I shouted, my voice almost lost against the roar of the river. 'I
need rest. Rest!" I sank to my knees on the sand but half a dozen of
the Bikura approached, pulled me gently to my feet, and moved me toward
the staircase.
I tried, the Lord knows that I tried, but two or three hours into the
climb I felt my legs give way and I collapsed, sliding across the rock,
unable to stop my six-hundred-meter fall to the rocks and river. 1
remember grasping at the cruciform under the thick robe and then half a
dozen hands stopped my slide, lifted me, carried me. Then I remember no
more.
Until this morning. 1 woke to a sunrise pouring light through the
opening of my hut. I wore only the robe and a touch assured me that the
cruciform was still hanging from its fibrous thong. As I watched the
sun lift over the
forest, I realized that I had lost a day, that somehow 1 had slept
through not only my ascent up that endless staircase (how could these
little people carry me two and a half vertical kilometers?) but through
the next day and night as well·
I looked around my hut. My comlog and other recording devices were
gone. Only my medscanner and a few packets of anthropological software
made useless by the destruction of my other equipment remained. I shook
my head and went up to the stream to wash.
The Bikura appeared to be sleeping. Now that I had participated in
their ritual and 'become of the cruciform,' they seemed to have lost
interest in me. As 1 stripped to bathe, I decided to take no interest
in them. I decided that I would leave as soon as I was strong enough. I
would find a way around the flame forests if necessary. I could descend
the staircase and follow the Kans if I had to. I knew more than ever
that word of these miraculous artifacts had to be brought to the outside
world.
I pulled off the heavy robe, stood pale and shivering in the morning
light, and went to lift the small cruciform from my chest.
It did not come off.
It lay there as if it were part of my flesh. I pulled, scraped, and
tore at the thong until it snapped and fell away. I clawed at the
cross-shaped lump on my chest. It did not come off. It was as if my
flesh had sealed itself around the edges of the cruciform. Except for
the scratches from my fingernails, there was no pain or physical
sensation in the cruciform or surrounding flesh, only sheer terror in my
soul at the thought of this thing attached to me. After the first rush
of panic subsided, 1 sat a minute and then hastily pulled on my robe and
ran back to the village.
My knife was gone, my maser, scissors, razor - everything that might
have helped me peel back the growth on my chest. My nails left bloody
tracks across the red welt and my chest. Then I remembered the
medscanner. 1 passed the transceiver over my chest, read the diskey
display, shook my head in disbelief, and then ran an entire body scan.
After a while I keyed in a request for hard copies of the scan results
and sat motionless for a very long time..
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

I sit here now holding the image wafers. The cruciform is quite visible
on both the sonic and k-cross images ·.. as are the internal fibers
that spread like thin tentacles, like roots, throughout my body.
Excess ganglia radiate from a thick nucleus above my sternum to
filaments everywhere- a nightmare of nematodes. As well as I can tell
with my simple field scanner, the nematodes terminate in the amygdala
and other basal ganglia in each cerebral hemisphere. My temperature,
metabolism, and !ymphocyte level are normal.
There has been no invasion of foreign tissue.
According to the scanner, the nematodic filaments are the result of
extensive but simple metastasis. According to the scanner, the
cruciform itself is composed of familiar tissue... the DNA is mine.
I am of the cruciform.
Day 116:
Each day I pace the confines of my cage - the flame · forests to the
south and east, the forested ravines to the northeast, and the Cleft to
the north and west. The Three Score and Ten will not let me descend
into the Cleft beyond the basilica. The cruciform will not let me get
more than ten kilometers from the Cleft.
At first I could not believe this. I had resolved to enter the flame
forests, trusting to luck and to God's help to see me through. But I
had gone no more than two kilometers into the fringes of the forest when
pain struck me in the chest and arms and head. I was sure that !-was
having a massive heart attack. But as soon as i turned back toward the
Cleft the symptoms ceased. I experimented for some time and the results
were invariably the same. Whenever I ventured deeper into the flame
forest, away from the Cleft, the pain would return and increase in
severity until I turned back.
I begin to understand other things. 'Yesterday I
happened across the wreckage of the original seedship shuttle as I
explored to the north. Only a rusted, vine-enmeshed wreck of' metal
remains among the rocks at the edge of the flame forest near the ravine.
But crouching among the exposed alloy ribs of the ancient craft, I could
imagine the rejoicing of the seventy survivors, their short voyage to
the Cleft, their eventual discovery of the basilica, and ... and what?
Conjectures beyond that point are useless, but suspicions remain.
Tomorrow I will attempt another physical exam of one of the Bikura.
Perhaps now that I am 'of the cruciform' they will allow it.
Each day I do a reedscan of myself. The nematodes remain - perhaps
thicker, perhaps not. l am convinced that they are purely parasitic
although my body has shown no signs of this. I peer at my face in the
pool near the waterfall and see only the same long, aging countenance
that I have learned to dislike in recent years: This niorning, while
gazing at my image in the water, l opened my mouth wide, half thinking
that I would see gray filaments and nematode clusters growing from the
roof of my mouth and the back of my throat. There was nothing.
Day liT:
The Bikura are sexless. Not celibate or herma-phroditic or undeveloped
- sexless. They are as devoid of external or internal genitalia as a
child's flowfoam doll. There is no evidence that the penis or testes or
comparable female organs have atrophied or been surgically altered.
There is no sign that they ever existed.
Urine is conducted through a primitive urethra terminating in a small
chamber contiguous with the anus - a sort of crude cloaca.
Beta allowed the examination. The reedscanner confirmed what my eyes
would not believe. Del and Theta also agreed to be scanned. I have
absolutely no doubt that the rest of the Three Score and Ten are equally
sexless. There is no sign that they have been... altered.
i would suggest that they had all been born that way but from what kind
of parents?. And how do these sexless lumps of human clay plan to
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

reproduce? It must be tied in with the cruciform in some way.
When I was finished with their medscans I stripped and studied myself.
The cruciform rises from my chest like pink scar tissue, but I am still
a man.
For how long?
Day 133:
Alpha is dead.
I was with him three mornings ago when he fell. We were about three
kilometers east, hunting for chalma tubers in the large boulders near
the edge of the Cleft. It had been raining most of the past two days
and the rocks were quite slippery. I looked up from my own scrambling
just in time to see Alpha lose his footing and go sliding down a broad
slab of stone, over the edge. He did not shout. The only sound was the
rasp of his robe against the rock, followed several seconds later by the
sickening dropped-melon sound of his body striking a ledge eighty meters
below.
It took me an hour to find a route down to him. Even before I began the
treacherous descent I knew it was too late to help. But it was my duty.
Alpha's body was half wedged between two large rocks. He must have died
instantly; his arms and legs were splintered and the right side of his
skull had been crushed. Blood and brain tissue clung to the wet rock
like the refuse of a sad picnic. I wept as I stood over the little
body. I do not know why I wept, but I did. And as l wept I
administered Extreme Unction and prayed that God would accept the soul
of this poor, sexless little person. Later I wrapped the body in vines,
laboriously climbed the eighty meters of cliff, and - pausing frequently
to pant with exhaustion- pulled the broken corpse up to me.
There was little interest as I carried the body of Alpha into the Bikura
village. Eventually Beta and half a dozen
others wandered over to stare down indifferently at the corpse. No one
asked me how he had died. After a few minutes the small crowd
dispersed.
Later l'carried Alpha's body to the promontory where I had buried Tuk so
many weeks earlier. I was digging the shallow grave with a flat stone
when Gamma appeared. The Bikura's eyes widened and for a brief second I
thought I saw emotion cross those bland features.
'What are you doing?" asked Gamma.
'Burying him." I was too tired to say more. I leaned against a thick
chalma root and rested.
'No." It was a command. 'He is of the cruciform."
I stared as Gamma turned and walked quickly back to the village. When
the Bikura was gone, I pulled off the crude fiber tarp I had draped over
the corpse.
Alpha was, without any doubt, truly dead. It no longer mattered to him
or the universe whether he was of the cruciform or not. The fall had
stripped him of most of his clothes and all of his dignity. The right
side of his skull had been cracked and emptied like a breakfast egg.
One eye stared sightlessly toward Hyperion's sky through a thickening
film while the other looked out lazily from under a drooping lid. His
rib cage had been splintered so thoroughly that shards of bone protruded
from his flesh. Both arms were broken and his left leg had been twisted
almost off. I had used the medscanner to perform a perfunctory autopsy
and it had revealed massive internal injuries; even the poor devil's
heart had been pulped by the force of the fall.
I reached out and touched the cold flesh. Rigor mortis was setting in.
My fingers brushed across the cross-shaped welt on his chest and I
quickly pulled. my hand
away. The cruciform was warm.
'Stand away."
I looked up to see Beta and the rest of the Bikura standing there. I
had no doubt that they would murder me in a second if I did not move
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

away from the corpse.
As I did so, an idiotically frightened part of my mind noted that the
Three Score and Ten were now the Three Score and Nine. It seemed funny
at the time.
The Bikura lifted the body and moved back toward the village. Beta
looked at the sky, looked at me, and said:
'It is almost time. You will come."
We went down into the Cleft. The body was carefully tied into a basket
of vines and lowered with us.
The sun was not yet illuminating the interior of the basilica when they
set Alpha's corpse on the broad altar and removed his remaining rags.
I do not know what I expected next - some ritual act of cannibalism
perhaps. Nothing would have surprised me. Instead, one of the Bikura
raised his arms, just as the first shafts of colored light entered the
basilica, and intoned, 'You will follow the cross all of your days."
The Three Score and Nine knelt and repeated the sentence. I remained
standing. I did not speak.
'You will be of the cruciform all of your days,' said the little Bikura
and the basilica echoed to the chorus of voices repeating the phrase.
Light the color and texture of clotting blood threw a huge shadow of the
cross on the far wall.
'You will be of the cruciform now and forever and ever,' came the chant
as the winds rose outside and the organ pipes of the canyon wailed with
the voice of a tortured child.
When the Bikura stopped chanting I did not whisper 'Amen." I stood there
while the others turned and left with the sudden, total indifference of
spoiled children who have lost interest in their game.
'There is no reason to stay,' said Beta when the others had gone.
'l want to,' I said, expecting a command to leave. Beta turned without
so much as a shrug and left me there. The light dimmed. I went outside
to watch the sun set and when I returned it had begun.
Once, years ago in school, I saw a time-lapse holo showing the
decomposition of a kangaroo mouse. A week's slow work of nature's
recycling had been accelerated to thirty seconds of horror. There was
the sudden, almost comic bloating of the little corpse, then the
stretching of flesh into lesions, followed by the sudden
appearance of maggots in the mouth, eyes, and open sores, and finally
the sudden and incredible corkscrew cleaning of meat from the bones-
there is no other phrase that fits the image- as the pack of maggots
spiraled right to left, head to tail, in a time-lapsed helix of carrion
consumption that left behind nothing but bones and gristle and hide.
Now it was a man's body I watched.
I stopped and stared, the last of the light fading quickly. There was
no sound in the echoing silence of the basilica except for the pounding
of my pulse in my own ears. I stared as Alpha's corpse 'first twitched
and then visibly vibrated, almost !evitating off the altar in the
spastic violence of sudden decomposition. For a few seconds the
cruciform seemed to increase in size and deepen in color, glowing as red
as raw meat, and I imagined then that I caught a glimpse of the network
of filaments and nematodes holding the disintegrating body together like
metal fibers in a sculptor's melting model. Theflesh flowed.
I stayed in the basilica that night. The area around the altar remained
!it by the glow of the cruciform on Alpha's chest. When the corpse
moved the light would cast strange shadows on the walls.
I did not leave the basilica until Alpha left on the third day, but most
of the visible changes had taken place by the end of that first night.
The body of the Bikura I had named .Alpha was broken down and rebuilt as
1 watched. The corpse t.hat was left was not quite Alpha and not quite
not Alpha, but it was intact. The face was a flowfoam do!l's face,
smooth and unlined, features stamped in a slight smile. At sunrise of
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

the third day, i saw the corpse's chest begin to rise and fall and I
heard the first intake of breath- a rasp like water being poured into a
leather pouch. Shortly before noon I left
the basilica to climb the vines.
I followed Alpha.
He has not spoken, will not reply. His eyes have a fixed, unfocused
look and occasionally he pauses as if he hears distant voices calling.
No one paid attention to us when we returned to the
village. Alpha went to a hut and sits there now. 1 sit in mine. A
minute ago I opened my robe and ran my fingers across the welt of the
cruciform. It lies benignly under the flesh of my chest. Waiting.
Day 140:
I am recovering from my wounds and the loss of blood. It cannot be cut
out with a sharpened stone.
It does not like pain. I lost consciousness long before the pain or
loss of blood demanded it. Each time I awoke and resumed cutting, I
would be made to pass out. It does not like pain.
Day 158:
Alpha speaks some now. He seems duller, slower, and only vaguely aware
of me (or anyone else) but he eats and moves. He appears to recognize
me to some extent.
The reedscanner shows the heart and internal organs of a young man -
perhaps of a boy of sixteen.
I must walt about another Hyperion month and ten days-about fifty days
in all- until the flame fores become quiet enough for me to try to walk
out, pain or no pain. We will see who can stand the most
pain.
Day 173:
Another death.
The one called Will - the one with the broken finger - had been missing
for a week. Yesterday the Bikura went several kilometers northeast as
if following a beacon, and found the remains near the great ravine.
Evidently a branch had snapped while he was climbing to grasp some
¢halma fronds. Death must have been instantaneous when he broke his
neck, but it is where he fell that is important. The body - if one
could call it
that - was lying between two great mud cones marking the burrows of the
large red insects that Tuk called fire mnntises. Carpet beetles might
have been a more apt phrase. In the past few days the insects had
stripped the c6rpse clean to the bone. Little was left to be found
except the skeleton, some random shreds of tissue and tendon, and the
cruciform - still attached to the rib cage like some splendid cross
packed in the sarcophagus of a long-dead pope.
It is terrible, but I cannot help but feel some small sense of triumph
beneath the sadness. There is no way thai the cruciform can regenerate
something out of these bare bones; even the terrible illogic of this
accursed parasite must respect the imperative of the law of conservation
of mass. The Bikura I called Will has died the true death. The Three
Score and Ten truly are the Three Score and Nine from this time on.
Day 174:
I am a fool.
Today I inquired about Will, about his dying the true death. I was
curious at the lack of reaction from the Bikura. They had retrieved the
cruciform but left the skeleton lying where they had found it; there was
no attempt to carry the remains to the basilica. During the night I had
become concerned that I would be made to fill the roll of the missing
member of the Three Score and Ten. 'It is very sad,' I said, 'that one
of you has died the true death. What is to become to the Three Score
and Ten?"
Beta stared'at me. 'He cannot die the true death,' said the bald little
androgyny. 'He is of the cruciform."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Somewhat later, while continuing my medscans of the tribe, I discovered
the truth. The one 1 have tagged as Theta looks the same and acts the
same, but now carries two cruciforms embedded in his flesh. I have no
doubt that this is one Bikura who will tend toward corpulence in coming
years, swelling and ripening like some obscene E coli cell in a petri
dish. When he/she/it dies, two will leave the tomb and the Three Score
and Ten will be complete once more.
I believe I am going mad.
Day 195:
Weeks of studying the damn parasite and still no clue as to how it
functions. Worse, I no longer care. What I care about now is more
important.
Why has GOd allowed this obscenity?
Why have the Bikura been punished this way?
Why was I chosen to suffer their fate?
I ask these questions in nightly prayers but I hear no answers, only the
blood song of the wind from the Cleft.
Day 214:
The last ten pages should have covered all of my field notes and
technical conjectures. This will be my last entry before attempting the
quiescent flame forest in the morning.
There is no doubt that I have discovered the ultimate in stagnant human
societies. The Bikura have realized the human dream of immortality and
have paid for it with their humanity and their immortal souls.
Edouard, I have spent-so many hours wrestling with my faith - my lack of
faith - but now, in this fearful corner of an all but forgotten world,
riddied as I am with this loathsome parasite, I have somehow
rediscovered a strength of belief the likes of which I have not known
since you and I were boys. I now understand the need for faith- pure,
blind, fly-in-the-face-of-reason faith- as a small life preserver in the
wild and endless sea of a universe ruled by unfeeling laws and totally
indifferent to the small, reasoning beings that inhabit it.
Day after day I have tried to leave the Cleft area and day after day I
have suffered pain so terrible that it has become a tangible part of my
world, like the too small
sun or the green and lapis sky. Pain has become my ally, my guardian
angel, my remaining link with humanity.
The cruciform does not like pain. Nor do I but, like the cruciform, I
am willing to use it to serve my purposes.
And I will do so consciously, not instinctively like the mindless mass
of alien tissue embedded in me. This thing only seeks a mindless
avoidance of death by any means.
I do not wish to die, but I welcome pain and death rather than an
eternity of mindless life. Life is sacred - I still 'hold to that as a
core element of the Church's thought and teachings these past
twenty-eight hundred years when life has been so cheap - but even more
sacred is the soul.
I realize now that what I was trying to do with the Armaghast data was
offer the Church not a rebirth but only a transition to a false life
such as these poor walking corpses inhabit. If the Church is meant to
die, it must do so - but do so gloriously, in the full knowledge of its
rebirth in Christ. It must go into the darkness not willingly but well
- bravely and firm of faith - like the millions who have gone before us,
keeping faith with all those generations facing death in the isolated
silence of death camps and nuclear fireballs and cancer wards and
pogroms, going into the darkness, if not hopefully, then prayerfully
that there is some reason for it all, something worth the price of all
that pain, all those sacrifices.
All those before us have gone into the darkness without assurance of
logic or fact or persuasive theory, with only a slender thread of hope
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

or the all too shakable conviction of faith. And if they have been able
to sustain that slim hope in the face of darkness, then so must I... and
so must the Church.
! no longer believe that any surgery or treatment can cure me of this
thing that infests me, but if someone can separate it and study it and
destroy it, even at the cost of my death, l will be well satisfied.
The flame forests are as quiet as they will ever be. To bed now. I
leave before dawn.
Day. 215:
There is no way out.
Fourteen kilometers into the forest. Stray fires and bursts of current,
but penetrable. Three weeks of walking would have got me through.
The cruciform will not let me go.
The pain was like a heart attack that would not stop.
Still I staggered forward, stumbling and crawling through the ash.
Eventually I lost consciousness. When I came to I was crawling toward
the Cleft. I would turn away, walk a kilometer, crawl fifty meters,
then lose consciousness again and awakeback where I had started.
All day this insane battle for my body went on.
Before sunset the Bikura entered the forest, found me
five kilometers from the Cleft, and carried me back.
Dear Jesus, why have you let this be?
There is no hope now unless someone comes looking for me.
Day 223:
Again the attempt. Again the pain. Again the failure.
Day257:
I am sixty-eight standard years old today. Work goes on with the chapel
I am building near the Cleft.
Attempted to descend to the river yesterday but was turned back by Beta
and four others.
Day 280:
One local year on Hyperion. One year in purgatory.
Or is it hell?
Day311:
Working on quarrying stones on the ledges below the shelf where the
chapel is going up and I made the discovery today: the arrestor rods.
The Bikura must have thrown them over the edge when they murdered Tuk
that night two hundred and twenty-three days ago.
These rods would allow me to penetrate the flame forest at any time if
the cruciform would allow it. But it will not. If only they had not
destroyed my medkits with the painkillers! But still, sitting here
holding the rods today, I have an idea.
My crude experiments with the medscanner have continued.
Two weeks ago when Theta broke his leg in three places, I observed the
reaction of the cruciform. The parasite did its best to block the pain;
Theta was unconscious much of the time and his body was producing
incredible quantities of endorphins. But the break was a very painful
one and after four days the Bikura slashed Theta's throat and took his
body to the basilica. It was easier for the cruciform to resurrect his
corpse than to tolerate such pain over a long period. But before his
murder my scanner showed an appreciable retreat of the cruciform
nematodes from some parts of the central nervous system.
I do not know if it would be possible to inflict on oneself - or to
tolerate - levels of nonlethal pain sufficient to drive the cruciform
out completely, but I am sure of one thing: the Bikura would not allow
it.
Today I sit on the ledge below the half-finished chapel and I consider
possibilities.
Day 438:
The chapel is finished. It is my !ife's work.
Tonight, when the Bikura went down into the Cleft for their daily parody
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

of worship, I said Mass at the altar of the newly erected chapel. I had
baked the bread from chalma flour and I am sure that it must have tasted
of that bland, yellow leaf, but to me the taste was exactly like that of
the first Host I had partaken of during my first Holy Communion in
Villefranche-sur-Sa/}ne some sixty standard years earlier.
!n the morning 1 will do what I have planned. Everything is in
readiness: my journals and the medscan wafers will be in the pouch of
woven bestos fibers. That is the best I can do.
The consecrated wine was only water, but in the dim light of sunset it
looked blood red and tasted of communion wine.
The trick will be to penetrate deep enough into the flame forest. I
will have to trust that there is enough incipient activity in and from
the tesla trees even during the quiet periods.
Goodbye, Edouard. I doubt if you are still alive, and should you be, 1
see no way that we could be reunited, separated aswe are not only by
years of distance but by a much wider gulf in the form of a cross. My
hope of seeing you again shall not be placed on this life but on the one
to come. Strange to hear me speak like this again, is it not? I must
tell you, Edouard, that after all these decades of uncertainty, and with
great fear of what lies ahead, my heart and soul are nonetheless at
peace.
Oh, my God,
I am heartily sorry for having offended Thee, And I detest all my sins,
Because of the loss of heaven And the pains of hell,
But most of all because I have offended Thee, My God,
Who art all good
And deserving of all my love."
I firmly resolve with the help of Thy grace to
confess my sins, to do penance,
And to amend my life,
Amen.
2400 hours:
The sunset comes through the open chapel window and bathes the altar,
the crudely carved chalice, and me
in light. The wind from the Cleft rises in the last such chorus that -
with luck and God's mercy - I will ever hear.
'That is the final entry,' said Lenar Hoyt.
When th priest quit reading, the six pilgrims at the table raised their
faces toward him as if they were awakening from a common dream. The
Consul glanced upward and saw that Hyperion was much closer now, filling
a third of the sky, banishing the stars with its cold radiance.
'I arrived some ten weeks after. 1 had last seen Father Dur6,'
continued Father Hoyt. His voice was a hoarse rasp. 'More than eight
years had passed on Hyperion .. seven years since the last entry in
Father Dul's journal." The priest was visibly in pain now, his face
paled to a sick !uminescence and filmed with perspiration.
'Within a month I found my way to Perecebo Plantation upriver from Port
Romance,' he continued, forcing some strength into his voice. 'My
assumption was that the fiberplastic growers might tell me the truth
even if they would have nothing to do with the consulate or Home Rule
Authorities. I was right. The administrator at Perecebo, a man named
Orlandi, remembered Father Dur, as did Orlandi's new wife, the woman
named Semfa whom Father Dur6 mentioned in his journals.
The plantation manager had tried to mount several rescue operations onto
the Plateau, but an unprecedented series of active seasons in the flame
forests had made them abandon their attempts. After several years they
had given up hope that Dur or their man Tuk could still be alive.
'Nonetheless, Orlandi recruited two expert bush pilots to fly a rescue
expedition up the Cleft in two plantation skimmers. We stayed in the
Cleft itself for as long as we could, trusting to terrain-avoidance
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

instruments and luck to get us to Bikura country. Even with bypassing
most of the flame forest that way, we lost one of the skimmers and four
people to tesla activity."
Father Hoyt paused and swayed slightly. Gripping the
edge of the table to steady himself, he cleared his throat and said,
'There's little else to tell. We located the Bikura village. There
were seventy of them, each as stupid and uncommunicative as Dur's notes
had suggested.
I managed to ascertain from them that Father Dur6 had died while trying
to penetrate the flame forest. The bestos pouch had survived and in it
we found his journals and medical data." Hoyt looked at the others a
second and then glanced down. 'We persuaded them to show us where
Father Dur6 had died,' he said. 'They...
ah... they had not buried him. His remains were badly burned and
decomposed but complete enough to show us that the intensity of the
tesla charges had destroyed the... the cruciform... as well as his
body.
'Father Dur6 had died the true death We returned the remains to the
Perecebo Plantation where he was buried following a full funeral Mass."
Hoyt took a deep breath. 'Over my strong objections, M. Orlandi
destroyed the Bikura village and a section of the Cleft wall with shaped
nuclear charges he had brought from the plantation. I do not believe
that any of the Bikura could have survived. As far as we could tell,
the entrance to the labyrinth and the so-called basilica also must have
been destroyed in the landslide.
'1 had sustained se/eral injuries during the expedition and thus had to
remain at the plantation for several months before returning to the
northern continent and booking passage to Pacem. No one knows of these
journals or their contents except M. Orlandi, Monsignor Edouard, and
whichever of his superiors Monsignor Edouard chose to tell. As far as I
know, the Church has issued no declaration relating to the journals of
Father Paul Dur6."
Father Hoyt had been standing and now he sat. Sweat dripped from his
chin and his face was blue-white in the reflected light of Hyperion.
'Is that... all?" asked Martin Silenus.
'Yes,' managed Father Hoyt.
'Gentlemen and lady,' said Het Masteen, 'it is late. 1 suggest that you
gather your luggage and rendezvous at our friend the Consui's ship on
sphere eleven in thirty
minutes or sooner. I will be using one of the tree's drop-ships to join
you later."
Most of the group was assembled in less than fifteen minutes. The
Templars had rigged a gangway from a work pier on the interior of the
sphere to the ship's top-tier balcony, and the Consul led the way into
the lounge as crew clones stowed luggage and departed.
'A fascinating old instrument,' said Colonel Kassad as he ran one hand
across the top of the Steinway.
'Harpsichord?"
'Piano,' said the Consul. 'Pre-Hegira. Are we all here?"
'Everyone except Hoyt,' said Brawne Lamia as she.
took a seat in the projection pit.
Het Masteen entered. 'The Hegemony warship has granted permission for
you to descend to Keats's space-port,' said the Captain. He glanced
around. 'I will send a crew member to see if M. Hoyt needs
assistance."
'No,' said the Consul. He modulated his voice. 'I'd like to get him.
Can you tell me the way to his quarters?"
The treeship Captain looked at the Consul for a long second and then
reached into the folds of his robe. 'Bon voyage,' he said, handing over
a wafer. 'I will see you on the planet, sometime before our midnight
departure time from the Shrike's Temple in Keats."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The Consul bowed. 'It was a pleasure traveling within the protective
branches of the Tree, Het Masteen,' he said formally. Turning to the
others, he gestured.
'Please make yourselves comfortable in the lounge or the library on the
desk below this. The ship will see to your needs and answer any
questions you might have.
We will depart as soon as Father Hoyt and I return."
The priest's environment pod was halfway up the treeship, far out on a
secondary branch. As the Consul expected, the comlog direction wafer
Het Masteen had given him also served as a palmlock override. After
useless minutes tapping the announcer chime and pounding on the access
portal, the Consul triggered the override and stepped into the pod.
Father Hoyt was on his knees, writhing in the center of the grass
carpet. Bedclothes, gear, garments, and the contents of a standard
medkit were strewn on the floor around him. He had torn off his tunic
and collar and sweated through his shirt so that it now hung in damp
folds, ripped and tattered where he had clawed through the fabric.
Hyperion light seeped through the pod wall, making the bizarre tableau
appear to be staged underwater - or, thought the Consul, in a cathedral.
Lenar Hoyt's face contorted in agony as his hands raked at his chest.
Muscles on his exposed forearms writhed like living creatures moving
beneath his pale tarp of a skin. 'The injector... malfunctioned,'
gasped Hoyt. 'Please."
The Consul nodded, commanded the door to close, and knelt next to the
priest. He removed the useless injector from Hoyt's clenched fist and
ejected the syrette ampule. Ultramorphine. The Consul nodded again and
took out an injector from the medkit he had brought from his ship. It
took less than five seconds to load the ultramorph.
'Please,' begged Hoyt. His whole body spasmed. The Consul could almost
see the waves of pain passing through the man.
'Yes,' said the Consul. He took a ragged breath. 'But first the rest
of the story."
Hoyt stared, reached weakly for the injector.
Sweating himself now, the Consul held the instrument just out of reach.
'Yes, in a second,' he said. 'After the rest of the story. It's
important that I know."
'Oh, God, sweet Christ,' sobbed Hoyt. 'Please!'
'Yes,' gasped the Consul. 'Yes. As soon as you tell me the truth."
Father Hoyt collapsed onto his forearms, breathing in quick pants. 'You
fucking bastard,' he gasped. The priest took several deep breaths, held
one until his body quit shaking, and tried to sit up. When he looked at
the Consul, there was something like relief in the maddened
eyes. 'Then... you'll give me... the shot?"
'Yes,' said the Consul.
'All right,' Hoyt managed in a sour whisper. 'The
truth. Perecebo Plantation... like I said. We flew in ... early
October ... Lycius ... eight years after Dur6 ... disappeared. Oh,
Christ, it hurts! Alcohol and endos don't work at all anymore. Only...
pure ultramorph..."
'Yes,' whispered the Consul. 'It's ready. As soon as the story is
done."
The priest lowered his head. Sweat dripped from his cheeks and nose
onto the short grass. The Consul saw the man's muscles tense as if he
were going to attack, then another spasm of pain wracked the thin body
and Hoyt sagged forward. 'Skimmer wasn't destroyed...
by tesla. Semfa, two men, and I... forced down near the Cleft while...
while Orlandi searched upriver. His skimmer... had to wait while the
lightning storm died down.
'Bikura came in the night. Killed... killed Semfa, the pilot, the
other man... forget his name. Left me ·.. alive." Hoyt reached for
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

his crucifix, realized that he had torn it off. He laughed briefly,
stopping before the laughter turned to sobs. 'They... told me about
the way of the cross. About the cruciform. Told me about ·.. the Son
of the Flames.
'Next morning, they took me to see the Son. Took me ·.. to see him."
Hoyt struggled upright and clawed at his own cheeks. His eyes were
wide, the ultramorph obviously forgotten despite the pain. 'About three
kilometers into the flame forest... big tesla... eighty, a hundred
meters tall, at least. Quiet then, but still a lot ... a lot of charge
in the air. Ash everywhere.
'The Bikura wouldn't... wouldn't go too close. Just knelt there with
their goddamned bald heads bowed. But I... went close... had to. Dear
God... Oh, Christ, it was him. Dur6. What was left of him.
'He'd used a ladder to get three ... maybe four meters... up on the
bole of the tree. Built a sort of platform. For his feet. Broken the
arrestor rods off...
little more than spikes ... then sharpened them· Must've used a rock to
drive the long one through his feet into the bestos platform and tree.
'His left arm... he'd pounded the stake between the
radius and ulna ... missed veins ... just like the goddamned Romans.
Very secure as long as his skeleton was intact. Other hand... right
hand... palm down.
He'd driven the spike first. Sharpened both ends. Then · . . impaled
his right hand. Somehow bent the spike over. Hook.
'Ladder'd fallen... long ago... but it was bestos.
Hadn't burned. Used it to climb up to him. Everything'd burned away
years ago... clothes, skin, top layers of flesh... but the bestos
pouch was still around his neck.
'The alloy spikes still conducted current even when ·.. I could see
it... feel it... surging through what was left of the body.
'It still looked like Paul Dur. Important. I told Monsignor. No skin.
Flesh raw or boiled away. Nerves and things visible... like gray and
yellow roots. Christ, the smell. But it still looked like Paul Dur!
'i understood then. Understood it all. Somehow...
even before reading the journals. Understood he'd been hanging there...
oh, dear God... seven years Living.
Dying· The cruciform . . . forcing him to live again.
Electricity ... surging through him every second of those ... those
Seven years. Flames. Hunger. Pain.
Death. But somehow the goddamned... cruciform...
!eeching substance from the tree maybe, the air, what was left...
rebuilding what it could... forcing him to live, to feel the pain, over
and over and over...
' 'But he won. Pain was his ally. Oh, Jesus, not a few hours on the
tree and then the spear and rest, but seven years!
'But . . . he won. When I removed the pouch, the cruciform on his
chest fell away also. Just... fell right off... long, bloody roots.
Then the thing... the thing I'd been sure was a corpse .".. the man
raised its head.
No eyelids. Eyes baked white. Lips gone. But it looked at me and
smiled. He smiled. And he died . . . really died... there in my
arms. The ten thousandth time, but real this time. He smiled at me and
died."
Hoyt stopped, communed in silence with his own pain, and then continued
between bouts of clenching his teeth. 'Bikura took me... back to...
Cleft Orlandi
came the next day. Rescued me. He... Semfa... 1 couldn't... he
iasered the village, burned the Bikura where they stood like stupid
sheep. I didn't... didn't argue with him. I laughed· Dear God,
forgive me.
Orlandi nuked the site with shaped charges they used to ·.. to clear
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

the jungle·.. fiberplastic matrix."
Hoyt looked directly at the Consul and made a contorted gesture with his
right hand. 'The painkillers worked all right at first. But every
year... every day ... got worse. Even in fugue... the pain. I would
have had to come back anyway. How could he . . . seven years! Oh,
Jesus,' said Father Hoyt and clawed at the carpet.
The Consul moved quickly, injecting the full ampule of ultramorph just
under the armpit, catching the priest as he collapsed, and gently
lowering the unconscious form to the floor. His vision unclear, the
Consul ripped open Hoyt's sweat-sodden shirt, casting the rags aside.
It was there, of course, lying under the pale skin of Hoyt's chest like
some great, raw, cross-shaped worm.
The Consul took a breath and gently turned the priest over. The second
cruciform was where he had expected to find it, a slightly smaller,
cross-shaped welt between the thin man's shoulder blades. It stirred
slightly as the Consu!'s fingers brushed the fevered flesh.
The Consul moved slowly but efficiently- packing the priest's
belongings, straightening the room, dressing the unconscious man with
the gentle care one would use in clothing the body of a dead family
member.
The Consui's.comiog buzzed. 'We need to go,' came Colonel Kassad's
voice.
'We're coming,' replied the Consul. He coded the comlog to summon crew
clones to fetch the luggage, but lifted Father Hoyt himself. The body
seemed to weigh nothing.
The door dilated open and the Consul stepped out, moving from the deep
shadow of the branch into the blue-green glow of the world which filled
the sky.
Deciding what cover story he would tell the others, the Consul paused a
second to look at the sleeping man's face. He glanced up at Hyperion
and then moved on.
Even if the gravity field had been full Earth standard, the Consul knew,
the body in his arms would have been no burden.
Once a parent to a child now dead, the Consul walked on, knowing once
again the sensation of bearing a sleeping son to bed.
TWO
It had been a warm, rainy day in Keats, Hyperion's capi-tai, and even
after the rains stopped a layer of clouds moved slow and heavy over the
city, filling the air with the salt scent of the ocean twenty kilometers
to the west.
Toward evening, as the gray daylight was beginning to fade into gray
twilight, a double sonic boom shook the town and then echoed from the
single, sculpted peak to the south. The clouds glowed blue-white. Half
a minute later an ebony spacecraft broke through the overcast and
descended carefully on a tail of fusion flame, its navigation lights
blinking red and green against the gray.
At one thousand meters the craft's landing beacons flared and three
beams of coherent light from the space-port north of town locked the
ship in a welcoming ruby tripod. The spacecraft hovered at three
hundred meters, slipped sideways as smoothly as a mug sliding on a wet
table top, and then settled weightlessly into a waiting blast pit.
High-iressure jets of water bathed the pit and the base of the ship,
sending up billows of steam to blend with the curtain of drizzle blowing
across the paved plain of the spaceport. When the water jets ceased
there was no noise except the whisper of rain and the random ticks and
creaks of the cooling spaceshi.
A balcony extruded itself from the ship's 'bulkhead twenty meters above
the pit wail. Five figures emerged.
'Thank you for the ride, sir,' Colonel Kassad said to the Consul.
The Consul nodded and leaned on the railing, taking in deep breaths of
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

fresh air. Droplets of rain beaded on his shoulders and eyebrows.
Sol Weintraub lifted his baby from her infant carrier.
Some change in pressure, temperature, scent, motion, noise, or a
combination of all of these had awakened her and now she began to cry
lustily. Weintraub bounced her and cooed to her but the wailing
continued.
'An appropriate comment upon our arrival,' said Martin Silenus. The
poet wore a long purple cape and a red beret which slouched to his right
shoulder. He took a drink from a wineglass he had carried out from the
lounge. 'Christ on a stick, this place looks different."
The Consul, who had been away only eight local years, had to agree. The
spaceport had been a full nine klicks from the city when he lived in
Keats; now shacks, tents, and mud streets surrounded the landing field's
perimeter.
In the Consui's day, no more than a ship a week had put in at the tiny
spaceport; now he counted more than twenty spacecraft on the field. The
small administration and customs building had been superseded by a huge,
prefabricated structure, a dozen new blast pits and drop-ship grids had
been added where the field had been hastily extended to the west, and
the perimeter now was littered with scores of camouflage-sheathed
modules which the Consul knew must serve as everything from ground
control stations to barracks. A forest of exotic antennae grew skyward
from a cluster of such boxes at the far end of the landing apron.
'Progress,' murmured the Consul.
'War,' said Colonel Kassad.
'Those are people,' said Brawne Lamia, pointing toward the main terminal
gates on the south side of the field. A wave of drab colors crashed
like a silent surf
against the outer fence and the violet containment field.
'My God,' said the Consul, 'you're right."
Kassad produced his binoculars and they took turns staring at the
thousands of forms tugging at the wire, pressing against the repelling
field.
'Why are they here?" asked Lamia. 'What do they want?" Even from half a
kilometer away, the mindless will of the mob was daunting. Dark forms
of FORCE: Marines could be seen patrolling just within the perimeter.
The Consul realized that between the wire, the containment field, and
the Marines a strip of raw earth
almost surely signified mines or a deathbeam zone, or both.
'What do they want?" repeated Lamia.
'They want out,' said Kassad.
Even before the Colonel spoke, the Consul realized that the shack city
around the spaceport and the mob at the gates were inevitable; the
people of Hyperion were ready to leave. He guessed that there must be
such a silent surge toward the gates each time a ship landed.
'Well, there's one who'll be staying,' said Martin Silenus and pointed
toward the low mountain across the river to the south. 'Old Weeping
William Rex, God rest his sinful soul." The sculpted face of Sad King
Billy was just visible through the light rain and growing darkness.
'l knew him. Horatio,' said the drunken poet. 'A man of infinite jest.
Not one of them funny. A real horse's ass, Horatio."
Sol Weintraub stood just inside the ship, shielding his baby from the
drizzle and removing her cries from the vicinity of the conversation. He
pointed. 'Someone is coming."
A groundcar with its camouflage polymer inert and a military EMV
modified with hoverfans for Hyperion's weak magnetic field were crossing
the damp hardpan.
Martin Silenus's gaze never left Sad King Billy's dour visage. Silenus
said in a voice almost too soft to be heard:
'Deep in the shady sadness of a vale
Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn, Far from the fiery noon, and
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

eve's one star, Sat gray-hair'd Saturn, quiet as a stone,
Still as the silence round about his lair; Forest on forest hung above
his head
Like cloud on cloud..."
Father Hoyt came onto the balcony, rubbing his face with both hands. His
eyes were wide and unfocused, a child rising from his nap. 'Are we
there?" he asked.
'Fucking aye,' cried Martin Silenus, returning the binoculars to the
Colonel. 'Let's go down and greet'the gendarmes."
The young Marine lieutenant seemed unimpressed with the group even after
he had scanned the authorization wafer Her Masteen had passed along from
the task force commander. The lieutenant took his time scanning their
visa chips, letting them wait in the drizzle, occasionally making a
comment with the idle arrogance common to such nobodies who have just
come into a small bit of power. Then he came to Fedmahn Kassad's chip
and looked up with the expression of a startled stoat. 'Colonel
Kassad!'
'Retired,' said Kassad.
'l'm sorry, sir,' said the lieutenant, stumbling over his words as he
fumbled the visas back to everyone. '1 had no idea you were with this
party, sir. That is ... the Captain just said... I mean... my uncle
was with you on Bressia, sir. I mean, I'm sorry... anything I or my
men can do to..."
'At ease, Lieutenant,' said Kassad. 'Is there any chance of getting
some transport into the city?"
'Ah... well, sir..." The young Marine started to rub his chin and then
remembered that he was wearing his helmet. 'Yes, sir. But the problem
is, sir, the mobs can get pretty nasty and... well, the damn EMVs don't
work for shit on this. '. uh, pardon me, sir. You see, the ground
transports're limited to cargo and we don't have any skimmers free to
leave the base until 2200 hours but I'!1 be happy to get your party on
the roster for..."
'Just a minute,' said the Consul. A battered passenger skimmer with the
gold geodesic of the Hegemony painted on one flare skirt had landed ten
meters away. A tall, thin man stepped out. 'Theo!" cried the Consul.
The two men stepped forward, started to shake hands, and then hugged
each other instead. 'Damn,' said the Consul, 'you look good, Theo."
ItWas true. His former aide had gained half a dozen years on the
Consul, but the younger man still had the boyish smile, thin face, and
thick red hair that had attracted every unmarried woman - annot a few
married ones - on the consulate staff. The shyness which had been part
of Theo Lane's vulnerability was still there, as evidenced by the way he
now needlessly adjusted his archaic horn-rimmed glasses - the young
diplomat's one affectation.
'It's good to have you back,' said Theo.
The Consul turned, started to introduce his friend to the group, and
then stopped. 'My God,' he said, 'you're Consul now. I'm sorry, Theo,
I wasn't thinking."
Theo Lane smiled and adjusted his glasses. 'No problem, sir,' he said.
'Actually, l'm no longer Consul. For the last few months I've been
acting Governor-General.
The Home Rule council finally requested - and received - formal colonial
status. Welcome to the newest world in the Hegemony."
The Consul stared a second and then hugged his former protg again.
'Congratulations, Your Excellency."
Theo grinned and glanced at the sky. 'It's going to rain in earnest
before long. Why don't we get your group aboard the skimmer and VII
drive you into town." The new Governor-General smiled at the young
Marine.
'Lieutenant?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Uh ... yes, sir?" The officer had snapped to attention.
'Could you get your men to load these good people's luggage, please?
We'd all like to get in out of the rain."
The skimmer flew south above the highway at a steady sixty meters. The
Consul rode in the front passenger seat; the rest of the group relaxed
in flowfoam recliners behind. Martin Silenus and Father Hoyt appeared
to be asleep. Weintraub's baby had ceased crying in favor of nursing on
a soft bottle of synthesized mother's milk.
'Things have changed,' said the Consul. He rested his cheek against the
rain-spattered canopy and looked down at the chaos.
Thousand of shacks and iean-tos covered the hillsides and gullies along
the three-klick ride to the suburbs.
Fires were being lighted under wet tarps and the Consul watched
mud-colored figures moving between mud-colored shacks. High fences had
been rigged along the old Spaceport Highway and the road itself had been
widened and regraded. Two lanes of truck and hover traffic,
ill
most of it military green or shrouded with inactive camouflage polymer,
moved sluggishly in both directions.
Ahead, the lights of Keats seemed to have multiplied and spread across
new sections of the river valley and hills.
'Three million,' said Tbeo, as if reading his former boss's mind. 'At
least three million people and growing every day."
The Consul stared. 'There were only four and a half million people on
the planet when I left."
'Still are,' said the new Governor-General. 'And every one of them
wants to get to Keats, board a ship, and get the hell out. Some are
waiting for the farcaster to be built, but most don't believe it'll
happen in time. They're afraid."
'Of the Ousters?"
'Them too,' said Theo, 'but mosfiy of the Shrike."
The Consul turned his face from the coolness of the canopy. 'It's come
south of the Bridle Range then?"
Theo laughed without humor. 'It's everywhere. Or they're everywhere.
Most people are convinced that there are dozens or hundreds of the
things now. Shrike deaths have been reported on all three continents.
Everywhere except Keats, segments of the coast along the Mane, and a few
of the big cities like Endymion."
'How many casualties?" The Consul did not really want to know.
'At least twenty thousand dead or missing,' said Theo.
'There are a lot of injured people but that isn't the Shrike, is it?"
Again came the dry laugh. 'The Shrike doesn't just wound people, does
it? Uh-uh, people shoot each other by accident, fall down stairways or
jump out windows in their panic, and trample each other in crowds. It's
a fucking mess."
In the eleven years the Consul had worked with Theo Lane, he had never
heard the younger man use profanity of .any sort. 'Is FORCE any help?"
the Consul asked.
'Ai'e they what's keeping the Shrike away from the big cities?"
Theo shook his head. 'FORCE hasn't done a damn thing except control the
mobs. Oh, the Marines put on a
show of keeping the spaceport open here and the harbor landing zone at
Port R secure, but they haven't even tried to confront the Shrike.
They're waiting to fight the Ousters."
,'SDF?" asked the Consul, knowing even as he spoke that the poorly
trained Self-defense Force would have been of little use.
Theo snorted. 'At least eight thousand of the casualties are SDF.
General Braxton took the "Fighting Third" up the River Road to "strike
at the Shrike menace in their lair" and that was the last we heard of
them."
'You're joking,' said the Consul, but one look at his friend's face told
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

him that he wasn't. 'Theo,' he said, 'how in the world did you have
time to meet us at the spaceport?"
'I didn't,' said the Governor-General. He glanced in the back. The
others were sleeping or staring exhaustedly out windows. 'I needed to
talk to you,' said Theo. 'Convince you not to go."
The Consul started to shake his head but Theo grasped his arm, squeezed
hard. 'Now listen to what I have to say, damn it. I know how hard it
is for you to come back here after... what happened but, goddamn it,
there's no sense in your throwing everything away for no reason.
Abandon this stupid pilgrimage. Stay in Keats."
'I can't..." began the Consul.
'Listen to me,' demanded Theo. 'Reason one: you're the finest diplomat
and crisis manager I've ever seen and
we need your skills."
'It doesn't..."
'Shut up a minute. Reason two: you and the others won't get within two
hundred klicks of the Time Tombs.
Thais isn't like the old days when you were here and the goddamned
suicides could get up there and even sit around for a week and maybeeven
change their minds and
come home. The Shrike is on the move. It's like a plague." '1
understand that but..."
'Reason three: lneed you. I begged Tau Ceti Center to' send someone
else out. When I found that you were coming...
well, hell, it got me through the last two years."
The Consul shook his head, not understanding.
Theo started the turn toward the city center and then hovered, taking
his eyes off the controls to look directly at the Consul. '! want you
to take over the governor-generalship.
The Senate won't interfere- except perhaps for Gladstone o and by the
time she finds out, it will be too late."
The Consul felt as though someone had struck him below the third rib. He
looked away, down at the maze of narrow streets and crooked buildings
that was Jacktown, the Old City. When he could speak again, he said, 'I
can't, Theo."
'Listen, if you..."
'No. I mean I cannot. It would be no good if I did accept it, but the
simple truth is, I can't. I have to go on this pilgrimage."
Theo straightened his glasses, stared straight ahead.
'Look, Theo, you're the most competent and capable Foreign Service
professional l've ever worked with. I've been out of things for eight
years. I think..."
Theo nodded tersely, interrupted. 'I suppose you want
to go to the Shrike Temple." ·
,yes."
The skimmer circled and settled. The Consul was staring at
nothing,.thinking, when the side doors of the skimmer raised and folded
and Sol Weintraub said, 'Good God."
The group stepped out and stared at the charred and toppled wreckage of
what had been the Shrike Temple.
Since the Time Tombs had been closed as too dangerous some twenty-five
local years earlier, the Shrike Temple had become Hyperion's most
popular tourist attraction.
Filling three full city blocks, rising more than a hundred and fifty
meters to its central, sharpened spire, the Shrike Church's central
temple was part awe-inspiring cathedral, part Gothic joke with its
fluid, buttressed curves of stone permabonded to its whiskered-alloy
skeleton, part Escher print with its tricks of perspective and
impossible angles, part Boschian nightmare with its tunnel entrances,
hidden chambers, dark gardens, and forbidden sections, and - more than
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

anything else - it had been part of Hyperion's past.
Now it was gone. Tall heaps of blackened stone were the only hint of
the structure's former majesty. Melted alloy girders rose from the
stones like the ribs of some giant carcass. Much of the rubble had
tumbled into the pits, basements, and passages which had lain beneath
the three-century-old landmark. The Consul walked close to the edge of
a pit and wondered if the deep basements had - as legend decreed -
actually connected to one of the planet's labyrinths.
'It looks as if they used a hellwhip on this place,' said Martin
Silenus, using an archaic term for any high-energy laser weapon. The
poet seemed suddenly sobered as he joined the Consul at the edge of the
pit. 'I remember when the Temple and parts of the Old City were the
only things here,' he said. 'After the disaster near the Tombs, Billy
decided to relocate Jacktown here because
of the Temple. Now it's gone. Christ."
'No,' said Kassad.
The others looked at him.
The Colonel rose from where he had been examining the rubble. 'Not a
hellwhip,' he said. 'Shaped plasma charges. Several of them."
'Now do you want to stay here and go on this useless pilgrimage?" asked
Theo. 'Come with me back to the consulate." He was speaking to the
Consul but extending the invitation to everyone.
The Consul turned away from the pit, looking at his former aide but now
seeing, for the first time, the Governor-General of a besieged Hegemony
world. 'We can't, Your Excellency,' said the Consul. 'At least I
can't. I won't speak for the others."
The four men and the woman shook their heads.
Silenus and Kassad began unloading luggage. The rain returned as a
light mist falling out of the darkness. At that second the Consul
noticed the two FORCE attack skimmers hovering above the nearby
roofiops. Darkness and chameleon-polymer hulls had hidden them we!!,
but the rain now revealed their outlines. Of course, thought
the Consul, the Governor-General does not travel unescorted.
'Did the priests escape? Were there survivors when the
Temple was destroyed?" asked Brawne Lamia.
'Yes,' said Theo. The de facto dictator of five million doomed souls
removed his glasses and dried them on his shirttail. 'All of the Shrike
Cult priests and acolytes escaped through tunnels. The mob had been
surrounding this place for months. Their leader, a woman named Cammon
from somewhere east of the Sea of Grass, gave everyone in the Temple
plenty of warning before they set off. the DL-20."
'Where were the police?" asked the Consul. 'The SDF?
FORCE?"
Theo Lane smiled and at that second he looked decades older than the
young man the Consul had known.
'You folks have been in transit for three years,' he said.
'The universe has changed. Shrike cultists are being burned out and
beaten up in the Web. You can imagine the attitude here. The Keats
police have been absorbed under the martial law I declared fourteen
months ago.
They and the SDF watched while the mob torched the Temple. So did 1.
There were half a million people here that night."
Sol Weintraub stepped closer. 'Do they know about us? About this final
pilgrimage?"
'If they did,' said Theo, 'none of you would be alive.
You'd think they'd welcome anything that might appease the Shrike, but
the only thing the mob would notice is that you were chosen by the
Shrike Church. As it was, I had to overrule my own Advisory Council.
They were in favor of destroying your ship before it reached the
atmosphere."
'Why did you?" asked the Consul. 'Overrule them, 1 mean. '
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Theo sighed and adjusted his glasses. 'Hyperion still needs the
Hegemony, and Gladstone still has the vote of confidence of the All
Thing, if not the Senate. And I still need you."
The Consul looked at the rubble of the Shrike Temple.
'This pilgrimage was over before you got here,' said Governor-General
Theo Lane. 'Will you come back to the consulate with me ... at least
in an advisory capacity?"
'I'm sorry,' said the Consul. '1 can't."
Theo turned without a word, dropped into the skimmer, and lifted off.
His military escort followed as a blur in the rain.
It was raining harder now. The group moved closer together in the
growing darkness. Weintraub had rigged a makeshift hood over Rachel and
the noise of the rain on plastic made the baby cry.
'What now?" said the Consul, looking around at the night and narrow
streets. Their luggage lay heaped in a soggy pile. The world smelled
of ashes.
Martin Silenus grinned. 'I know a bar."
It turned out that the Consul also knew the bar; he had all but lived in
Cicero's for most of his eleven-year assignment on Hyperion.
Unlike most things in Keats, on Hyperion, Cicero's was not named after
some piece of pre-Hegira literary trivia. Rumor had it that the bar was
named after a section of an Old Earth city - some said Chicago, USA,
others were sure it was Calcutta, AIS - but only Stan Leweski, owner and
great-grandson of the founder, knew for sure, and Stan had never
revealed its secret.
The bar itself had overflowed over the century and a half of its
existence from a walkup loft in one of Jacktown's sagging older
buildings along the Hoolie River to nine levels in four sagging old
buildings along the Hoolie. The only consistent elements of decor at
Cicero's over the decades were the low ceilings, thick smoke, and
constant background babble which offered a sense of privacy in the midst
of bustle.
There was no privacy this night. The Consul and the others paused as
they carried their gear through the Marsh Lane entrance.
'Jesus Wept,' muttered Martin Silenus
Cicero's looked as if it had been invaded by barbarian hordes. Every
chair was filled, every table occupied, mostly by men, and the floors
were littered with packs, weapons, bedrolls, antiquated comm equipment,
ration boxes, and all of the other detritus of an army of refugees...
or perhaps a refugee army. The heavy air of
Cicero's, which once had been filled with the blended scent of broiling
steaks, wine, stim, ale, and T-free tobacco, was now laden with the
overlapping smells of unwashed bodies, urine, and hopelessness.
At that moment the huge form of Stan Leweski materialized out of the
gloom. The bar owner's forearms were as huge and heavy as ever, but his
forehead had advanced more than a few centimeters against the receding
tangle of black hair and there were more creases than the Consul
remembered around the dark eyes.
Those eyes were wide now as Leweski stared at the Consul. 'Ghost,' he
said.
"No."
'You are not dead?"
'No."
'By damn!" declared Stan Leweski and, grasping the Consul by the upper
arms, picked him up as easily as a man would lift a five-year-old. 'By
damn! You are not dead. What are you doing here?"
'Checking your liquor license,' said the Consul. 'Put me down."
Leweski carefully set the Consul down, tapped his shoulders, and
grinned. He looked at Martilt Silenus and the grin changed to a frown.
'You look familiar but I have never seen you before."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'I knew your great*grandfather,' said Silenus. 'Which reminds me, do
you have any of that pre-Hegira ale left?
The warm, 'British stuff that tastes like recycled moose piss. I could
never get enough of that."
'Nothing left,' said Leweski. He pointed at the poet.
'By damn. Grandfather Jiri's trunk. That old holo of the satyr in the
original Jacktown. Can it be?" He stared at Silenus and then at the
Consul, touching them both gingerly with a massive forefinger. 'Two
ghosts."
'Six tired people,' said the Consul. The baby began crying again.
'Seven. Do you have space for us?"
Leweski turned in a half circle, hands spread, palms up. 'it is all
like this. No space left. No food. No wine." He squinted at Martin
Silenus. 'No ale. Now we have become a big hotel with no beds. The
SDF bastards stay here without paying and drink their own upcountry
rotgut and wait for the world to end. That will happen soon enough, I
think."
The group was standing in what had once been the entrance mezzanine.
Their heaped luggage joined a riot of gear already littering the floor.
Small clusters of men shouldered their way through the throng and cast
appraising glances at the newcomers- especially at Brawne Lamia. She
returned their stares with a flat, cold glare.
Stan Leweski looked at the Consul for a moment. '1 have a balcony
table. Five of those SDF Death Commandos have been parked there for a
week, telling everyone and each other how they are going to wipe out the
Ouster Legions with their bare hands. You want the'table, I will
throw the teat-suckers out."
'Yes,' said the Consul.
Leweski had turned to leave when Lamia stopped him with a hand on his
arm. 'Would you like a little help?" she asked.
Stan Leweski shrugged, grinned. 'I do not need it, but I might like it.
Come."
They disappeared into the crowd.
The third-floor balcony had just enough room for the splintered table
and six chairs. Despite the insane crowding on the main floors, stairs,
and landings, no one had challenged them for the space after Leweski and
Lamia threw the protesting Death Commandos over the railing and into the
river nine meters below. Somehow Leweski had managed to send up a
tankard of beer and a basket of bread and cold beef.
The group ate in silence, obviously suffering more than the usual amount
of post fugue hunger, fatigue, and depression. The darkness of the
balcony was relieved only by dim, reflected light from deeper within
Cicero's and by the lanterns on passing river barges. Most of the
buildings along the Hoolie were dark but other city lights reflected
from low clouds. The Consul could make out the ruins of the Shrike
Temple half a kilometer upriver.
'Well,' said Father Hoyt, obviously recovered from the heavy dose of
ultramorph and teetering on the
delicate balance between pain and sedation, 'what do we do next?"
When no one answered, the Consul closed his eyes. He refused to take
the lead in anything. Sitting on the balcony at Cicero's, it was all
too easy to fall back into the rhythms of a former life; he would drink
until the early morning hours, watch the predawn meteor showers as the
clouds cleared, and then stagger to his empty apartment near the market,
going into the consulate four hours later showered, shaved, and
seemingly human except for the blood in his eyes and the insane ache in
his skull. Trusting in Theo - quiet, efficient Theo - to get him
through the morning. Trusting in luck to get him through the day.
Trusting in the drinking at Cicero's to get him through the night.
Trusting in the unimportance of his posting to get him through life.
'You are all ready to leave for the pilgrimage?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The Consul's eyes snapped open. A hooded figure stood in the doorway
and for a second the Consul thought it was Het Masteen, but then he
realized that this man was much shorter, his voice not accented with the
stilted Templar consonants.
'If you are ready, we must go,' said the dark figure.
'Who are you?" asked Brawne Lamia.
'Come quickly,' was the shadow's only reply.
Fedmahn Kassad stood, bending to keep his head from striking the
ceiling, and detained the robed figure, flipping back the man's hood
with a flick of his left hand.
'An android!" said Lenar Hoyt, staring at the man's blue skin and
blue-on-blue eyes.
The Consul was less surprised. For more than a century it had been
illegal to own androids in the Hegemony, and none had been biofactured
for almost that long, but they were still used for manual labor in
remote parts of backwater, noncolony worlds - worlds like Hyperion. The
Shrike Temple had used androids extensively, complying with the Church
of the Shrike doctrine which proclaimed that androids were free from
original sin, therefore spiritually superior to humankind and-
incidentally-exempt from the Shrike's terrible and inevitable
retribution.
'You must come quickly,' whispered the android, setting his hood in
place.
'Are you from the Temple?" asked Lamia.
'Quiet!" snapped the android. He glanced into the hall, turned back,
and nodded. 'We must hurry. Please follow me."
All of them stood and then hesitated. The Consul watched as Kassad
casually unsealed the long leather jacket he was wearing. He caught the
briefest glimpse of a deathwand tucked in the Colonei's belt. Normally
the Consul would have been appalled by even the thought of a deathwand
nearby- the slighttest mistaken touch could pure every synapse on the
balcony - but at this
moment he was oddly reassured by the sight of it.
'Our luggage..." began Weintraub.
'It has been seen to,' whispered the hooded man.
'Quickly now."
The group followed the android down the stairs and into the night, their
movement as tired and passive as a sigh.
The Consul slept late. Half an hour after sunrise a rectangle of light
found its way between the porthole's shutters and fell across his
pillow. The Consul rolled away and did not wake. An hour after that
there came a loud clatter as the tired mantas which had pulled the barge
all night were released and fresh ones harnessed. The Consul slept on.
In the next hour the footsteps and cries of the crew on the deck outside
his stateroom grew louder and more persistent, but it was the warning
klaxon below the locks at Karla which finally brought him up out of his
sleep.
Moving slowly in the druglike languor of fugue hangover, the Consul
bathed as best he could with only basin and pump, dressed in loose
cotton trousers, an old canvas shirt, and foam-soled walking shoes, and
found his way to the mid-deck.
Breakfast had been set out on a long sideboard near a weathered table
which could be retracted into the deck planking. An awning shaded the
eating area and the crimson and gold canvas snapped to the breeze of
their
passage. It was a beautiful day, cloudless and bright, with Hyperion's
sun making up in ferocity what it lacked in size.
M. Weintraub, Lamia, Kassad, and Silenus had been up for some time.
Lenar Hoyt and Het Masteen joined the group a few minutes after the
Consul arrived.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The Consul helped himself to toasted fish, fruit, and orange juice at
the buffet and then moved to the railing.
The water was wide here, at least a kilometer from shore to shore, and
its green and lapis sheen echoed the sky. At first glance the Consul
did not recognize the land on either side of the river. To the east,
periscope-bean paddies stretched away into the haze of distance where
the rising sun reflected on a thousand flooded surfaces.
A few indigenie huts were visible at the junction of paddy dikes, their
angled walls made of bleached weirwood or golden half oak. To the west,
the bottomland along the river was overgrown with low tangles of gissen,
woman-grove root, and a flamboyant red fern the Consul did not
recognize, all growing around mud marshes and miniature lagoons which
stretched another kilometer or so to bluffs where scrub everblues clung
to any bare spot between granite slabs.
For a second the Consul felt lost, disoriented on a world he thought he
knew well, but then he remembered the klaxon at the Karla Locks and
realized that they had entered a rarely used stretch of the Hoolie north
of Doukhobor's Copse. The Consul had never seen this part of the river,
having always traveled on or flown above the Royal Transport Canal which
lay to the west of the bluffs. He could only surmise that some danger
or disturbance along the main route to the Sea of Grass had sent them
this back way along bypassed stretches of the Hoolie. He guessed that
they were about a hundred and eighty kilometers northwest of Keats.
'It looks different in the daylight, doesn't it?" said Father Hoyt.
The Consul looked at the shore again, not sure what Hoyt was talking
about; then he realized the priest meant the barge.
It had been strange - following the android messenger
in the rain, boarding the old barge, making their way through its maze
of tessellated rooms and passages, picking up Het Masteen at the ruins
of the Temple, and then watching the lights of Keats fall astern.
The Consul remembered those hours before and after midnight as from a
fatigue-blurred dream, and he imagined the others must have been just as
exhausted and disoriented. He vaguely remembered his surprise that the
barge's crew were all android, but mostly he recalled his relief at
finally closing the door of his stateroom and crawling into bed.
'l was talking to A. Bettik this morning,' said Weintraub, referring to
the android who had been their guide. 'This old scow has quite a
history."
Martin Silenus moved to the sideboard to pour himself more tomato juice,
added a dash of something from the flask he carried, and said, 'It's
obviously been around a bit. The goddamn railings've been oiled by
hands, the stairs worn by feet, the ceilings darkened by lamp soot, and
the beds beaten saggy by generations of humping.
I'd say it's several centuries old. The carvings and rococo finishes
are fucking marvelous. Did you notice that under all the other scents
the inlaid wood still smells of sandalwood? I wouldn't be surprised if
this thing came from Old Earth."
'It does,' said Sol Weintraub. The baby, Rachel, slept on his arm,
softly blowing bubbles of saliva in her sleep.
'We're on the proud ship Benares, built in and named after the Old Earth
city of the same name."
'I don't remember hearing of any Old Earth city with that name,' said
the Consul.
Brawne Lamia looked up from the last of her breakfast.
'Benares, also known as Varanasi or Gandhipur, Hindi Free State. Part
of the Second Asian Co-prosperity Sphere after the Third Sino-Japanese
War.
Destroyed in the lndo-Soviet Muslim Republic Limited Exchange."
'Yes,' said Weintraub, 'the Benares was built quite some time before the
Big Mistake. Mid-twenty-second century, I would guess. A. Bettik
informs me that it was originally a levitation barge..."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Are the EM generators still down there?" interrupted Colonel Kassad.
'1 believe so,' said Weintraub. 'Next to the main salon on the lowest
deck. The floor of the salon is clear lunar crystal. Quite nice if we
were cruising at two thousand meters... quite useless now."
'Benares,' mused Martin Silenus. He ran his hand lovingly across a
time-darkened railing. 'I was robbed there once."
Brawne Lamia put down her coffee mug. 'Old man, are you trying to tell
us that you're ancient enough to remember Old Earth? We're not fools,
you know."
'My dear child,' beamed Martin Silenus, 'I am not trying to tell you
anything. I just thought it might be entertaining - as well as edifying
and enlightening - if at some point we exchanged lists of all the
locations at which we have either robbed or been robbed. Since you have
the unfair advantage of having been the daughter of a senator, 1 am sure
that your list would be much more distinguished... and much longer."
Lamia opened her mouth to retort, frowned, and said nothing.
"i wonde how this ship got to Hyperion?" murmured Father Hoyt. 'Why
bring a levitation barge to a world where EM equipment doesn't work?"
'It would work,' said Colonel Kassad. 'Hyperion has some magnetic
field. It just would not be reliable in holding anything airborne."
Father Hoyt raised an eyebrow, obviously at a loss to see the
distinction.
'Hey,' cried the poet from his place at the railing, 'the gang's all
here!'
'So?" said Brawne Lamia. Her lips all but disappeared into a thin line
whenever she spoke to Silenus.
'So we're all here,' he said. 'Let's get on with the storytelling."
Het Masteen said, '1 thought it had been agreed that we would tell our
respective stories after the dinner hour."
Martin Silenus shrugged. 'Breakfast, dinner, who the
fuck cares? We're assembled. It's not going to take six or seven days
to get to the Time Tombs, is it?"
The Consul considered. Less than two days to get as far as the river
could take them. Two more days, or less if the winds were right, on the
Sea of Grass. Certainly no more than one more day to cross the
mountains. 'No,' he said. 'Not quite six days.
'All right,' said Silenus, 'then let's get on with the telling of tales.
Besides, there's no guarantee that the Shrike won't come calling before
We knock on his door.
If these bedtime stories are supposed to be helpful to our survival
chances in some way, then I say let's hear from everyone before the
contributors start getting chopped and diced by that ambulatory food
processor we're so eager to visit."
'You're disgusting,' said Brawne Lamia.
'Ah, darling,' smiled Silenus, 'those are the same words you whispered
last night after your second orgasm."
Lamia looked away. Father Hoyt cleared his throat and said, 'Whose turn
is it? To tell a story, I mean?" The silence stretched.
'Mine,' said Fedmahn Kassad. The tall man reached into the pocket of
his white tunic and held up a slip of paper with a large 2 scribbled on
it.
'Do you mind doing this now?" asked Sol Weintraub.
Kassad showed a hint of a smile. 'I wasn't'in favor of doing it at
all,' he said, 'but if it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well it
were done quickly."
'Hey!" cried Martin Silenus. 'The man knows his pre-Hegira
playwrights."
'Shakespeare?" said Father Hoyt.
'No,' said Silenus. 'Lerner and fucking Lowe. Neii buggering Simon.
Hamel fucking Posten."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Colonel,' Sol Weintraub said formally, 'the weather is nice, none of us
seems to have anything pressing to do in the next hour or so, and we
would be obliged if you would share the tale of what brings you to
Hyperion on the Shrike's last pilgrimage."
Kassad nodded. The day grew warmer as the canvas awning snapped, the
decks creaked, and the levitation
barge Benares worked its steady way upstream toward the mountains, the
moors, and the Shrike.