THE CONSUL'S TALE: Remembering Siri
I climb the steep hill to Siri's tomb on the day the islands return to
the shallow seas of the Equatorial Archipelago.
The day is perfect and I hate it for being so. The sky is as tranquil
as tales of Old Earth's seas, the shallows are dappled with ultramarine
tints, and a warm breeze blows in from the sea to ripple the russet
willowgrass on the hillside near me.
Better low clouds and gray gloom on such a day. Better mist or a
shrouding fog which sets the masts in First-site Harbor dripping and
raises the lighthouse horn from its slumbers. Better one of the great
sea-simoons blowing up out of the cold belly of the south, lashing
before it the motile isles and their dolphin herders until they seek
refuge in the lee of our atolls and stony peaks.
Anything would be better than this warm spring day when the sun moves
through a vault of sky so blue that it makes me want to run, to jump in
great loping arcs, and to roll in the soft grass as Siri and I have done
at just this spot.
Just this spot. I pause to look around. The willowgrass bends and
ripples like the fur of some great beast as the salt-tinged breeze gusts
up out of the south. I shield my eyes and search the horizon but
nothing moves there.
Out beyond the lava reef, the sea begins to chop and lift itself in
nervous strokes.
'Siri,' I whisper. I say her name without meaning to do so. A hundred
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

meters down the slope, the crowd pauses to watch me and to catch its
collective breath. The procession of mourners and celebrants stretches
for more than a kilometer to where the white buildings of the city
begin. I can make out the gray and balding head of my younger son in
the vanguard. He is wearing the blue and gold robes of the Hegemony. I
know that I should wait for him, walk with him, but he and the other
aging Council members cannot keep up with my young, ship-trained muscles
and steady stride. But decorum dictates that I should walk with him and
my granddaughter Lira and my nine-year-old grandson.
To hell with it. And to hell with them.
I turn and jog up the steep hillside. Sweat begins to soak my loose
cotton shirt before I reach the curving
summit of the ridge and catch sight of the tomb.
Siri' s tomb.
I stop. The wind chills me although the sunlight is warm enough as it
glints off the flawless white stone of the silent mausoleum. The grass
is high near the sealed entrance to the crypt. Rows of faded festival
pennants on ebony staffs line the narrow gravel path.
Hesitating, I circle the tomb and approach the steep cliff edge a few
meters beyond. The willowgrass is bent and trampled here where
irreverent picnickers have laid their blankets. There are several fire
rings formed from the perfectly round, perfectly white stones purloined
from the border of the gravel path.
I cannot stop a smile. I know the view from here: the great curve of
the outer harbor with its natural seawall, the low, white buildings of
Firstsite, and the colorful hulls and masts of the catamarans bobbing at
anchorage.
Near the pebble beach beyond Common Hall, a young woman in a white skirt
moves toward the water. For a second I think that it is Siri and my
heart pounds. 1 half prepare to throw up my arms in response to her
wave but she does not wave. I watch in silence as the distant figure
turns away and is lost in the shadows of the old boat building.
Above me, far out from the cliff, a wide-winged Thomas Hawk circles
above the lagoon on rising thermals and scans the shifting bluekelp beds
with its infrared vision, seeking out harp seals or torpids. Nature hv
stupid, I think and sit in the soft grass. Nature sets the stage all
wrong for such a day and then it is insensitive enough to throw in a
bird searching for prey which have long since fled the polluted waters
near the growing city.
I remember another Thomas Hawk on that first night when Siri and I came
to this hilltop. I remember the moonlight on its wings and the strange,
haunting cry
which echoed off the cliff and seemed to pierce the dark air above the
gaslights of the village below.
Siri was sixteen... no, not quite sixteen... and the moonlight that
touched the hawk's wings above us also painted her bare skin with milky
light and cast shadows beneath the soft circles of her breasts. We
looked up guiltily when the bird's cry cut the night and Siri said, '
"It was the nightingale and not the lark, That pierc'd the fearful
hollow of thine ear." '
'Huh?" I said. Siri was almost sixteen. I was nineteen.
But Siri knew the slow pace of books and the cadences of theater under
the stars. I knew only the stars.
'Relax, young Shipman,' she whispered and pulled me down beside her
then. 'It's only an old Tom's Hawk hunting. Stupid bird. Come back,
Shipman. Come back, Merin."
The Los Angeles had chosen that moment to rise above the horizon and to
float like a wind-borne ember west across the strange constellations of
Maui-Covenant, Siri's world. I lay next to her and described the
workings of the great Hawking-drive spinship which was catching the high
sunlight against the drop of night above us, and all the while my hand
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

was sliding lower along her smooth side, her skin seemed all velvet and
electricity, and her breath came more quickly against my shoulder. I
lowered my face to the hollow of her neck, to the sweat and perfume
essence of her tousled hair.
'Siri,' I say and this time her name is not unbidden.
Below me, below the crest of the hill and the shadow of the white tomb,
the crowd stands and shuffles. They are impatient with me. They want
me to unseal the tomb, to enter, and to have my private moment in the
cool silent emptiness that has replaced the warm presence that was Siri.
They want me to say my farewells so they can get on with their rites and
rituals, open the farcaster doors, and
join the waiting Worldweb of the Hegemony.
To hell with that. And to hell with them.
I pull up a tendril of the thickly woven willowgrass, chew on the sweet
stem, and watch the horizon for the first sign of the migrating islands.
The shadows are still
long in the morning light. The day is young. I will sit here for a
while and remember.
I will remember Siri.
Siri was a... what?... a bird, I think, the first time 1 saw her. She
was wearing some sort of mask with bright feathers. When she removed it
to join in the raceme quadrille, the torchlight caught the deep auburn
tints of her hair. She was flushed, cheeks aflame, and even from across
the crowded common I could see the startling green of her eyes
contrasting with the summer heat of her face and hair. It was Festival
Night, of course. The torches danced and sparked to the stiff breeze
coming in off the harbor and the sound of the flutists on the break-wall
playing for the passing isles was almost drowned out by surf sounds and
the crack of pennants snapping in the wind. Siri was almost sixteen and
her beauty burned more brightly than any of the torches set round the
throng-filled square. I pushed through the dancing crowd and went to
her.
It was five years ago for me. It was more than sixty five years ago for
us. It seems only yesterday.
This is not going well.
Where to start?
'What say we go find a little nooky, kid?" Mike Osho was speaking.
Short, squat, his pudgy face a clever caricature of a Buddha, Mike was a
god to me then. We were all gods; long-lived if not immortal, well paid
if not quite divine. The Hegemony had chosen us to help crew one of its
precious quantum-leap spinships, so how could we be less than gods? It
was just that Mike, brilliant, mercurial, irreverent Mike, was a little
older and a little higher in the Shipboard pantheon than young Merin
Aspic.
'Hah. Zero probability of that,' I said. We were scrubbing up after a
twelve-hour shift with the farcaster construction crew. Shuttling the
workers around their chosen singularity point some one hundred and
sixty-three thousand kilometers out from Maul-Covenant was a lot less
glamorous for us than the four-month leap from Hegemony-space. During
the C-plus portion of the
trip we had been master specialists; forty-nine starship experts
shepherding some two hundred nervous passengers.
Now the passengers had their hardsuits on and we Shipmen had been
reduced to serving as glorified truck drivers as the construction crew
wrestled the bulky singularity containment sphere into place.
'Zero probability,' I repeated. 'Unless the groundlings have added a
whorehouse to that quarantine island they leased us."
'Nope. They haven't,' grinned Mike. He and I had our three days of
planetary R and R coming up but we knew from Shipmaster Singh's
briefings and the moans of our Shipmates that the only ground time we
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

had to look forward to would be spent on a seven-by-four-kilometer
island administered by the Hegemony. It wasn't even one of the motile
isles we had heard about, just another volcanic peak near the equator.
Once there, we could i:ount on real gravity underfoot, unfiltered air to
breathe, and the chance to taste unsynthesized food. But we could also
count on the fact that the only intercourse we would have with the
Maul-Covenant colonists would be through buying local artifacts at the
duty-free store.
Even those were sold by Hegemony trade specialists.
Many of our Shipmates had chosen to spend their R and R on the Los
Angeles.
'So how do we find a little nooky, Mike? The colonies are off limits
until the farcaster's working. That's about sixty years away, local
time. Or are you talking about Meg in spincomp?"
'Stick with me, kid,' said Mike. 'Where there's a will, there's a way."
I stuck with Mike. There were only five of us in the dropship. It was
always a thrill to me to fall out of high orbit into the atmosphere of a
real world. Especially a world that looked as much like Old Earth as
Maul-Covenant did. I stared at the blue and white limb of the planet
until the seas were down and we were in atmosphere, approaching the
twilight terminator in a gentle glide at three times the speed of our
own sound.
We were gods then. But even gods must descend from their high thrones
upon occasion.
AAA
Siri's body never ceased to amaze me. That time on the Archipelago.
Three weeks in that huge, swaying tree-house under the billowing
treesails with the dolphin herders keeping pace like outriders, tropical
sunsets filling the evening with wonder, the canopy of stars at night,
and our own wake marked by a thousand phosphorescent swirls that
mirrored the constellations above. And still it is Siri's body I
remember. For some reason-shyness, the years of separation - she wore
two strips of swimsuit for the first few days of our Archipelago stay
and the soft white of her breasts and lower belly had not darkened to
match the rest of her tan before I had to leave again.
I remember her that first time. Triangles in the moonlight as we lay in
the soft grass above Firstsite Harbor.
Her silk pants catching on a weave of willowgrass. There was a child's
modesty then; the slight hesitation of something given prematurely. But
also pride. The same pride that later allowed her to face down the
angry mob of Separatists on the steps of the Hegemony consulate in South
Tern and send them to their homes in shame.
I remember my fifth planetfall, our Fourth Reunion.
It was one of the few times I ever saw her cry. She was almost regal in
her fame and wisdom by then. She had been elected four times to the All
Thing and the Hegemony Council turned to her for advice and guidance.
She wore her independence like a royal cloak and her fierce pride had
never burned more brightly. But when we were alone in the stone villa
south of Fevarone, it was she who turned away. I was nervous,
frightened by this powerful stranger, but it was $iri- Siri of the
straight back and proud eyes, who turned her face to the wall and said
through tears, 'Go away. Go away, Merin.
I don't want you to see me. I'm a crone, all slack and sagging. Go
away."
I confess that I was rough with her then. I pinned her wrists with my
left hand - using a strength which surprised even me - and tore her
silken robe down the front in one move. I kissed her shoulders, her
neck, the faded shadows of stretch marks on her taut belly, and the scar
on her upper leg from the skimmer crash some forty of her years earlier.
I kissed her graying hair and the lines etched in the once smooth
cheeks. I kissed her tears.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Jesus, Mike, this can't be legal,' I'd said when my friend unrolled the
hawking mat from his backpack. We were on island 241, as the Hegemony
traders had so romantically named the desolate volcanic blemish which
they had chosen for our R and R site. Island 241 was less than fifty
kilometers from the oldest of the colonial settlements but it might as
well have been fifty light-years away. No native ships were to put in
at the island while Los Angeles crewmen or farcaster workmen were
present.
The Maul-Covenant colonists had a few ancient skimmers still in working
order, but by mutual agreement there would be no overflights. Except
for the dormitories, swimming beach, and the duty-free store, there was
little on the island to interest us Shipmen.
Someday, when the last components had been brought in-system by the Los
Angeles and the farcaster finished, Hegemony officials would make island
241 into a center for trade and tourism. Until then it was a primitive
place with a dropship grid, newly finished buildings of the local white
stone, and a few bored maintenance people.
Mike checked the two of us out for three days of backpacking on the
steepest and most inaccessible end of the little island.
'I don't want to go backpacking, for Chrissake,' I'd said. 'I'd rather
stay on the L.A. and plug into a stimsim."
'Shut up and follow me,' said Mike and, like a lesser member of the
pantheon following an older and wiser deity, I had shut up and followed.
Two hours of heavy tramping up the slopes through sharp-branched
scrubtrees brought us to a lip of lava several hundred meters above the
crashing surf. We were near the equator on a mostly tropical world but
on this exposed ledge the wind was howling and my teeth were chattering.
The sunset was a red smear between dark cumulus to the west and ! had
no wish to be out in the open when full night descended.
'Come on,' I said. 'Let's get out of the wind and build a fire. I
don't know how the hell we're going to set up a tent on all of this
rock."
Mike sat down and lit a cannabis stick. 'Take a look in your pack,
kid."
I hesitated. His voice had been neutral but it was the flat neutrality
of the practical joker's voice just before the bucket of water descends.
I crouched down and began pawing through the nylon sack. The pack was
empty except for old flowfoam packing cubes to fill it out. Those and a
Harlequin's costume complete with mask and bells on the toes.
'Are you... is this... are you goddamn crazy?" I spluttered. It was
getting dark quickly now. The storm might or might not pass to the
south of us. The surf was rasping below like a hungry beast. If I had
known how to find my own way back to .the trade compound in the dark, I
might have considered leaving Mike Osho's remains to feed the fishes far
below.
'Now look at what's in my pack,' he said. Mike dumped out some flowfoam
cubes and then removed some jewelry of the type I'd seen handcrafted on
Renaissance Vector, an inertial compass, a laser pen which might or
might not be labeled a concealed weapon by ShipSecurity, another
Harlequin costume - this one tailored to his more rotund form ' and a
hawking mat.
'Jesus, Mike,' I said while running my hand over the exquisite design of
the old carpet, 'this can't be legal."
'I didn't notice any customs agents back there,' grinned Mike. 'And I
seriously doubt that the locals have any traffic control ordinances."
'Yes, but..." I trailed off and unrolled the rest of the mat. It was a
little more than a meter wide and about two meters long. The rich
fabric had faded with age but the flight threads were still as bright as
new copper. 'Where did you get it?" I asked. 'Does it still work?"
'On Garden,' said Mike and stuffed my costume and his other gear into
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

his backpack. 'Yes, it does."
It had been more than a century since old Vladimir Sholokov, Old Earth
emigrant, master lepidopterist, and EM systems engineer, had handcrafted
the first
hawking mat for his beautiful young niece on New Earth. Legend had it
that the niece had scorned the gift but over the decades the toys had
become almost absurdly popular - more with rich adults than with
childrenuntil they were outlawed on most Hegemony worlds. Dangerous to
handle, a waste of shielded monofilaments, almost impossible to deal
with in controlled airspace, hawking mats had become curiosities
reserved for bedtime stories, museums, and a few colony worlds.
'It must have cost you a fortune,' I said.
'Thirty marks,' said Mike and settled himself on the center of the
carpet. 'The old dealer in Carvnel Marketplace thought it was
worthless. It was . . . for him. 1 brought it back to the ship,
charged it up, reprogrammed the inertia chips, and voild!" Mike palmed
the intricate design and the mat stiffened and rose fifteen centimeters
above the rock ledge.
I stared doubtfully. 'All right,' I said, 'but what if it..."
'It won't,' said Mike and impatiently patted the carpet behind him.
'It's fully charged. I know how to handle it.
Come on, climb on or stand back. I want to get going
before that storm gets any closer."
'But I don't think..."
'Come on, Merin. Make up your mind. I'm in a hurry."
I hesitated for another second or two. If we were caught leaving the
island, we would both be kicked off the ship. Shipwork was my life now.
I had made that decision when I accepted the eight-mission Maui-Covenant
contract. More than that, I was two hundred light-years and five and a
half leap years from civilization.
Even if they brought us back to Hegemony-space, the round trip would
have cost us eleven years' worth of friends and family. The time-debt
was irrevocable.
I crawled on the hovering hawking mat behind Mike.
He stuffed the backpack between us, told me to hang on, and tapped at
the flight designs. The mat rose five meters above the ledge, banked
quickly to the left, and shot out over the alien ocean. Three hundred
meters below us, the
surf crashed whitely in the deepening gloom. We rose higher above the
rough water and headed north into the night.
In such seconds of decision entire futures arc made.
I remember talking to Siri during our Second Reunion, shortly after we
first visited the villa along the coast near Fevarone. We were walking
along the beach. A16n had been allowed to stay in the city under
Magritte's supervision.
It was just as well. I was not truly comfortable with the boy. Only
the undeniable green solemnity of his eyes and the disturbing
mirror-familiarity of his short, dark curls and snub of a nose served to
tie him to me... to us . . . in my mind. That and the quick, almost
sardonic smile I would catch him hiding from Siri when she reprimanded
him. It was a smile too cynically amused and self-observant to be so
practiced in a ten-year-old. I knew it well. I would have thought such
things were learned, not inherited.
'You know very little,' Siri said to me. She was wading, shoeless, in a
shallow tidepool. From time to time she would lift the delicate shell
of a frenchhorn conch, inspect it for flaws, and drop it back into the
silty water.
Tve been well trained,' I replied.
'Yes, I'm sure you've been well trained,' agreed Siri. 'I know you are
quite skillful, Merin. But you know very little."
Irritated, unsure of how to respond, I walked along with my head
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

lowered. I dug a white lavastone out of the sand and tossed it far out
into the bay. Rain clouds were piling along the eastern horizon. I
found myself wishing that I was back aboard the ship. I had been
reluctant to return this time and now I knew that it had been a mistake.
It was my third visit to Maui-Covenant, our Second Reunion as the poets
and her people were calling it. I was five months away from being
twenty-one standard years old. Siri had just celebrated her
thirty-seventh birthday three weeks earlier.
'I've been to a lot of places you've never seen,' I said at last. It
sounded petulant and childish even to me.
'Oh, yes,' said Siri and clapped her hands together.
For a second, in her enthusiasm, I glimpsed my other Siri -the young
girl I had dreamed about during the long nine.months of turnaround. Then
the image slid back to harsh reality and I was all too aware of her
short hair, the loosening neck muscles, and the cords appearing on the
backs of those once beloved hands.
'You've been to places I'll never see,' said Siri in a rush.
Her voice was the same. Almost the same. 'Merin, my love, you've
already seen things I cannot even imagine.
You probably know more facts about the universe than I would guess
exist. But you know very little, my darling."
'What the hell are you talking about, Siri?" I sat down on a
half-submerged log near the strip of wet sand and drew my knees up like
a fence between us.
Siri strode out of the tidepool and came to kneel in front of me. She
took my hands in hers and, although mine were bigger, heavier, bluntcr
of finger and bone, I could feel the strength in hers. I imagined it as
the strength of years I had not shared. 'You have to live to really
know things, my love. Having A16n has helped me to understand that.
There is something about raising a
child that helps to sharpen one's sense of what is real." 'How do you
mean?"
Siri squinted away from me for a few seconds and absently brushed back a
strand of hair. Her left hand stayed firmly around both of mine. 'I'm
not sure,' she said softly. 'I think one begins to feel when things
aren't important. I'm not sure how to put it. When you've spent thirty
years entering rooms filled with strangers you feel less pressure than
when you've had only half that number of years of experience. You know
what the room and the people in it probably hold for you and you go
looking for it. If it's not there, you sense it earlier and leave to go
about your business. You just know more about what is, what isn't, and
how little time there is to learn the difference. Do you understand,
Merin? Do you
follow me even a little bit?"
'No,' I said.
Siri nodded and bit her lower lip. But she did not speak again for a
while. Instead, she leaned over and kissed me.
Her lips were dry and a little questioning. I held back for a second,
seeing the sky beyond her, wanting time to think. But then I felt the
warm intrusion of her tongue and closed my eyes. The tide was coming in
behind us. I felt a sympathetic warmth and rising as Siri unbuttoned my
shirt and ran sharp fingernails across my chest. There was a second of
emptiness between us and I opened my eyes in time to see her unfastening
the last buttons on the front of her white dress. Her breasts were
larger than 1 remembered, heavier, the nipples broader and darker.
The chill air nipped at both of us until I pulled the fabric down her
shoulders and brought our upper bodies together. We slid down along the
log to the warm sand. I pressed her closer, all the While wondering how
I possibly could have thought her the stronger one. Her skin tasted of
salt.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Siri's hands helped me. Her short hair pressed back against bleached
wood, white cotton, and sand. My pulse outraced the surf.
'Do you understand, Merin?" she whispered to me seconds later as her
warmth connected us.
'Yes,' I whispered back. But I did not.
Mike brought the hawking mat in from the east toward Firstsite. The
flight had taken over an hour in the dark and I had spent most of the
time huddling from the wind and waiting for the carpet to fold up and
tumble us both into the sea. We were still half an hour out when we saw
the first of the motile isles. Racing before the storm, treesails
billowing, the islands sailed up from their southern feeding grounds in
seemingly endless procession.
Many were !it brilliantly, festooned with colored
lanterns and shifting veils of gossamer light.
'You sure this is the way?" I shouted.
'Yes,' shouted Mike. He did not turn his head. The wind whipped his
long black hair back against my face.
From time to time he would check his compass and make small corrections
to our course. It might have been easier to follow the isles. We
passed one - a large one almost half a kilometer in length - and I
strained to make out details but the isle was dark except for the glow
of its
phosphorescent wake. Dark shapes cut through the milky waves. I tapped
Mike on the shoulder and pointed.
'Dolphins!" he shouted. 'That's what this colony was all about,
remember? A bunch of do-gooders during the Hegira wanted to save all
the mammals in Old Earth's oceans. Didn't succeed."
I would have shouted another question but at that moment the headland
and Firstsite Harbor came into view.
I had thought the stars were bright above Maui-Covenant.
I had thought the migrating islands were memorable in their colorful
display. But the city of First-site, wrapped about with harbor and
hills, was a blazing beacon in the night. Its brilliance reminded me of
a torchship I once had watched while it created its own plasma nova
against the dark limb of a sullen gas giant..
The city was a five-tiered honeycomb of white buildings, all illuminated
by warmly glowing lanterns from within and by countless torches from
without. The white lava-stone of the volcanic island itself seemed to
glow from the city light. Beyond the town were tents, pavilions,
campfires, cooking fires, and great flaming pyres, too large for
function, too large for anything except to serve as a welcome to the
returning isles.
The harbor was filled with boats: bobbing catamarans with cow-bells
clanking from their masts, large-hulled, flat-bottomed house-boats built
for creeping from port to port in the calm equatorial shallows but
proudly ablaze with strings of lights this night, and then the
occasional oceangoing yacht, sleek and functional as a shark.
A lighthouse set out on the pincer's end of the harbor reef threw its
beam far out to sea, illuminated wave and isle alike, and then swept its
light back in to catch the colorful bobbing of ships and men.
Even from two kilometers out we could hear the noise.
Sounds of celebration were clearly audible. Above the shouts and
constant susurration of the surf rose the unmistakable notes of a Bach
flute sonata. I learned later that this welcoming chorus was
transmitted through hydrophones to the Passage Channels where dolphins
leaped and cavorted to the music.
'My God, Mike, how did you know all of this was going on?"
' 1 asked the main ship computer,' said Mike. The hawking mat banked
right to keep us far out from the ships and lighthouse beam. Then we
curved back in north of Firstsite toward a dark spit o fland. I could
hear the soft booming of waves on the shallows ahead. 'They have this
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

festival every year,' Mike went on, 'but this is their sesquicentennial.
The party's been going on for three weeks now and is scheduled to
continue another two. There are only about a hundred thousand colonists
on this whole world, Merin, and I bet half of them are here partying."
We slowed, came in carefully, and touched down on a rocky outcropping
not far from the beach. The storm had missed us to the south but
intermittent flashes of lightning and the distant lights of advancing
isles still marked the horizon. Overhead, the stars were not dimmed by
the glow from Firstsite just over the rise from us. The air was warmer
here and I caught the scent of orchards on the breeze. We folded up the
hawking mat and hurried to get into our Harlequin costumes. Mike
slipped his laser pen and jewelry into loose pockets.
'What are those for?" I asked as we secured the backpack and hawking mat
under a large boulder.
'These?" asked Mike as he dangled a Renaissance necklace from his
fingers. 'These are currency in case we have to
negotiate for favors."
'Favors?"
'Favors,' repeated Mike. 'A lady's largesse. Comfort to a weary
spacefarer. Nooky to you, kid."
'Oh,' I said and adjusted my mask and fool's cap. The bells made a soft
sound in the dark.
'Come on,' said Mike. 'We'll miss the party." I nodded and followed
him, bells jangling, as we picked our way over stone and scrub toward
the waiting light.
I sit here in the sunlight and wait. I am not totally certain what I am
waiting for. I can feel a growing warmth on my back as the morning
sunlight is reflected from the white stone of Siri's tomb.
Siri's tomb?
There are no clouds in the sky. I raise my head and squint skyward as
if I might be able to see the L.A. and the newly finished farcaster
array through the glare of atmosphere. I cannot. Part of me knows that
they have not risen yet. Part of me knows to the second the time
remaining before ship and farcaster complete their transit to the
zenith. Part of me does not want to think
about it.
Siri, am I doing the right thing?
There is the sudden sound of pennants stirring on their staffs as the
wind comes up. I sense rather than see the restlessness of the waiting
crowd. For the first time since my planetfall for this, our Seventh
Reunion, I am filled with sorrow. No, not sorrow, not yet, but a
sharp-toothed sadness which soon will open into grief. For years I have
carried on silent conversations with Siri, framing questions to myself
for future discussion with her, and it suddenly strikes me with cold
clarity that we will never again sit together and talk. An emptiness
begins to grow inside me.
· Should I let it happen, Siri?
There is no response except for the growing murmurs of the crowd. In a
few minutes-they will send Donel, my younger and surviving son, or his
daughter Lira and her brother up the hill to urge me on. I toss away
the sprig of willowgrass I've been chewing on. There is a hint of
shadow on the horizon. It could be a cloud. Or it could be the first
of the isles, driven by instinct and the spring northerlies to migrate
back to the great band of the equa torial shallows whence they came. It
does not matter.
Siri, am I doing the right thing?
There is no answer and the time grows shorter.
Sometimes Siri seemed so ignorant it made me sick.
She knew nothing of my life away from her. She would ask questions but
I sometimes wondered if she was interested in the answers. I spent many
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

hours explaining the beautiful physics behind our spinships but she
never did seem to understand. Once, after I had taken great care to
detail the differences between their ancient seedship and the Los
Angeles, Siri astounded me by asking, 'But why
did it take my ancestors eighty years of shiptime to reach Maul-Covenant
when you can make the trip in a hundred and thirty days?" She had
understood nothing.
Siri's sense of history was, at best, pitiful. She viewed the Hegemony
and the Worldweb the way a child would view the fantasy world of a
pleasant but rather silly myth; there was an indifference there that
almost drove me mad at times.
Siri knew all about the early days of the Hegira - at least insofar as
they pertained to the Maui-Covenant and the colonists - and she
occasionally would come up with delightful bits of archaic trivia or
phraseology, but she knew nothing of post-Hegira realities. Names like
Garden and the Ousters, Renaissance and Lusus meant little to her. I
could mention Salmud Brew or General Horace Glennon-Height and she would
have no associations or reactions at all. None.
The last time I saw Siri she was seventy standard years old. She was
seventy years old and still she had never traveled offworld, used a
fatline, tasted any alcoholic drink except wine, interfaced with an
empathy surgeon, stepped through a farcaster door, smoked a cannahis
stick, received gene tailoring, plugged into a stimsim, received any
formal schooling, taken any RNA medication, heard of Zen Gnostics or the
Shrike Church, or flown any vehicle except an ancient Vikken skimmer
belonging to her family.
Siri had never made love to anyone except me. Or so she said. And so I
believed. ,
It was during our First Reunion, that time on the Archipelago, when Siri
took me to talk with the dolphins.
We had risen to watch the dawn. The highest levels of the tree-house
were a perfect place from which to watch the eastern sky pale and fade
to morning. Ripples of high cirrus turned to rose and then the sea
itself grew molten as the sun floated above the flat horizon.
'Let's go swimming,' said Sift. The rich, horizontal light bathed her
skin and threw her shadow four meters across the boards of the platform.
'I'm too tired,' I said. 'Later." We had lain awake
most of the night talking, making love, talking, and making love again.
In the glare of morning I felt empty and vaguely nauseated. I sensed
the slight movement of the isle under me as a tinge of vertigo, a
drunkard's disconnection from gravity.
'No. Let's go now,' said Siri and grasped my hand to pull me along. I
was irritated but did not argue. Siri was twenty-six, seven years older
than I during that First Reunion, but her impulsive behavior often
reminded me of the teen-aged Siri I had carried away from the Festival
only ten of my months earlier. Her deep, unselfconious laugh was the
same. Her green eyes cut as sharply when she was impatient. The long
mane of auburn hair had not changed. But her body had ripened, filled
out with a promise which had been only hinted at before. Her breasts
were still high and full, almost girlish, bordered above by freckles
that gave way to a whiteness so translucent that a gentle blue tracery
of veins could be seen. But they were different somehow. She was
different.
'Are you going to join me or just sit there staring?" asked Siri. She
had slipped off her caftan as we came out onto the lowest deck. Our
small ship was still tied to the dock. Above us, the island's treesails
were beginning to open to the morning breeze. For the past several days
Siri had insisted on wearing swimstrips when we went into the water. She
wore none now. Her nipples rose in the cool air.
'Won't we be left behind?" I asked, squinting up at the flapping
treesails. On previous days we had waited for the doldrums in the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

middle of the day when the isle was still in the water, the sea a glazed
mirror. Now the jibvines were beginning to pull taut as the thick
leaves filled with wind.
'Don't be silly,' said Siri. 'We could always catch a keel-root and
follow it back. That or a feeding tendril. Come on." She tossed an
osmosis mask at me and donned her own. The transparent film made her
face look slick with oil. From the pocket of her discarded caftan she
lifted a thick medallion and set it in place around her neck. The
metal looked dark and ominous against her skin.
'What's that?" I asked.
Siri did not lift the osmosis mask to answer. She set the
comthreads in place against her neck and handed me the earplugs. Her
voice was tinny. 'Translation disk,' she said. 'Thought you knew all
about gadgets, Merin. Last one in's a seaslug." She held the disk in
place between her breasts with one hand and stepped off the isle. I
could see the pale globes of her buttocks as she pirouetted and kicked
for depth. In seconds she was only a white blur deep in the water. I
slipped my own mask on, pressed the comthreads tight, and stepped into
the sea.
The bottom of the isle was a dark stain on a ceiling of crystalline
light. I was wary of the thick feeding tendrils even though Siri had
amply demonstrated that they were interested in devouring nothing larger
than the tiny zooplankton that even now caught the sunlight like dust in
an abandoned ballroom. Keeiroots descended like gnarled stalactites for
hundreds of meters into the purple depths.
The isle was moving. I could see the faint fibrillation of the tendrils
as they trailed along. A wake caught the light ten meters above me. For
a second I was choking, the gel of the mask smothering me as surely as
the surrounding water would, and then I relaxed and the air flowed
freely into my lungs.
'Deeper, Merin,' came Siri's voice. I blinked - a slow-motion blink as
the mask readjusted itself over my eyes- and caught sight of Siri twenty
meters lower, grasping a keelroot and trailing effortlessly above the
colder, deeper currents where the light did not reach. 1 thought of the
thousands of meters of water under me, of the things which might lurk
there, unknown, unsought out by the human colonists. I thought of the
dark and the depths and my scrotum tightened involuntarily.
'Come on down." Siri's voice was an insect buzz in my ears. I rotated
and kicked. The buoyancy here was not so great as in Old Earth'sseas,
but it still took energy to dive so deep. The mask compensated for
depth and nitrogen but I could feel the pressure against my skin and
ears.
Finally i quit kicking, grabbed a keelroot, and roughly hauled myself
down to Siri's level.
We floated side by side in the dim light. Siri was a
spectral figure here, her long hair swirling in a wine-dark nimbus, the
pale strips of her body glowing in the blue-green light. The surface
seemed impossibly distant. The widening V of the wake and the drift of
the scores of tendrils showed that the isle was moving more quickly now,
moving mindlessly to other feeding grounds, distant waters.
'Where are the..." I began to subvocalize.
'Shhh,' said Siri. She fiddled with the medallion. I could hear them
then: the shrieks and trills and whistles and cat purrs and echoing
cries. The depths were suddenly filled with strange music.
'Jesus,' I said and because Siri had tuned our cornthreads to the
translator, the word was broadcast as a senseless whistle and toot.
'Hello!" she called and the translated greeting echoed from the
transmitter; a high-speed bird's call sliding into the ultrasonic.
'Hello!" she called again.
Minutes passed before the dolphins came to investigate.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

They rolled past us, surprisingly large, alarmingly large, their skin
looking slick and muscled in the uncertain light. A large one swam
within a meter of us, turning at the last moment so that the white of
his belly curved past us like a wall. I could see the dark eye rotate
to follow me as he passed. One stroke of his wide fluke kicked up a
turbulence strong enough to convince me of the animal's power.
'Hello,' called Siri but the swift form faded into distant haze and
there was a sudden silence. Siri clicked off the translator. 'Do you
want to talk to them?" she asked.
'Sure." I was dubious. More than three centuries of effort had not
raised much of a dialogue between man and sea mammal. Mike had once
told me that the thought structures of Old Earth's two groups of orphans
were too different, the referents too few. One pre-Hegira expert had
written that speaking to a dolphin or porpoise was about as rewarding as
speaking to a one-year-old human infant. Both sides usually enjoyed the
exchange and there was a simulacrum of conversation, but neither party
would come away the more knowledgeable. Siri switched the translator
disk back on. 'Hello,' I said.
There was a final minute of silence and then our ear-phones were buzzing
while the sea echoed shrill ululations.
distance/noofiuke/heilo-tone?/current pulse/circle me/funny?
'What the hell?" I asked Siri and the translator trilled out my
question. Siri was grinning under her osmosis mask.
I tried again. 'Hello! Greetings from... uh... the surface. How are
you?"
The large male . . . I assumed it to be a male . . .
curved in toward us like a torpedo. He arch-kicked his way through the
water ten times faster than I could have swum even if I had remembered
to don flippers that morning. For a second I thought he was going to
ram us and I raised my knees and clung tightly to the keelroot.
Then he was past us, climbing for air, while Siri and I reeled from his
turbulent wake and the high tones of his shout.
no-fiuke/no-feed/no-swim/no-play/no-fun.
Siri switched off the translator and floated closer. She lightly
grasped my shoulders while I held on to the keel-root with my right
hand. Our legs touched as we drifted through the warm water. A school
of tiny crimson warriorfish flickered above us while the dark shapes of
the dolphins circled farther out.
'Had enough?" she asked. Her hand was flat on my chest.
'One more try,' I said. Siri nodded and twisted the disk to life. The
current pushed us together again. She slid her arm around me.
'Why do you herd the islands?" I asked the bottle-nosed shapes circling
in the dappled light. 'How does it benefit you to stay with the isles?"
sounding now/old songs/deep water/no-Great Voices/no-Shark/old songs/new
songs.
Siri's body lay along the length of me now. Her left arm tightened
around me. 'Great Voices were the whales,' she whispered. Her hair
fanned out in streamers.
Her right hand moved down and seemed surprised at what it found.
'Do you miss the Great Voices?" I asked the shadows.
There was no response. Sift slid her legs around my hips.
The surface was a churning bowl of light forty meters above us.
'What do you miss most of Old Earth's oceans?" I asked.
With my left arm I pulled Sift closer, slid my hand down along the curve
of her back to where her buttocks rose to meet my palm, held her tight.
To the circling dolphins we must have appeared a single-creature. Sift
lifted herself against me and we became a single creature.
The translator disk had twisted around so it trailed over Siri's
shoulder. I reached to shut it off but paused as the answer to my
question buzzed urgently in our ears.
miss Shark/miss Shark/miss Shark/miss Shark/ Shark/Shark/Shark.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

I turned off the disk and shook my head. I did not understand.
There was so much I did not understand. I closed my eyes as Siri and I
moved gently to the rhythms of the current and ourselves while the
dolphins swam nearby and the cadenceof their calls took on the sad, slow
trilling of an old lament.
Siri and I came down out of the hills and returned to the Festival just
before sunrise of the second day. For a night and a day we had roamed
the hills, eaten with strangers in pavilions of orange silk, bathed
together in the icy waters of the Shree, and danced to the music which
never ceased going out to the endless file of passing isles. We were
hungry.
I had awakened at sunset to find Siri gone. She returned before the
moon of Maui-Covenant rose. She told me that her parents had gone off
with friends for several days on a slow-moving houseboat. They had left
the family skimmer in Firstsite. Now we worked our way from dance to
dance, bonfire to bonfire, back to the center of the city. We planned
to fly west to her family estate ndlr Fevarone.
It was very late but Firstsite Common still had its share of revelers. I
was very happy. I was nineteen and I was in love and the .93 gravity of
Maui-Covenant seemed much less to me. I could have flown had I wished.
I could have done anything.
We had stopped at a booth and bought fried dough and mugs of black
coffee. Suddenly a thought struck me.
I asked, 'How did you know I was a Shipman?"
'Hush, friend Merin. Eat your poor breakfast. When we get to the
villa, I will fix a true meal to break our fast."
'No, I'm serious,' I said and wiped grease off my chin with the sleeve
of my less than clean Harlequin's costume.
'This morning you said that you knew right away last night that I was
from the ship. Why was that? Was it my accent? My costume? Mike and
I saw other fellows dressed like this."
Siri laughed and brushed back her hair. 'Just be glad it was I who
spied you out, Merin, my love. Had it been my Uncle Gresham or his
friends it would have meant trouble."
'Oh? Why is that?" I picked up one more fried ring and Sift paid for
it. I followed her through the thinning crowd. Despite the motion and
the music all about, I felt weariness beginning to work on me.
'They are Separatists,' said Sift. 'Uncle Gresham recently gave a
speech before the Council urging that we fight rather than agree to be
swallowed into your Hegemony.
He said that we should destroy your farcaster device before it destroys
us."
'Oh?" I said. 'Did he say how he was going to do that?
The last I heard, you folks had no craft to get off-world in."
'Nay, nor for the past fifty years have we,' said Siri.
'But it shows how irrational the Separatists can be."
I nodded. Shipmaster Singh and Councilor Halmyn had briefed us on the
so-called Separatists of Maui-Covenant.
'The usual coalition of colonial jingoists and throwbacks,' Singh had
said. 'Another reason we go slow and develop the world's trade
potential before finishing the fareaster. The Worldweb doesn't need
these yahoos coming in prematurely. And groups like the Separatists are
another reason to keep you crew and construction workers the hell away
from the groundlings."
'Where is your skimmer?" I asked. The Common was emptying quickly. Most
of the bands had packed up their instruments for the night. Gaily
costumed heaps lay
snoring on the grass or cobblestones amid the litter and unlit lanterns.
Only a few enclaves of merriment remained, groups dancing slowly to a
lone guitar or singing drunkenly to themselves. I saw Mike Osho at
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

once, a patchworked fool, his mask long gone, a girl on either arm. He
was trying to teach the 'Hava Nagilia' to a rapt but inept circle of
admirers. One of the troupe would stumble and they would all fall down.
Mike would flog them to their feet among general laughter and they would
start again, hopping clumsily to his basso profundo chant.
'There it is,' said Siri and pointed to a short line of skimmers parked
behind the Common Hall. I nodded and waved to Mike but he was too busy
hanging on to his two ladies to notice me. Siri and I had crossed the
square and were in the shadows of the old building when the shout went
up.
'Shipmanl Turn around, you Hegemony son of a bitch."
I froze and then wheeled around with fists clenched but no one was near
me. Six young men had descended the steps from the grandstand and were
standing in a semicircle behind Mike. The man in front was tall, slim,
and strikingly handsome. He was twenty-five or twenty-six years old and
his long blond curls spilled down on a crimson silk suit that emphasized
his physique. In his right hand he carried a meter-long sword that
looked to be of tempered steel.
Mike turned slowly. Even from a distance I could see his eyes sobering
as he surveyed the situation. The women at his side and a couple of the
young men in his group tittered as if something humorous had been said.
Mike allowed the inebriated grin to stay on his face. 'You address me,
sir?" he asked.
'I address you, you Hegemony whore's son,' hissed the leader of the
group. His handsome face was twisted into a sneer.
'Bertol,' whispered Siri. 'My cousin. Gresham's younger son." I nodded
and stepped out of the shadows.
Siri caught my arm.
'That is twice you have referred unkindly to my
mother, sir,' slurred Mike. 'Have she or I offended you in some way? If
so, a thousand pardons." Mike bowed so deeply that the bells on his cap
almost brushed the ground. Members of his group applauded.
'Your presence offends me, you Hegemony bastard.
You stink up our air with your fat carcass."
Mike's eyebrows rose comically. A young man near him in a fish costume
waved his hand. 'Oh, come on, Bertol. He's just..."
'Shut up, Ferick. It is this fat shithead I am speaking to."
'Shithead?" repeated Mike, eyebrows still raised. 'I've traveled two
hundred light-years to be called a fat shit-head?
It hardly seems worth it." He pivoted gracefully, untangling himself
from the women as he did so. I would have joined Mike then but Siri
clung tightly to my arm, whispering unheard entrearies. When I was free
I saw that Mike was still smiling, still playing the fool. But his left
hand was in his baggy shirt pocket.
'Give him your blade, Creg,' snapped Bertol. One of the younger men
tossed a sword hilt-first to Mike. Mike watched it arc by and clang
loudly on the cobblestones.
'You can't be serious,' said Mike in a soft voice that was suddenly
quite sober. 'You cretinous cow turd. Do you really think I'm going to
play duel with you just because you get a hard-on acting the hero for
these yokels?"
'Pick up the sword,' screamed Bertol, 'or, by God, I'll carve you where
you stand." He took a quick step forward.
The youth's face contorted with fury as he advanced.
'Fuck off,' said Mike. In his left hand was the laser pen.
'No!" I yelled and ran into the light. That pen was used by
construction workers to scrawl marks on girders of whiskered alloy.
Things happened very quickly then. Bertoi took another step and Mike
flicked the green beam across him almost casually. The colonist let out
a cry and leaped back; a smoking line of black was slashed diagonally
across his silk shirtfront. I hesitated. Mike had the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

setting as low as it could go. Two of Bertol's friends started forward
and Mike swung the light across their shins. One dropped to his knees
cursing and the other hopped away holding his leg and hooting.
A crowd had gathered. They laughed as Mike swept off his fooi's cap in
another bow. 'I thank you,' said Mike. 'My mother thanks you."
Siri's cousin strained against his rage. Froths of spittle spilled on
his lips and chin. I pushed through the crowd and stepped between Mike
and the tail colonist.
'Hey, it's all right,' I said. 'We're leaving. We're going now.".
'Goddamn it, Merin, get out of the way,' said Mike.
'It's all right,' I said as I turned to him. 'l'm with a girl named
Siri who has a..." Bertol stepped forward and lunged past me with his
blade. I wrapped my left arm around his shoulder and flung him back. He
tumbled heavily onto the grass.
'Oh, shit,' said Mike as he backed up several paces. He looked tired
and a little disgusted as he sat down on a stone step. 'Aw, damn,' he
said softly. There was a short line of crimson in one of the black
patches on the left side of his Harlequin costume. As I watched, the
narrow slit spilled over and blood ran down across Mike Osho's broad
belly.
'Oh, Jesus, Mike." I tore a strip of fabric from my shirt and tried to
staunch the flow. I could remember none of the first aid we'd been
taught as mid-Shipmen. 1 pawed at my wrist but my cornlog was not
there. We had left them on the Los Angeles.
'It's not so bad, Mike,' I gasped. 'It's. just a little cut." The
blood flowed down over my hand and wrist.
'It will serve,' said Mike. His voice was held taut by a cord of pain.
'Damn. A fucking sword. Do you believe it, Merin? Cut down in the
prime of my prime by a piece of fucking cutlery out of a fucking
one-penny opera. Oh, damn, that smarts."
'Three-penny opera,' I said and changed hands. The rag was soaked.
'You know what your fucking problem is, Merin?
You're always sticking your fucking two cents in.
Awwwww." Mike's face went white and then gray. He lowered his chin to
his chest and breathed deeply. 'To hell with this, kid. Let's go home,
huh?"
I looked over my shoulder. Bertol was slowly moving away with his
friends. The rest of the crowd milled around in shock. 'Call a
doctor!" I screamed. 'Get some medics up here!" Two men ran down the
street. There was no sign of Siri.
'Wait a minute! Wait a minute!" said Mike in a stronger voice as if he
had forgotten something important.
'Just a minute,' he said and died.
Died. A real death. Brain death. His mouth opened obscenely, his eyes
rolled back so only the whites showed, and a minute later the blood
ceased pumping from the wound.
For a few mad seconds I cursed the sky. I could see the L.A. moving
across the fading starfield and I knew that I could bring Mike back if I
could get him there in a few minutes. The crowd backed away as I
screamed and ranted at the stars.
Eventually I turned to Bertol. 'You,' I said.
The young man had stopped at the far end of the Common. His face was
ashen. He stared wordlessly.
'You,' I said again. I picked up the laser pen from where it had
rolled, clicked the power to maximum, and walked to where Bertol and his
friends stood waiting.
Later, through the haze of screams and scorched flesh, I was dimly aware
of Siri's skimmer setting down in the crowded square, of dust flying up
all around, and of her voice commanding me to join her. We lifted away
from the light and madness. The cool wind blew my sweat-soaked hair
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

away from my neck.
'We will go to Fevarone,' said Siri. 'Bertol was drunk.
The Separatists are a small, violent group. There will be no reprisals.
You will stay with me until the Council holds the inquest."
'No,' I said. 'There. Land there." I pointed to a spit of land not far
from the city.
Siri landed despite her protests. I glanced at the boulder to make sure
the backpack was still there and then climbed out of the skimmer. Siri
slid across the seat and
pulled my head down to hers. 'Merin, my love." Her lips were warm and
open but I felt nothing. My body felt anesthetized. I stepped back and
waved her away. She brushed her hair back and stared at me from green
eyes filled with tears. Then the skimmer lifted, turned, and sped to
the south in the early morning light.
Just a minute, I felt like calling. I sat on a rock and gripped my
knees as several ragged sobs were torn up out of me. Then I stood and
threw the laser pen into the surf below. I tugged out the backpack and
dumped the contents on the ground.
The hawking mat was gone.
I sat back down, too drained to laugh or cry or walk away. The sun rose
as I sat there. I was still sitting there three hours later when the
large black skimmer from ShipSecurity set down silently beside me.
'Father? Father, it is getting late."
I turn to see my son Donel standing behind me. He is wearing the blue
and gold robe of the Hegemony Council.
His bald scalp is flushed and beaded with sweat.
Donel is only forty-three but he seems much older to me.
'Please, Father,' he says. I nod and rise, brushing off the grass and
dirt. We walk together to the front of the tomb. The crowd has pressed
closer now. Gravel crunches under their feet as they shift restlessly.
'Shall I enter with you, Father?" Donel asks.
I pause to look at this aging stranger who is my child.
There is little of Siri or me reflected in him. His face is friendly,
florid, and tense with the excitement of the day.
I can sense in him the open honesty which often takes the place of
intelligence in some people. I cannot help but compare this balding
puppy of a man to A!bn - A!bn of the dark curls and silences and
sardonic smile. But Albn is thirty-three years dead, cut down in a
stupid battle which had nothing to do with him.
'No,' ! say. 'I'll go in by myself. Thank you, Donel." He nods and
steps back. The pennants snap above the heads of the straining crowd. 1
turn my attention to the tomb.
The entrance is sealed with a palmlock. I have only to touch it.
During the past few minutes I have developed a fantasy which will save
me from both the growing sadness within and the external series o f
events which I have initiated. Siri is not dead. In the last stages of
her illness she had called together the doctors and the few technicians
left in the colony and they rebuilt for her one of the ancient
hibernation chambers used in their seedship two centuries earlier.
Siri is only sleeping. What is more, the year-long sleep has somehow
restored her youth. When I wake her she will be the Siri I remember
from our early days. We will walk out into the sunlight together and
when the farcaster doors
open we shall be the first through.
'Father?"
'Yes." I step forward and set my hand to the door of the crypt. There
is a whisper of electric motors and the white slab of stone slides back.
I bow my head and enter Siri's tomb.
'Damn it, Merin, secure that line before it knocks you overboard.
Hurry!" I hurried. The wet rope was hard to coil, harder to tie off.
Siri shook her head in disgust and leaned over to tie a bowline knot
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

with one hand.
It was our Sixth Reunion. I had been three months too late for her
birthday but more than five thousand other people had made it to the
celebration. The CEO of the All Thing had wished her well in a
forty-minute speech. A poet read his most recent verses to the Love
Cycle sonnets.
The Hegemony Ambassador had presented her with a scroll and a new ship,
a small submersible powered by the first fusion cells to be allowed on
Maul-Covenant.
Siri had eighteen other ships. Twelve belonged to her fleet of swift
catamarans that plied their trade between the wandering Archipelago and
the home islands. Two were b.autiful racing yachts that were used only
twice a year to wm the Founder's Regatta and the Covenant Criterium.
The other four craft were ancient fishing boats, homely and awkward,
well maintained but little more than scows.
Siri had nineteen ships but we were on a fishing boat - the Ginnie Paul.
For the past eight days we had
fished the shelf of the Equatorial Shallows; a crew of two, casting and
pulling nets, wading knee-deep through stinking fish and crunching
trilobites, wallowing over every wave, casting and pulling nets, keeping
watch, and sleeping like exhausted children during our brief rest
periods. I was not quite twenty-three. I thought I was used to heavy
labor aboard the L.,4. and it was my custom to put in an hour of
exercise in the 1.3-g pod every second shift, but now my arms and back
ached from the strain and my hands were blistered between the calluses.
Siri had just turned seventy.
'Merin, go forward and reef the foresail. Do the same for the jib and
then go below to see to the sandwiches.
Plenty of mustard."
I nodded and went forward. For a day and a half we had been playing
hide-and-seek with a storm: sailing before it when we could, turning
about and accepting its punishment when we had to. At first it had been
exciting, a welcome respite from the endless casting and pulling and
mending. But after the first few hours the adrenaline rush faded to be
replaced by constant nausea, fatigue, and a terrible tiredness. The
seas did not relent. The waves grew to six meters and higher. The
Ginnie Paul wallowed like the broad-beamed matron she was. Everything
was wet. My skin was soaked under three layers of rain gear. For Siri
it was a long-awaited vacation.
'This is nothing,' she had said during the darkest hour of the night as
waves washed over the deck and smashed against the scarred plastic of
the cockpit. 'You should see it during simoon season."
The clouds still hung low and blended into gray waves in the distance
but the sea was down to a gentle five-foot chop. I spread mustard
across the roast beef sandwiches and poured steaming coffee into thick
white mugs. It would have been easier to transport the coffee in zero-g
without spilling it than to get up the pitching shaft of the
companionway. Siri accepted her depleted cup without commenting. We
sat in silence for a bit, appreciating the food and the tongue-scalding
warmth. I took the wheel when Siri went below to refill our mugs. The
gray day was dimming almost imperceptibly into night.
'Merin,' she said after handing me my mug and taking a seat on the long
cushioned bench which encircled the cockpit, 'what will happen after
they open the farcaster?"
l was surprised by the question. We had almost never talked about the
time when Maul-Covenant would join the Hegemony. I glanced over at Siri
and was struck by how ancient she suddenly seemed. Her face was a
mosaic of seams and shadows. Her beautiful green eyes had sunken into
wells of darkness and her cheekbones were knife edges against brittle
parchment. She kept her gray hair cut short now and it stuck out in
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

damp spikes. Her neck and wrists were tendoned cords emerging from a
shapeless sweater.
'What do you mean?" I asked.
'What will happen after they open the farcaster?" 'You know what the
Council says, Siri." I spoke loudly because she was hard of hearing in
one ear. 'It will open a new era of trade and technology for
Maul-Covenant.
And you won't be restricted to one little world any longer. When you
become citizens, everyone will be entitled to use the farcaster doors."
'Yes,' said Siri. Her voice was weary. 'I have heard all of that,
Merin. But what will happen? Who will be the first through to us?"
I shrugged. 'More diplomats, I suppose. Cultural contact specialists.
Anthropologists. Ethnologists. Marine biologists."
'And then?"
I paused. It was dark out. The sea was almost gentle.
Our running lights glowed red and green against the night. I felt the
same anxiety I had known two days earlier when the wall of storm
appeared on the horizon.
I said, 'And then will come the missionaries.
The petroleum geologists. The sea farmers. The developers. '
Siri sipped at her coffee. 'I would have thought your Hegemony was far
beyond a petroleum economy."
I laughed and locked the wheel in. 'Nobody gets beyond a petroleum
economy. Not while there's petroleum there. We don't burn it, if
that's what you mean.
But it's still essential for the production of plastics, synthetics,
food base, and keroids. Two hundred billion people use a lot of
plastic."
'And Mani-Covenant has oil?"
'Oh, yes,' I said. There was no more laughter in me.
'There are billions of barrels reservoired under the Equatorial Shallows
alone."
'How will they get it, Merin? Platforms?"
'Yeah. Platforms. Submersibles. Sub-sea colonies with tailored
workers brought in from Mare Infinitus."
'And the motile isles?" asked Siri. 'They must return each year to the
shallows to feed on the bluekelp there and to reproduce. What will
become of the isles?"
I shrugged again. I had drunk too much coffee and it had left a bitter
taste in my mouth. 'I don't know,' I said.
'They haven't told the crew much. But back on our first trip out, Mike
heard that they planned to develop as many of the isles as they can so
some will be protected."
'Develop?" Siri's voice showed surprise for the first time. 'How can
they develop the isles? Even the First Families must ask permission of
the Sea Folk to build our treehouse retreats there."
I smiled at Siri's use of the local term for the dolphins.
The Maul-Covenant colonists were such children when it came to their
damned dolphins. 'The plans are all set,' I said. 'There are 128,573
motile isles big enough to build a dwelling on. Leases to those have
long since been sold.
The smaller isles will be broken up, I suppose. The home islands will
be developed for recreation purposes."
'Recreation purposes,' echoed Siri. 'How many-peo-ple from the Hegemony
will use the farcaster to come here... for recreation purposes?"
'At first, you mean?" I asked. 'Just a few thousand the first year. As
long as the only door is on Island 241...
the Trade Center . . . it will be limited. Perhaps 'fifty thousand
the second year when Firstsite gets its door.
It'll be quite the luxury tour. Always is after a seed
colony is first opened to the Web."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'And later?"
'After the five-year probation? There will be thousands of doors, of
course. I would imagine that there will
be twenty or thirty million new residents coming through during the
first year of full citizenship."
'Twenty or thirty million,' said Siri. The light from the compass stand
illuminated her lined face from below.
There was still a beauty there. But there was no anger or shock. I had
expected both.
'But you'll be citizens then yourself,' I said. 'Free to step anywhere
in the Worldweb. There will be sixteen new worlds to choose from.
Probably more by then."
'Yes,' said Siri and set aside her empty mug. A fine rain streaked the
glass around us. The crude radar screen set in its hand-carved frame
showed the seas empty, the storm past. 'Is it true, Merin, that people
in the Hegemony have their homes on a dozen worlds? One house, I mean,
with windows facing out on a dozen skies?"
'Sure,' I said. 'But not many people. Only the rich can afford
multiworld residences like that."
Siri smiled and set her hand on my knee. The back of her hand was
mottled and blue-veined. 'But you are very rich, are you not, Shipman?"
I looked away. 'Not yet I'm not."
'Ah, but soon, Merin, soon. How long for you, my love? Less than two
weeks here and then the voyage back to your Hegemony. Five months more
of your time to bring the last components back, a few weeks to finish,
and then you step home a rich man. Step two hundred empty light-years
home. What a strange thought... but where was I? That is how long?
Less than a standard year."
'Ten months,' I said. 'Three hundred and six standard days. Three
hundred fourteen of yours. Nine hundred eighteen shifts."
'And then your exile will be over."
'Yes."
'And you wili be twenty-four years old and very rich." 'Yes."
'I'm tired, Merin. I want to sleep now."
We programmed the tiller, set the collision alarm, and went below. The
wind had risen some and the old vessel
wallowed from wave crest to trough with every swell. We undressed in
the dim light of the swinging lamp. I was first in the bunk and under
the covers. It was the first time Siri and I had shared a sleep period.
Remembering our last Reunion and her shyness at the villa, I expected
her to douse the light. Instead she stood a minute, nude in the chill
air, thin arms calmly at her sides.
Time had claimed Siri but had not ravaged her. Gravity had done its
inevitable work on her breasts and buttocks and she was much thinner. I
stared at the gaunt outlines of ribs and breastbone and remembered the
sixteen-year=old girl with baby fat and skin like warm velvet. In the
cold light of the swinging lamp I stared at Siri's sagging flesh and
remembered moonlight on budding breasts. Yet somehow, strangely,
inexplicably, it was the same Siri who stood before me now.
'Move over, Merin." She slipped into the bunk beside me. The sheets
were cool against our skin, the rough blanket welcome. I turned off the
light. The little ship swayed to the regular rhythm of the sea's
breathing. I could hear the sympathetic creak of masts and rigging.
In the morning we could be casting and pulling and mending but now there
was time to sleep. I began to doze
to the sound of waves against wood.
'Merin?" 'Yes."
'What would happen if the Separatists attacked the Hegemony tourists or
the new residents?"
'I thought the Separatists had all been carted off to he isles."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'They have been. But what if they resisted?"
'Tbe Hegemony would send in FORCE troops who could kick the shit out of
the Separatists."
'What if the farcaster itself were attacked ...
destroyed before it was operational?"
'Impossible."
'Yes, I know, but what if it were?"
'Then the LosAngeles would return nine months later with Hegemony troops
who would proceed to kick the shit out of the Separatists... and anyone
else on Maui-Covenant who got in their way."
'Nine months' shiptime,' said Siri. 'Eleven years of our time."
'But inevitable either way,' I said. 'Let's talk about something else."
'All right,' said Siri but we did not speak. I listened to the crack
and sigh of the ship. Siri had nestled in the hollow of my arm. Her
head was on my shoulder and her breathing was so deep and regular that I
thought her to be asleep. I was almost asleep myself when her warm hand
slid up my leg and lightly cupped me. I was startled even as I began to
stir and stiffen. Siri whispered an answer to my unasked question. 'No,
Merin, one is never really too old.
At least not too old to want the warmth and closeness.
You decide, my love. I will be content either way."
I decided. Toward the dawn we slept.
The tomb is empty.
'Donel, come in here!'
He bustles in, robes rustling in the hollow emptiness.
The tomb/s empty. There is no hibernation chamber - I did not truly
expect there to be one - but neither is there sarcophagus or coffin. A
bright bulb illuminates the white interior. 'What the hell is this,
Donel? I thought this was Siri's tomb."
'It is, Father."
'Where is she interred? Under the floor for Chrissake?" Donel mops at
his brow. I remember that it is his mother I am speaking of. I also
remember that he has had almost
two years to accustom himself to the idea of her death.
'No one told you?" he asks.
'Told me what?" The anger and confusion are already ebbing. 'I was
rushed here from the dropship station and told that I was to visit
Siri's tomb before the farcaster opening. What?"
'Mother was cremated as per her instructions. Her ashes were spread on
the Great South Sea from the highest platform of the family isle."
'Then why this... crypt?" I watch what I say. Donel is sensitive.
He mops his brow again and glances to the door. We are shielded from
the view of the crowd but we are far behind
schedule. Already the other members of the Council have had to hurry
down the hill to join the dignitaries on the bandstand. My slow grief
this day has been worse than bad timing - it has turned into bad
theater.
'Mother left instructions. They were carried out." He touches a panel
on the inner wall and it slides up to reveal
a small niche containing a metal box. My name is on it.
'What is that?"
Donel shakes his head. 'Personal items Mother left for you. Only
Magritte knew the details and she died last winter without telling
anyone."
'All right,' I say. 'Thank you. I'll be out in a moment." Donel
glances at his chronometer. 'The ceremony begins in eight minutes. They
will activate the farcaster in twenty minutes."
'I know,' I say. I do know. Part of me knows precisely how much time
is left. 'VII be out in a moment."
Donel hesitates and then departs. I close the door behind him with a
touch of my palm. The metal box is surprisingly heavy. I set it on the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

stone floor and crouch beside it. A smaller palmlock gives me access.
The lid clicks open and I peer into the container.
'Well I'll be damned,' I say softly. I do not know what I expected-
artifacts perhaps, nostalgic mementos of our hundred and three days
together - perhaps a pressed flower from some forgotten offering or the
frenchhorn conch we dove for off Fevarone. But there are no mementos -
not as such.
The box holds a small Steiner-Ginn handlaser, one of the most powerful
projection weapons ever made. The accumulator is attached by a power
lead to a small fusion cell that Siri must have cannibalized from her
new submersible. Also attached to the fusion cell is an ancient
cornlog, an antique with a solid state interior and a liquid crystal
diskey. The charge indicator glows green.
There are two other objects in the box. One is the translator medallion
we had used so long ago. The final object makes me literally gape in
surprise.
'Why, you little bitch,' I say. Things fall into place. I cannot stop
a smile. 'You dear, conniving, little bitch."
There, rolled carefully, power lead correctly attached,
lies the hawking mat Mike Osho bought in Carvnel Marketplace for thirty
marks. I leave the hawking mat there, disconnect the comlog, and lift
it out. I sit crosslegged on the cold stone and thumb the diskey. The
light in the crypt fades out and suddenly Siri is there before me.
They did not throw me off the ship when Mike died.
They could have but they did not. They did not leave me to the mercy of
provincial justice on Maui-Covenant.
They could have but they chose not to. For two days 1 was held in
Security and questioned, once by Shipmaster Singh himself. Then they
let me return to duty. For the four months of the long leap back I
tortured myself with the memory of Mike's murder. I knew that in my
clumsy way I had helped to murder him. I put in my shifts, dreamed my
sweaty nightmares, and wondered if they would dismiss me when we reached
the Web. They could have told me but they chose not to.
They did not dismiss me. I was to have my normal leave in the Web but
could take no off-Ship R and R while in the Maui-Covenant system. In
addition, there was a written reprimand and temporary reduction in rank.
That was what Mike's life had been worth- a reprimand and reduction in
rank.
I took my three-week. leave with the rest of the crew but, unlike the
others, I did not plan to return. I farcast to Esperance and made the
classic Shipman's mistake of trying to visit family. Two days in the
crowded residential bulb was enough and I stepped to Lusus and took my
pleasure in three days of whoring on the Rue des Chats.
When my mood turned darker I 'cast to Fuji and lost most of my ready
marks betting on the bloody samurai fights there.
Finally 1 found myself farcasting to Homesystem Station and taking the
two-day pilgrim shuttle down to Hellas Basin. I had never been to
Homesystem or Mars before and I never plan to return, but the ten days I
spent there, alone and wandering the dusty, haunted corridors of the
Monastery, served to send me back to the ship.
Back to Siri.
Occasionally I would leave the red-stoned maze of the
megalith and, clad only in skinsuit and mask, stand on one of the
uncounted thousands of stone balconies and stare skyward at the pale
gray star which had once been Old Earth. Sometimes then I thought of
the brave and stupid idealists heading out into the great dark in their
slow and leaking ships, carrying embryos and ideologies with equal faith
and care. But most times I did not try to think. Most times I simply
stood in the purple night and let Siri come to me. There in the
Master's Rock, where perfect satori had eluded so many much worthier
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

pilgrims, I achieved it through the memory of a not quite
sixteen-year-old womanchild's body lying next to mine while moonlight
spilled from a Thomas Hawk's wings.
When the Los Angeles spun back up to a quantum state, I went with her.
Four months later I was content to pull my shift with the construction
crew, plug into my usual stims, and sleep my R and R away. Then Singh
came to me. 'You're going down,' he said. I did not understand. 'In
the past eleven years the groundlings have turned your screw-up with
Osho into a goddamned legend,' said Singh. 'There's an entire cultural
mythos built around your little roll in the hay with that colonial
girl."
'Siri,' I said.
'Get your gear,' said Singh. 'You'll spend your three weeks groundside.
The Ambassador's experts say you'll do the Hegemony'more good down there
than up here.
We'll see."
The world was waiting. Crowds were cheering. Siri was waving. We left
the harbor in a yellow catamaran and sailed south-southeast, bound for
the Archipelago and her family isle.
'Hello, Merin." Siri floats in the darkness of her tomb.
The holo is not perfect; a haziness mars the edges. But it is Siri -
Siri as I last saw, gray hair shorn rather than cut, head high, face
sharpened with shadows. 'Hello, Merin, my love."
'Hello, Siri,' I say. The tomb door is closed.
'I am sorry I cannot share our Seventh Reunion, Merin. I looked forward
to it." Siri pauses and looks
down at her hands. The image flickers slightly as dust motes float
through her form. 'I had carefully planned what to say here,' she goes
on. 'How to say it. Arguments to be pied. Instructions to be given.
But I know how useless that would have been. Either I have said it
already and you have heard or there is nothing left to say and silence
would best suit the moment."
Siri's voice had grown even more beautiful with age.
There is a fullness and calmness there which can come only from knowing
pain. Siri moves her hands and they disappear beyond the border of the
projection. 'Merin, my love, how strange our days apart and together
have been. How beautifully absurd the myth that bound us.
My days were but heartbeats to you. I hated you for that.
You were the mirror that would not lie. If you could have seen your
face at the beginning of each Reunion! The least you could have done
was to hide your shock...
that, at least, you could have done for me.
'But through your clumsy naivet there has always been... what?...
something, Merin. There is something there that belies the callowhess
and thoughtless egotism which you wear so well. A caring, perhaps. A
respect for caring, if nothing else.
'Merin, this diary has hundreds of entries... thousands, I fear... I
have kept it since I was thirteen. By the time you see this, they will
all have been erased except the ones which follow. Adieu, my love.
Adieu."
I shut off the comlog and sit in silence for a minute. The crowd sounds
are barely audible through the thick walls of the tomb. I take a breath
and thumb the diskey.
Siri appears. She is in her late forties. I know immediately the day
and place she recorded this image. I remember the cloak she wears, the
eelstone pendant at her neck, and the strand of hair which has escaped
her barrette and even now falls across her cheek. I remember everything
about that day. It was the last day of our Third Reunion and we were
with friends on the heights above South Tern. Donel was ten and we were
trying to convince him to slide on the snowfield with us. He was
crying. Siri turned away from us even before the skimmer settled.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

When Magritte stepped out we knew from Siri's face that something had
happened.
The same face stares at me now. She brushes absently at the unruly
strand of hair. Her eyes are red but her voice is controlled. 'Merin,
they killed our son today.
Albn was twenty-one and they killed him. You were so confused today,
Merin. "How could such a mistake have happened?" you kept repeating.
You did not really know our son but I could see the loss in your face
when we heard. Merin, it was not an accident. If nothing else
survives, no other record, if you never understand why I allowed a
sentimental myth to rule my life, let this be known - it was not an
accident that killed Albn. He was with the Separatists when the Council
police arrived.
Even then he could have escaped. We had prepared an alibi together. The
police would have believed his story.
He chose to stay.
'Today, Merin, you were impressed with what I said to the crowd... the
mob... at the embassy. Know this, Shipman - when I said, "Now is not
the time to show your anger and your hatred," that is precisely what I
meant. No more, no less. Today is not the time. But the day will
come. It will surely come. The Covenant was not taken lightly in those
final days, Merin. It is not taken lightly now. Those who have
forgotten will be surprised when the day comes but it will surely come."
The image fades to another and in the split second of overlap the face
of a twenty-six-year-old Siri appears superimposed on the older woman's
features. 'Merin, I am pregnant. I'm so glad. You've been gone five
weeks now and I miss. you. Ten years you'll be gone. More than that.
Merin, why didn't you think to invite me to go with you? I could not
have gone but I would have loved it if you had just invited me. But I'm
pregnant, Merin. The doctors say that it will be a boy. I will tell
him about you, my love. Perhaps someday you and he will sail in the
Archipelago and listen to the songs of the Sea Folk as you and I have
done these past few weeks. Perhaps you'll understand them by then.
Merin, I miss' you. Please hurry back."
The holographic image shimmers and shifts. The sixteen-year-old girl is
red-faced. Her long hair cascades over bare shoulders and a white
nightgown. She speaks in a rush, racing tears. 'Shipman Merin Aspic,
I'm sorry about your friend - I really am - but you left without even
saying goodbye. I had such plans about how you would help us... how
you and I... you didn't even say goodbye. I don't care what happens to
you. I hope you go back to your stinking, crowded Hegemony hives and
rot for all I care. In fact, Merin Aspic, I wouldn't want to see you
again even if they paid me. Goodbye."
She turns her back before the projection fades. It is dark in the tomb
now but the audio continues for a second. There is a soft chuckle and
Siri's voice - I cannot tell the age - comes one last time. 'Adieu,
Merin.
Adieu."
'Adieu,' I say and thumb the diskey off.
The crowd parts as I emerge blinking from the tomb. My poor timing has
ruined the drama of the event and now the smile on my face incites angry
whispers. Loudspeakers carry the rhetoric of the official ceremony even
to our hilltop. '... beginning a new era of cooperation,' echoes the
rich voice of the Ambassador.
I set the box on the grass and remove the hawking mat.
The crowd presses forward to see as I unroll the carpet.
The tapestry is faded but the flight threads gleam like new copper. I
sit in the center of the mat and slide the heavy box on behind me.
'... and more will follow until space and time will cease to be
obstacles."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The crowd moves back as I tap the flight design and the hawking mat
rises four meters into the air. Now I can see beyond the roof of the
tomb. The islands are returning to form the Equatorial Archipelago. I
can see them, hundreds of them, borne up out of the hungry south by
gentle winds.
'So it is with great' pleasure that I close this circuit and welcome
you, the colony of Maui-Covenant, into the community of the Hegemony of
Man."
The thin thread of the ceremonial comm-laser pulses
to the zenith. There is a spattering of applause and the band begins
playing. I squint skyward just in time to see a new star being born.
Part of me knew to the microsecond what has just occurred.
For a few microseconds the farcaster had been functional.
For a few microseconds time and space had ceased to be obstacles. Then
the massive tidal pull of the artificial singularity triggered the
thermite charge I had placed on the outer containment sphere. That tiny
explosion had not been visible but a second later the expanding
Schwarzschild radius is eating its shell, swallowing thirty-six thousand
tons of fragile dodecahedron, and growing quickly to gobble several
thousand kilometers of space around it. And that is visible -
magnificently visible - as a miniature nova flares whitely in the clear
blue sky.
The band stops playing. People scream and run for cover. There is no
reason to. There is a burst of X rays tunneling out as the farcaster
continues to collapse into itself, but not enough to cause harm through
Maui-Covenant's generous atmosphere. A second streak of plasma becomes
visible as the Los Angeles puts more distance between itself and the
rapidly decaying little black hole. The winds rise and the seas are
choppier.
There will be strange tides tonight.
I want to say something profound but I can think of nothing. Besides,
the crowd is in no mood to listen. I tell myself that I can hear some
cheers mixed in with the screams and shouts.
I tap at the flight designs and the hawking mat speeds out over the
cliff and above the harbor. A Thomas Hawk lazing on midday thermals
flaps in panic at my approach.
'Let them come!" I shout at the fleeing hawk. 'Let them come! I'll be
thirty-five and not alone and let them come if they dare!" I drop my
fist and laugh. The wind is blowing my hair and cooling the sweat on my
chest and arms.
Cooler now, I take a sighting and set my course for the most distant of
the isles. I look forward to meeting the others. Even more, I look
forward to talking to the Sea
Folk and telling them that it is time for the Shark to come at last to
the seas of Maui-Covenant.
Later, when the battles are won and the world is theirs, I will tell
them about her. I will sing to them of Siri.
The cascade of light from the distant space battle continued.
There was no sound except for the slide of wind across escarpments. The
group sat close together, leaning forward and looking at the antique
comlog as if expecting more.
There was no more. The Consul removed the micro-disk and pocketed it.
Sol Weintraub rubbed the back of his sleeping infant and spoke to the
Consul. 'Surely you!re not Merin Aspic."
'No,' said the Consul. 'Merin Aspic died during the Rebellion. Siri's
Rebellion."
'How did you come to possess this recording?" asked Father Hoyt. Through
the priest's mask of pain, it was visible that he had been moved. 'This
incredible recording..."
'He gave it to me,' said the Consul. 'A few weeks before he was killed
in the Battle of the Archipelago." The Consul looked at the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

uncomprehending faces before him. 'I'm their grandson,' he said.
'Siri's and Merin's.
My father ... the Donel whom Aspic mentions ...
became the first Home Rule Councilor when Maui-Covenant was admitted to
the Protectorate. Later he was elected Senator and served until his
death. I was nine years old that day on the hill near Siri's tomb. I
was twenty - old enough to join the rebels and fight -- when Aspic came
to our isle at night, took me aside, and forbade me to join their band."
'Would you have fought?" asked Brawne Lamia.
'Oh, yes. And died. Like a third of our menfolk and a fifth of our
women. Like all of the dolphins and many of the isles themselves,
although the Hegemony tried to keep as many of those intact as
possible."
'It is a moving document,' said Sol Weintraub. 'But why are you here?
Why the pilgrimage to the Shrike?"
'I am not finished,' said the Consul. 'Listen."
My father was as weak as my grandmother had been strong. The Hegemony
did not wait eleven local years to return - the FORCE torchships were in
orbit before five years had elapsed. Father watched as the rebels'
hastily constructed ships were swatted aside. He continued to defend
the Hegemony as they laid siege to our world. I remember when I was
fifteen, watching with my family from the upper deck of our ancestral
isle as a dozen other islands burned in the distance, the Hegemony
skimmers lighting the sea with their depth charges. In the morning, the
waves were gray with the bodies of the dead dolphins.
My older sister Lira went to fight with the rebels in those hopeless
days after the Battle of the Archipelago.
Eyewitnesses saw her die. Her body was never recovered.
My father never mentioned her name again.
Within three years after the cease-fire and admission to the
Protectorate, we original colonists were a minority on our own world.
The isles were tamed and said to tourists, just as Merin had predicted
to Siri. Firstsite is a city of eleven million now, the condos and
spires and EM cities extending around the entire island along the coast.
Firstsite Harbor remains as a quaint bazaar, with descendants of the
First Families selling crafts and overpriced art there.
We lived on Tau Ceti Center for a while when Father was first elected
Senator, and I finished school there. I was the dutiful son, extolling
the virtues of life in the Web, studying the glorious history of the
Hegemony of Man, andpreparing for my own career in the diplomatic corps.
And all the time I waited.
I returned to Maul-Covenant briefly after graduation, working in the
offices on Central Administration Isle.
Part of my job was to visit the hundreds of drilling platforms going up
in the shallows, to report on the rapidly multiplying undersea
complexes, and to act as liaison with the development corporations
coming in from TC and Sol Draconi Septem. I did not enjoy the work. But
I was efficient. And I smiled. And I waited.
I courted and married a girl from one of the First
Families, from Siri's cousin Bertol's line, and after receiving a rare
'First' on diplomatic corps examinations, I requested a post out of the
Web.
Thus began our personal Diaspora, Gresha's and mine. I was efficient. I
was born to diplomacy. Within .five standard years I was an Under
Consul. Within eight, a Consul in my own right. As long as I stayed in
the Outback, this was as far as I would rise.
It was my choice. I worked for the Hegemony. And I waited.
At first my role was to provide Web ingenuity to help the colonists do
what they do best - destroy truly indigenous life. It is no. accident
that in six centuries of interstellar expansion the Hegemony has
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

encountered no species considered intelligent on the Drake- Turing-Chen
Index. On Old Earth, it had long been accepted that if a species put
mankind on itsfood-chain menu the species would be extinct before long.
As the Web expanded, if a species attempted serious competition with
humanity's intellect, that species wouM be extinct before the first
farcaster opened in-system.
On Whirl we stalked the elusive zeplen through their cloud towers. It
is possible that they were not sapient by human or Core standards. But
they were beautiful.
When they died, rippling in rainbow colors, their many-hued messages
unseen, unheard by their fleeing herdmates, the beauty of their death
agony was beyond words. We sam their photoreceptive skins to Web
corporations, their flesh to worlds like Heaven's Gate, and ground their
bones to powder to sell as aphrodisiacs to the impotent and
superstitious on a score of other colony worlds.
On Garden I was adviser to the arcology engineers who drained Grand Fen,
ending the short reign of the marsh centaurs who had ruled- and
threatened Hegemony progress - there. They tried to migrate in the end,
but the North Reaches were far too dry and when I visited the region
decades later, when Garden entered the Web, the desiccated remains of
the centaurs still littered some of the distant Reaches like the husks
of exotic plants from some more colorful era.
On Hebron I arrived just as the Jewish settlers were ending their long
feud with the Seneschal Aluit, creatures as fragile as the world's
waterless ecology. The Aluit were empathic and it was our fear and
greed which killed them - that and our unbreachable alienness. But on
Hebron it was not the death of the Aluit which turned my heart to stone,
but my part in dooming the colonists themselves.
On Old Earth they had a word for what I was-quisling.
For, although Hebron was not my world, the settlers who had fled there
had done so for reasons as clear as those of my ancestors who signed the
Covenant of Life on the Old Earth island of MauL But I was waiting. And
in my waiting I acted... in all senses of the word.
They trusted me. They grew to believe in my candid revelations of how
wonderful it was to rejoin the community of mankind... to join the Web.
They insisted that only the one city might be open to foreigners. I
smiled and agreed. And now New Jerusalem holds sixty millions while the
continent holds ten million Jewish indigenies, dependent upon the Web
city for most of what they need. Another decade. Perhaps less.
I broke down a bit after Hebron was opened to the Web. I discovered
alcohol, the blessed antithesis of Flashback and wireheading. Gresha
stayed with me in the hospital there until I dried out. Oddly, for a
Jewish world, the clinic was Catholic. I remember the rustle of robes
in the halls at night.
My breakdown had been very quiet and very far away.
My career was not damaged. As full Consul, I took my wife and son to
Bressia.
How delicate our role there! How Byzantine the fine line we walked. For
decades, Colonel Kassad, forces of the TechnoCore had been harassing the
Ouster swarms wherever they fled. Now the forces-that-be in the Senate
and AI Advisory Council had determined that some test had to be made of
Ouster might in the Outback itself.
Bressia was chosen. I admit, the Bressians had been our surrogates for
decades before I arrived. Their society.
was archaically and delightfully Prussian, militaristic to a fault,
arrogant in their economic pretensions, xenophobic to the point of
happily enlisting to wipe out the 'Ouster Menace." A t first, a few
lend-lease torchships so that they could reach the swarms. Plasma
weapons.
Impact probes with tailored viruses.
It was a slight miscalculation that I was still on Bressia when the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Ouster hordes arrived. A few months' difference.
A military-political analysis team should have been there in my place.
It did not matter. Hegemony purposes were served.
The resolve and rapid-deployment capabilities of FORCE were properly
tested where no real harm was done to Hegemony interests. Gresha died,
of course. In the first bombardment. And A!On, my ten-year-old son.
He had been with me... had survived the war itself...
only to die when some FORCE idiot set off a booby trap or demolition
charge too near the refugee barracks in Buckminster, the capital.
I was not with him when he died.
I was promoted after Bressia. I was given the most challenging and
sensitive assignment ever relegated to someone of mere consular rank:
diplomat in charge of direct negotiations with the Ousters themselves.
First I was 'cast to Tau Ceti Center for long conferences with Senator
Gladstone's committee and some of the AI Councilors. I met with
Gladstone herself. The plan was very complicated. Essentially the
Ousters had to be provoked into attacking, and the key to that
provocation was the world of Hyperion.
The Ousters had been observing Hyperion since before the Battle of
Bressia. Our intelligence suggested that they were obsessed with the
Time Tombs and the Shrike. Their attack on the Hegemony hospital ship
carrying Colonel Kassad, among others, had been a miscalculation; their
ship captain had panicked when the hospital ship had been mistakenly
identified as a military spinship. Worse, from the Ousters' point of
view, was the fact that by setting their dropships down near the Tombs
themselves, the same commander had revealed their ability to defy the
time tides. After the Shrike had
decimated their commando teams, the torchship captain returned to the
Swarm to be executed.
But our intelligence suggested that the Ouster miscalculation had not
been a total disaster. Valuable information had been obtained about the
Shrike. And their obsession with Hyperion had deepened.
Gladstone explained to me how the Hegemony planned to capitalize on that
obsession.
The essence of the plan was that the Ousters had to be provoked into
attacking the Hegemony. The focus of that attack was to be Hyperion
itself. I was made to understand that the resulting battle had more to
do with internal Web politics than with the Ousters. Elements of the
TechnoCore had opposed Hyperion's entry into the Hegemony for centuries.
Gladstone explained that this was no longer in the interest of humanity
and that a forcible annexation of Hyperion - under the guise of
defending the Web itself- would allow more progressive Al coalitions in
the Core to gain power. This shift of the power balance in the Core
would benefit the Senate and the Web in ways not fully explained to me.
The Ousters would be eradicated as a potential menace once and for all.
A new era of Hegemony glory would begin.
Gladstone explained that I need not volunteer, that the mission would be
fraught with dangers - both for my career and my life. I accepted
anyway.
The Hegemony provided me with a private spacecraft.
I asked for only one modification: the addition of an an tique Stein way
piano.
For months I traveled alone under Hawking drive. For more months I
wandered in regions where the Ouster Swarms regularly migrated.
Eventually my ship was sensed and seized. They accepted that I was a
courier and knew that I was a spy. They debated killing me and did not.
They debated negotiating with me and eventually decided to do so.
I will not try to describe the beauty of life in a Swarm - their
zero-gravity globe cities and comet farms and thrust clusters, their
micro-orbital forests and migrating rivers and the ten thousand colors
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

and textures of life at Rendezvous Week. Suffice it to say that I
believe the Ousters have done what Web humanity has not in the past
millennia: evolved. While we llve in our derivative cultures, pale
reflections of Old Earth life, the Ousters have explored new dimensions
of aesthetics and ethics and biosciences and art and all the things that
must change and grow to reflect the human soul.
Barbarians, we call them, while all the while we timidly cling to our
Web like Visigoths crouching in the ruins of Rome's faded glory and
proclaim ourselves civilized.
Within ten standard months, I had told them my greatest secret and they
had told me theirs. I explained in all the detail I could what plans
for extinction had been laid for them by Gladstone's people. I told
them what little the Web scientists understood of the ttnomaly of the
Time Tombs and revealed the TechnoCore's inexplicable fear of Hyperion.
I described how Hyperion would be a trap for them if they dared attempt
to occupy it, how every element of FORCE would be brought to Hyperion
System to crush them. I revealed everything I knew and waited once
again to die.
Instead of killing me, they told me something. They showed me fatline
intercepts, tightbeam recordings, and their own records from the date
they fled Old Earth System, four and a half centuries earlier. Their
facts were terrible and simple.
The Big Mistake of '38 had been no mistake. The death of Old Earth had
been deliberate, planned by elements of the TechnoCore and their human
counterparts in the fledgling government of the Hegemony. The Hegira
had been planned in detail decades before the runaway black hole had
'accidentally' been plunged into the heart of Old Earth.
The Worldweb, the All Thing, the Hegemony of Man - allof them had been
built on the most vicious type of patricide. Now they were being
maintained by a quiet and deliberate policy of fraticide - the murder of
any species with even the slightest potential of being a competitor.
And the Ousters, the only other tribe of humanity free to wander between
the stars and the only group not dominated by the TechnoCore, was next
on our list of extinction.
I returned to the Web. Over thirty years of Web-time had passed. Meina
Gladstone was CEO. Siri's Rebellion was a romantic legend, a minor
footnote in the history of the Hegemony.
I met with Gladstone. I told her many - but not all -of the things the
Ousters had revealed. I told her that they knew that any battle for
Hyperion would be a trap, but that they were coming anyway. I told her
that the Ousters wanted me to become Consul on Hyperion so that I might
be a double agent when war came.
I did not tell her that they had promised to give me a device which
would open the Time Tombs and allow the Shrike free rein.,
CEO Gladstone had long talks with me. FORCE: Intelligence agents had
even longer talks with me, some lasting months. Technologies and drugs
were used to confirm that I was telling the truth and keeping nothing
back. The Ousters also had been very good with technologies and drugs.
I was telling the truth. I was also keeping something back.
In the end, I was assigned to Hyperion. Gladstone offered to raise the
world to Protectorate status and me to an ambassadorship. I declined
both offers, although I asked if I could keep my private spacecraft. I
arrived on a regularly scheduled spinship, and my own ship arrived
several weeks later in the belly of a visiting torchship. It was left
in a parking orbit with the understanding that I could summon it and
leave any time I wished.
Alone on Hyperion, I waited. Years passed. I allowed my aide to govern
the Outback world while I drank at Cicero's and waited.
The Ousters contacted me through private fatline and I took a three
weeks' leave from the Consulate, brought my ship down to an isolated
place near the Sea of Grass, rendezvoused with their scoutship near the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

OOrt Cloud, picked up their agent - a woman named Andil - and a trio of
technicians, and dropped down north of the Bridle Range, a few
kilometers from the Tombs themselves.
The Ousters did not have farcasters. They spent their lives on the long
marches between the stars, watching life in the Web speed by like some
film or holie set at a frenzied speed. They were obsessed with time.
The TechnoCore had given the Hegemony the farcaster and continued to
maintain it. No human scientists or team of human scientists had come
close to understanding it. The Ousters tried. They failed. But even
in their failures they made inroads into understanding the manipulation
of space/time.
They understood the time tides, the anti-entropic fields surrounding the
Tombs. They could not generate such fields, but they could shield
against them and-theoretically - collapse them. The Time Tombs and all
their contents would cease to age backward. The Tombs would 'open. '
The Shrike would slip its tether, no longer connected to the vicinity of
the Tombs. Whatever else was inside would now be freed.
The Ousters believed that the Time Tombs were artifacts from their
future, the Shrike a weapon of redemption awaiting the proper hand to
seize it. The Shrike Cult saw the monster as an avenging angel; the
Ousters saw it as a tool of human devising, sent back through time to
deliver humanity from the TechnoCore. Andil and the technicians were
there to calibrate and experiment.
'You won't use it now?" I asked. We were standing in the shadow of the
structure called the Sphinx.
'Not now,' said Andil. 'When the invasion is imminent."
'But you said it would take months for the device to work,' I said, for
the Tombs to open."
Andil nodded. Her eyes were a dark green. She was very tall, and I
could make out the subtle stripes of the powered exoskeleton on her
skinsuit. 'Perhaps a year or longer,' she said. 'The device causes the
anti-entropic field to decay slowly. But once begun, the process is
irrevocable. But we will not activate it until the Ten Councils have
decided that invasion of the Web is necessary. '
'There are doubts?" I said.
'Ethical debates,' said A ndii. A few meters from us, the three
technicians were covering the device with chameleon cloth and a coded
containment field. 'And interstellar war will cause the deaths of
millions, perhaps
billions. Releasing the Shrike into the Web will have unforeseen
consequences. As much as we need to strike at the Core, there are
debates as to which is the best way. '
I nodded and looked at the device and the valley of the Tombs. 'But
once this is activated,' I said, 'there is no turning back. The Shrike
will be released, and you will
have to have won the war to control it?"
Andil smiled slightly. 'That is true."
I shot her then, her and then the three technicians.
Then I tossed Grandmother Siri's Steiner-Ginn laser far into the drift
dunes and sat on an empty flowfoam crate and sobbed for several minutes.
Then I walked over, used a techniciqn's cornlog to enter the containment
field, threw off the chameleon cloth, and triggered the device.
There was no immediate change. The air held the same rich, late-winter
light. The Jade Tomb glowed softly while the Sphinx continued to stare
down at nothing.
The only sound was the rasp of sand across the crates and bodies. Only
a glowing indicator on the Ouster device showed that it was working ...
had already worked.
I walked slowly back to the ship, half expecting the Shrike to appear,
half hoping that it would. I sat on the balcony of my ship for more
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

than an hour, watching the shadows filling the valley and the sand
covering the distant corpses. There was no Shrike. No thorn tree.
After a while I played a Bach Prelude on the Steinway, buttoned up the
ship, and rose into space.
I contacted the Ouster ship and said that there had been an accident.
The Shrike had taken the others; the device had been activated
prematurely. Even in their confusion and panic, the Ousters offered me
refuge. I declined the offer and turned my ship toward the Web.
The Ousters did not pursue.
I used myfatline transmitter to contact Gladstone and to tell her that
the Ouster agents had been eliminated. !
told her that the invasion was very likely, that the trap would be
sprung as planned. I did not tell her about the device. Gladstone
congratulated me and called me home. I declined. I told her that I
needed silence and solitude. I turned my ship toward the Outback world
nearest the Hyperion system, knowing that travel itself would eat time
until the next act commenced.
Later, when the fatline call to pilgrimage came from Gladstone herself,
I knew the role the Ousters had planned for me in these final days: the
Ousters, or the Core, or Gladstone and her machinations. It no longer
matters who consider themselves the masters of events.
Events no longer obey their masters.
The world as we know it is ending, my friends, no matter what happens to
us. As for me, I have no request of the Shrike. I bring no final words
for it or the universe.
I have returned because I must, because this is my fate. I've known
what I must do since I was a child, returning alone to Siri's tomb and
swearing vengeance on the Hegemony. I've known what price I must pay,
both in life and in history.
But when the time comes to judge, to understand a betrayal which will
spread like fame across the Web, which will end worlds, l ask you not to
think of me - my name was not even writ on water as your lost poet's
soul said - but to think of Old Earth dying for no reason, to think of
the dolphins, their gray flesh drying and rotting in the sun, to see -
as I have seen - the motile isles with no place to wander, their feeding
grounds destroyed, the Equatorial Shallows scabbed with drilling
platforms, the islands themselves burdened with shouting, trammeling
tourists smelling of UV lotion and cannabis.
Or better yet, think of none of that. Stand as l did after throwing the
switch, a murderer, a betrayer, but still proud, feet firmly planted on
Hyperion's shifting sand, head held high, fist raised against the sky,
crying 'A plague on both your houses.t'
For you see, I remember my grandmother's dream. I remember the way it
could have been.
I remember Siri.
'Are you the spy?" asked Father Hoyt. 'The Ouster spy?"
The Consul rubbed his cheeks and said nothing. He looked tired, spent.
'Yeah,' said Martin Silenus. 'CEO Gladstone warned
me when I was chosen for the pilgrimage. She said that there was a
spy."
'She told all of us,' snapped Brawne Lamia. She stared at the Consul.
Her gaze seemed sad.
'Our friend is a spy,' said Sol Weintraub, 'but not merely an Ouster
spy." The baby had awakened.
Weintraub lifted her to calm her crying. 'He is what they call in the
thrillers a double agent, a triple agent in this case, an agent to
infinite regression. In truth, an agent of retribution."
The Consul looked at the old scholar.
'He's still a spy,' said Silenus. 'Spies are executed, aren't they?" ,
Colonel Kassad had the deathwand in his hand. It was not aimed in
anyone's direction. 'Are you in touch with
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

your ship?" he asked the Consul.
'Yes." 'How?"
'Through Siri's comlog. It was... modified."
Kassad nodded slightly. 'And you've been in touch
with the Ousters via the ship's fatline transmitter?" 'Yes."
'Making reports on the pilgrimage as they expected?" 'Yes."
'Have they replied?"
'No."
'How can we believe him?" cried the poet. 'He's a fucking spy."
'Shut up,' Colonel Kassad said flatly, finally. His gaze never left the
Consul. 'Did you attack Her Masteen?"
'No,' said the Consul. 'But when the Yggdrasili
burned, I knew that something was wrong."
'What do you mean?" said Kassad.
The Consul cleared his throat. 'I've spent time with Templar Voices of
the Tree. Their connection to their treeships is almost telepathic.
Masteen's reaction was far too subdued. Either he wasn't what he said
he was, or he had known that the ship was to be destroyed and had
severed contact with it. When I was on guard duty, 1 went below to
confront him. He was gone. The cabin was as we found it, except for
the fact that the MObius cube was in a neutral state. The erg could
have escaped. I secured it and went above."
'You did not harm Het Masteen?" Kassad asked again.
'No."
'1 repeat, why the fuck should we believe you?" said Silenus. The poet
was drinking Scotch from the last bottle he had brought along.
The Consul looked at the bottle as he answered. 'You have no reason to
believe me. It doesn't matter."
Colonel Kassad's long fingers idly tapped the dull casing of the
deathwand. 'What will you do with your fatline commlink now?"
The Consul took a tired breath. 'Report when the Time Tombs open. If
I'm still alive then."
Brawne Lamia pointed at the antique comlog. 'We could destroy it."
The Consul shrugged.
'It could be of use,' said the Colonel. 'We can eavesdrop on military
and civilian transmissions made in the clear. If we have to, we can
call the Consul's ship."
'No!" cried the Consul. It was the first time he had shown emotion in
many minutes. 'We can't turn back now."
'l believe we have no intention of turning back,' said Colonel Kassad.
He looked around at pale faces. No one spoke for a moment.
'There is a decision we have to make,' said Sol Weintraub. He rocked
his infant and nodded in the direction of the Consul.
Martin Silenus had been resting his forehead on the mouth of the empty
bottle of Scotch. He looked up. 'The penalty for treason is death." He
giggled. 'We're all going to die within a few hours anyway. Why not
make our last act an execution?"
Father Hoyt grimaced as a spasm of pain gripped him.
He touched his cracked lips with a trembling finger.
'We're not a court."
'Yes,' said Colonel Kassad, 'we are."
The Consul drew up his legs, rested his forearms on his knees, and laced
his fingers. 'Decide then." There was no emotion in his voice.
Brawne Lamia had brought out her father's automatic pistol. Now she set
it on the floor near where she sat. Her eyes darted from the Consul to
Kassad. 'We're talking treason here?" she said. 'Treason toward what?
None of us except maybe the Colonel there is exactly a leading citizen.
We've all been kicked around by forces beyond our control."
Sol Weintraub spoke directly to the Consul. 'What you have ignored, my
friend, is that if Meina Gladstone and elements of the Core chose you
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

for the Ouster contact, they knew very well what you would do. Perhaps
they could not have guessed that the Ousters had the means by which o
open the Tombs - although with the Als of the Core one can never know -
but they certainly knew that you would turn on both societies, both
camps which have injured your family. It is all part of some bizarre
plan. You were no more an instrument of your own will than was' - he
held the baby up - 'this child."
The Consul looked confused. He started to speak, shook his head
instead.
'That may be correct,' said Colonel Fedmahn Kassad, 'but however they
may try to use all of us as pawns, we must attempt to choose our own
actions." He glanced up at the wall where pulses of light from the
distant space battle painted the plaster blood red. 'Because of this
war, thousands will die. Perhaps millions. If the Ousters or the
Shrike gain access to the Web's farcaster system, billions of lives on
hundreds of worlds are at risk."
The Consul watched as Kassad raised the deathwand.
'This would be faster for all of us,' said Kassad. 'The Shrike knows no
mercy."
No one spoke. The Consul seemed to be staring at something at a great
distance.
Kassad pressed on the safety and set the wand back in his belt. 'We've
come this far,' he said. 'We will go the rest of the way together."
Brawne Lamia put away her father's pistol, rose, crossed the small
space, knelt next to the Consul, and put her arms around him. Startled,
the Consul raised one arm. Light danced on the wall behind them.
A moment later, Sol Weintraub came close and
hugged them both with one arm around their shoulders.
The baby wriggled in pleasure at the sudden warmth of bodies. The
Consul smelled the talc-and-newborn scent of her.
'I was wrong,' said the Consul. 'I will make a reqtlest of the Shrike.
I will ask for her." He gently touched Rache!'s head where the small
skull curved in to neck.
Martin Silenus made a noise which began as a laugh and died as a sob.
'Our last requests,' he said. 'Does the muse grant requests? I have no
request. I want only for the poem to be finished."
Father Hoyt turned toward the poet. 'Is it so important?"
'Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes,' gasped Silenus. He dropped the empty Scotch
bottle, reached into his bag, and lifted out a handful of flimsies,
holding them high as if offering them to the group. 'Do you want to
read it? Do you want me to read it to you? It's flowing again. Read
the old parts. Read the Cantos I wrote three centuries ago and never
published. It's all here. We're all here. My name, yours, this trip.
Don't you see... I'm not creating a poem, I'm creating the future!" He
let the flimsies fall, raised the empty bottle, frowned, and held it
like a chalice. 'I'm creating the future,' he repeated without looking
up, 'but it's the past which must be changed.
One instant. One decision."
Martin Silenus raised his face. His eyes were red. 'This thing that is
going to kill us tomorrow - my muse, our maker, our unmaker - it's
traveled back through time.
Well, let it. This time, let it take me and leave Billy alone.
Let it take me and let the poem end there, unfinished for all time." He
raised the bottle higher, closed his eyes, and threw it against the far
wall. Glass shards reflected orange light from the silent explosions.
Colonel Kassad stepped closer and laid long fingers on the poet's
shoulder.
For a few seconds the room seemed warmed by the mere fact of human
contact. Father Lenar Hoyt stepped away from the wall where he had been
leaning, raised his right hand with thumb and little finger touching,
three fingers raised, the gesture somehow including himself as
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

well as those before him, and said softly, 'Ego te absolvo. '
Wind scraped at the outer walls and whistled around the gargoyles and
balconies. Light from a battle a hundred million kilometers away
painted the group in blood hues.
Colonel Kassad walked to the doorway. The group moved apart.
'Let's try to get some sleep,' said Brawne Lamia.
Later, alone in his bedroll, listening to the wind shriek and howl, the
Consul set his cheek against his pack and pulled the rough blanket
higher. It had been years since he had been able to fall asleep easily.
The Consul se[ his curled fist against his cheek, closed his eyes, and
slept.