THE DETECTIVE'S TALE: The Long Good-Bye
I knew the case was going to be special the minute that he walked into
my office. He was beautiful. By that I don't mean effeminate or
'pretty' in the male-model, HTV-star mode, merely... beautiful.
He was a short man, no taller than I, and I was born and raised in
Lusus's 1.3-g field. It was apparent in a second that my visitor was
not from Lusus - his compact form was well proportioned by Web
standards, athletic but thin. His face was a study in purposeful
energy: low brow, sharp cheekbones, compact nose, solid jaw, and a wide
mouth that suggested both a sensuous side and a stubborn streak. His
eyes were large and hazel-colored.
He looked to be in his late twenties standard.
Understand, I didn't itemize all this the moment he walked in. My first
thought was, Is this a client? My
second thought was, Shit, this guy'$ beautiful.
'M. Lamia?" 'Yeah."
'M. Brawne Lamia of AllWeb Investigations?" 'Yeah."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

He looked around as if he didn't quite believe it. I understood the
look. My office is on the twenty-third level of an old industrial hive
in the Old Digs section of Iron Pig on Lusus. I have three big windows
that look
out on Service Trench 9 where it's always dark and always drizzling
thanks to a massive filter drip from the Hive above. The view is mostly
of abandoned automated loading docks and rusted girders.
What the hell, it's cheap. And most of my clients call rather than show
up in person.
'May I sit down?" he asked, evidently satisfied that a bona fide
investigatory agency would operate out of such a slum.
'Sure,' I said and waved him to a chair. 'M... ah?" 'Johnny,' he said.
He didn't look like a first-name type to me. Something about him
breathed money. It wasn't his clothes - common enough casuals in black
and gray, although the fabric was better than average - it was just a
sense that the guy had class. There was something about his accent.
l'm good at placing dialects- it helps in this profession - but I
couldn't place this guy's homeworld, much less local region.
'How can I help you, Johnny?" I held out the bottle of Scotch I had been
ready to put away as he entered.
Johnny-boy shook his head. Maybe he thought 1 wanted him to drink from
the bottle. Hell, I have more class than that. There are paper cups
over by the water cooler. 'M. Lamia,' he said, the cultivated accent
still
bugging me by its elusiveness, 'I need an investigator." 'That's what I
do."
He paused. Shy. A lot of my clients are hesitant to tell me what the
job is. No wonder, since ninety-five percent of my work is divorce and
domestic stuff. I waited him out.
'It's a somewhat sensitive matter,' he said at last.
'Yeah, M . . . ah, Johnny, most of my work falls under that category.
I'm bonded with UniWeb and everything having to do with a client falls
under the Privacy Protection Act. Everything is confidential, even the
fact that we're talking now. Even if you decide not to hire me." That
was basic bullshit since the authorities could get at my files in a
moment if they ever wanted to, but I sensed that I had to put this guy
at ease somehow.
God, he was beautiful.
'Uh-huh,' he said and glanced around again. He leaned forward. 'M.
Lamia, I would want you to investigate a murder."
This got my attention. I'd been reclining with my feet on the desk; now
I sat up and leaned forward. 'A mur der? Are you sure? What about the
cops?"
'They aren't involved."
'That's not possible,' I said with the sinking feeling that I was
dealing with a loony rather than a client. 'It's a crime to conceal a
murder from the authorities." What I thought was: Are you the murderer,
Johnny?
He smiled and shook his head. 'Not in this case." 'What do you mean?"
'1 mean, M. Lamia, that a murder was committed but that the police-
local and Hegemony- have neither knowledge of it nor jurisdiction over
it."
'Not possible,' I said again. Outside, sparks from an industrial
welder's torch cascaded into the trench along with the rusty drizzle.
'Explain."
'A murder was committed outside of the Web. Outside of the
Protectorate. There were no local authorities."
That made sense. Sort of. For the life of me, though, I couldn't
figure where he was talking about. Even the Outback settlements and
colonial worlds have cops. On board some sort of spaceship? Uh-uh. The
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Interstellar Transit Authority has jurisdiction there.
'I see,' I said. It'd been some weeks since l'd had a case. 'All
right, tell me the details."
'And the conversation will be confidential even if you
do not take the case?"
'Absolutely."
'And if you do take the case, you will report only to me?"
'Of course."
My prospective client hesitated, rubbing his fingers against his chin.
His hands were exquisite. 'All right,' he said at last.
'Start at the beginning,' 1 said. 'Who was murdered?"
Johnny sat up straight, an attentive schoolboy. There was no doubting
his sincerity. He said, 'I was."
It took ten minutes to get the story out of him. When he was finished,
I no longer thought he was crazy. I was. Or I would be if I took the
job.
Johnny - his real name was a code of digits, letters, and cipher bands
longer than my arm - was a cybrid.
I'd heard about cybrids. Who hasn't? I once accused my first husband
of being one. But I never expected to be sitting in the same room with
one. Or to find it so damned attractive.
Johnny was an AI. His consciousness or ego or whatever you want to call
it floated somewhere in the megadatasphere datumplane of TechnoCore.
Like everyone else except maybe the current Senate CEO or the Als'
garbage removers, I had no idea where the TechnoCore was. The Als had
peacefully seceded from human control more than three centuries ago -
before my time- and while they continued to serve the Hegemony as allies
by advising the All Thing, monitoring the dataspheres, occasionally
using their predictive abilities to help us avoid major mistakes or
natural disasters, the TechnoCore generally went about its own
indecipherable and distinctly nonhuman business in privacy.
Fair enough, it seemed to me.
Usually Als do business with humans and human machines via the
datasphere. They can manufacture an interactive holo if they need to -
I remembered during the Maui-Covenant incorporation, the TechnoCore
ambassadors at the treaty signing looked suspiciously like the old holo
star Tyrone Bathwaite.
Cybrids are a whole different matter. Tailored from human genetic
stock, they are far more human in appearance and outward behavior than
androids are allowed to be. Agreements between the TechnoCore and the
Hegemony allow only a handful of cybrids to be in existence.
I looked at Johnny. Fom an AI's perspective, the beautiful body and
intriguing personality sitting across the desk from me must be merely
another appendage, a remote, somewhat more complex but otherwise no more
important than any one of ten thousand such sensors, manipulators,
autonomous units, or other remotes that an AI might use in a day's work.
Discarding 'Johnny' probably would create no more concern in an AI than
clip ping a fingernail would bother me.
What a waste, I thought.
'A cybrid,' I said.
'Yes. Licensed. I have a Worldweb user's visa."
'Good,' I heard myself say. 'And someone... murdered your cybrid and
you want me to f'md out who?"
'No,' said the young man. He had brownish-red curls.
Like his accent, the hairstyle eluded me. It seemed archaic somehow,
but I had seen it somewhere. 'It was not merely
this body that was murdered. My assailant murdered me." 'You?" 'Yes."
'You as in the... ah... AI itself?."
'Precisely."
I didn't get it. Als can't die. Not as far as anyone in the Web knew.
'I don't get it,' I said.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Johnny nodded, 'Unlike a human personality which can . . . I believe
the consensus is . . . be destroyed at death, my own consciousness
cannot be terminated.
There was, however, as a result of the assault, an...
interruption. Although I possessed... ah... shall we say duplicate
recordings of memories, personality, et cetera, there was a loss. Some
data were destroyed in the attack. In that sense, the assailant
committed murder."
'I see,' I lied. I took a breath. 'What about the AI authorities ...
if there are such things ... or the Hegemony cybercops? Wouldn't they
be the ones to go tO?"
'For personal reasons,' said the attractive young man whom I was trying
to see as a cybrid, 'it is important - even necessary - that I do not
consult these sources."
I raised an eyebrow. This sounded more like one of my regular clients.
'I assure you,' he said, 'it is nothing illegal. Nor unethical. Merely
. . . embarrassing to me on a level which I cannot explain."
I folded my arms across my chest. 'Look, Johnny.
This is a pretty half-assed story. I mean, I only have your word that
you're a cybrid. You might be a scam artist for all I know."
He looked surprised. 'I had not thought of that. How would you like me
to show you that I am what I say I am?"
I did not hesitate a second. 'Transfer a million marks to my checking
account in TransWeb,' I said.
Johnny smiled. At the same instant my phone rang and the image of a
harried man with the TransWeb code block floating behind him said,
'Excuse me, M. Lamia, but we wondered with a... ah... deposit of this
size if you would be interested in investigating our long-term savings
options or our mutual assured market possibilities?"
'Later,' I said.
The bank manager nodded and vanished.
'That could've been a simulation,' I said.
Johnny's smile was pleasant. 'Yes, but even that
would be a satisfactory demonstration, would it not?" 'Not necessarily."
He shrugged. 'Assuming I am what I say I am, will you take the case?"
'Yeah." I sighed. 'One thing though. My fee isn't a million marks. I
get five hundred a day plus expenses."
The cybrid nodded. 'Does that mean you will take the case?"
I stood up, put on my hat, and pulled an old coat from a rack by the
window. I bent over the lower desk drawer, smoothly sliding my father's
pistol into a coat pocket.
'Let's go,' I said.
'Yes,' said Johnny. 'Go where?"
'I want to see where you were murdered."
Stereotype has it' that someone born on Lusus hates to leave the Hive
and suffers from instant agoraphobia if we visit anything more open to
the elements that a shopping mall. The truth of it is, most of my
business comes from ... and leads to ... offworld. Skiptracing
deadbeats who use the farcaster system and a change of
identity to try to start over. Finding philandering spouses who think
rendezvousing on a different planet will keep them safe from discovery.
Tracking down missing kids and absent parents.
Still, I was surprised to the point of hesitating a second when we
stepped through the Iron Pig Concourse far-caster onto an empty stone
plateau which seemed to stretch to infinity. Except for the bronze
rectangle of the farcaster portal behind us, there was no sign of
civilization anywhere. The air smelled like rotten eggs. The sky was a
yellow-brown cauldron of sick-looking clouds.
The ground around us was gray and scaled and held no visible life, not
even lichen. I had no idea how far away the horizon really was, but we
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

felt high and it looked far, and there was no hint of trees, shrubs, or
animal life in the distance either.
'Where the hell are we?" I asked. I had been sure that I knew all of
the worlds in the Web.
'Madhya,' said Johnny, pronouncing it something like 'Mudye."
'I never heard of it,' I said, putting one hand in my pocket and finding
the pearl-handled grip of Dad's automatic.
'It's not officially in the Web yet,' said the cybrid.
'Officially it's a colony of Parvati. But it's only light-minutes from
the FORCE base there and the farcaster connections have been set up
before Madhya joins the Protectorate."
I looked at the desolation. The hydrogen-sulfide stench was making me
ill and I was afraid it was going to ruin my suit. 'Colonies? Nearby?"
'No. There are several small cities on the other side of the planet."
'What's the nearest inhabited area?"
'N.nda Devi. A town of about three hundred people.
It's more than two thousand kilometers to the south." 'Then why put a
farcaster portal here?"
'Potential mining sites,' said Johnny. He gestured toward the gray
plateau. 'Heavy metals. The consortium authorized over a hundred
farcaster portals in this hemisphere for easy access once the
development began."
'Okay,' ! said. 'It's a good place for a murder. Why'd you come
here?"
' I don't know. It was part of the memory section lost." 'Who'd you
come with?" 'I don't know that either." 'What do you know?"
The young man put his graceful hands in his pockets.
'Whoever... whatever... attacked me used a type of
weapon known in the Core as an AIDS II virus." 'What'sthat?"
'AIDS II was a human plague disease back long before the Hegira,' said
Johnny." It disabled the immune system.
This... virus... worksthesamewith anal. Inlessthana second it
infiltrates security systems and turns lethal phagocyte programs against
the host... against the AI itself. Against me."
'So you couldn't have contracted this virus naturally?" Johnny smiled.
'Impossible. l?s comparable to asking a shooting victim if he might not
have fallen on the bullets."
I shrugged." Look, if you want a datumnet or AI expert, you've come to
the wrong woman. Other than accessing the sphere like twenty billion
other chumps, I know zilch about the ghost world." I used the old term
to see if it would get a rise out of him.
'I know,' said Johnny, still equable. 'That's not what I want you to
do."
'What do you want me to do?"
'Find out who brought me here and killed me. And why."
'All right. Why do you think this is where the murder took place?"
'Because this is where I regained control of my cybrid when I was...
reconstituted."
'You mean your cybrid was incapacitated while the
virus destroyed you?"
'Yes."
'And how long did that last?"
'My death? Almost a minute before my reserve persona could be
activated."
I laughed. I couldn't help myself.
'What is amusing, M. Lamia?"
'Your concept of death,' I said.
The hazel eyes looked sad. 'Perhaps it is amusing to you, but you have
no idea what a minute of... disconnection...
means to an element of the TechnoCore.
It is eons of time and information. Millennia of non-communication."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Yeah,' I said, able to hold back my own tears without too much effort.
'So what did your body, your cybrid do
while you were changing personae tapes or whatever?" '1 presume it was
comatose."
'It can't handle itself autonomously?"
'Oh, yes, but not when there's a general systems failure."
'So where did you come to?"
'Pardon me?"
'When you reactivated the cybrid, where was it?" Johnny nodded in
understanding. He pointed to a boulder less than five meters from the
farcaster. 'Lying there."
'Oh this side or the other side?"
'The other side."
I went over and examined the spot. No blood. No notes. No murder
weapons left lying about. Not even a footprint or indication that
Johnny's body had lain there for that eternity of a minute. A police
forensics team might have read volumes into the microscopic and biotic
clues left there, but all I could see was hard rock.
'If your memory's really gone,' I said, 'how do you
know someone else came here with you?"
'I accessed the farcaster records."
'Did you bother to check the mystery person or person's name on the
universal card charge?"
'We both farcast on my card,' said Johnny.
'Just one other person?" 'Yes."
I nodded. Farcaster records would solve every inter-world crime if the
portals were true teleportation; the transport data record could have
re-created the subject down to the last gram and follicle. Instead, a
farcaster essentially is just a crude hole ripped in space/time by a
phased singularity. If the farcaster criminal doesn't use
his or her own card, the only data we get are origination and
destination.
'Where'd you two farcast from?" I asked.
'Tau Ceti Center."
'You have the portal code?"
'Of course."
'Let's go there and finish this conversation,' I said.
'This place stinks to high heaven."
TC, the age-old nickname for Tau Ceti Center, is certainly the most
crowded world in the Web. Besides its population of five billion people
scrabbling for room on less than half the land area of Old Earth, it has
an orbital ring ecology that is home for half a billion more. In
addition to being the capital of the Hegemony and home of the Senate,
TC2 is the business nexus for Webtrade.
Naturally the portal number Johnny had found brought us to a
six-hundred-portal terminex in one of the biggest spires in New London,
one of the oldest and largest city sections.
'Hell,' I said, 'let's get a drink."
There was a choice of bars near the terminex and I picked one that was
relatively quiet: a simulated 'ship's tavern, dark, cool, with plenty of
fake wood and brass. I ordered a beer. I never drink the hard stuff or
use Flashback when on a case. Sometimes I think that need for
self-discipline is what keeps me in the business.
Johnny also ordered a beer, a dark, German brew bottled on Renaissance
Vector. I found myself wondering what vices a cybrid might have. I
said:
'What else did you find out before coming to see me?" The young man
opened his hands. 'Nothing."
'Shit,' I said reverently. 'This is a joke. With all the powers of an
AI at your disposal, you can't trace your cybrid's whereabouts and
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

actions for a few days prior to your... accident?"
'No." Johnny sipped his beer. 'Rather, I could but there are important
reasons why I. do not want my fellow Als to find me investigating."
'You suspect one of them?"
Instead of answering, Johnny handed me a flimsy of his universal card
purchases. 'The blackout caused by my murder left five standard days
unaccounted for.
Here are the card charges for that time."
'I thought you said you were only disconnected for a minute."
Johnny scratched his cheek with one finger. 'I was lucky to lose only
five days' worth of data,' he said.
I waved over the human waiter and ordered another beer. 'Look,' I said,
'Johnny... whoever you are, VII never be able to get an angle on this
case unless I know more about you and your situation. Why would someone
want to kill you if they know you'll be reconstituted or whatever the
hell it is?"
'I see two possible motives,' said Johnny over his beer.
I nodded. 'One would be to create just the memory loss they succeeded
in getting,' I said. 'That would suggest that, whatever it was they
wanted you to forget, it'd occurred or come to your attention in the
past week or so. What's the second motive?"
'To send me a message,' said Johnny. '1 just don't know what it is. Or
from whom."
'Do you know who would want to kill you?"
'No."
'No guesses at all?"
'None."
'Most murders,' I said, 'are acts of sudden, mindless rage committed by
someone the victim knows well.
Family. A friend or lover. A majority of the premeditated ones are
usually carried out by someone close to the victim."
Johnny said nothing. There was something about his face that I found
incredibly attractive - a sort of masculine strength combined with a
feminine sense of awareness.
Perhaps it was the eyes.
'Do Als have families?" I asked. 'Feuds? Squabbles?
Lovers' spats?"
'No." He smiled slightly. 'There are quasi-family arrangements, but
they share none of the requirements of emotion or responsibility that
human families exhibit.
AI "families" are primarily convenient code groups for showing where
certain processing trends originated."
350.
'So you don't think another AI attacked you?"
'It's possible." Johnny rotated his glass in his hands. 'I just do not
see why they would attack me through my cybrid."
'Easier access?"
'Perhaps· But it complicates things for the assailant.
An attack in datumplane would have been infinitely more lethal. Also, I
do fail to see any motive for another AI. It makes no sense. I'm a
threat to no one."
'Why do you have a cybrid, Johnny? Maybe if I understood your role in
things, I could get a motive·'
He picked up a pretzel and played with it. 'I have a cybrid... in some
ways I am a cybrid, because my...
function... is to observe and react to human beings. In a sense, I was
human once myself."
I frowned and shook my head. So far nothing he'd said had made sense·
'You've heard of personality retrieval projects?" he asked.
'No."
'A standard year ago, when the FORCE sims re-created the personality of
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

General Horace Glennon-Height to see what made him such a brilliant
general? It was in all
the news·'
'Yeah."
'Well, I am... or was... an earlier and much more complicated
retrieval project. My core persona was based on a pre-Hegira Old Earth
poet. Ancient. Born late eighteenth century Old Calendar."
'How the hell can they reconstruct a personality that lost in time?"
'Writings,' said Johnny· 'His letters. Diaries. Critical biographies.
Testimony of friends. But mostly through his verse. The sim re-creates
the environment, plugs in the known factors, and works backward from the
creative products. Voild - a persona core. Crude at first but, by the
time I came into being, relatively refined. Our first attempt was a
twentieth-century poet named Ezra Pound. Our persona was opinionated to
the point of absurdity, prejudiced beyond rationality, and functionally
insane. It took a year of tinkering before we
discovered that the persona was accurate; it was the man who had been
nuts. A genius but nuts'
'And then what?" I said. 'They build your personality around a dead
poet. Then what?"
'This becomes the template upon which the AI is grown,' said Johnny.
'The cybrid allows me to carry out
my role in the datumplane community."
'As poet?"
Johnny smiled again. 'More as poem,' he said.
'A poem?"
'An ongoing work of art... but not in the human sense· A puzzle
perhaps. A variable enigma which occasionally offers unusual insights
into more serious lines of analysis."
'I don't get it,' I said.
'It probably does not matter. I very much doubt if my
· . . purpose... was the cause of the assault·' 'What do you think
was the cause?" 'I have no idea."
I felt us closing a circle. 'All right,' I said. 'I'11 try to find out
what you were doing and who you were with during these lost five days.
Is there anything besides the credit flimsy that you can think of to
help?"
Johnny shook his head. 'You know, of course, why it is important for me
to know the identity and motive of my assailant?"
'Sure,' I said, 'they might try it again."
'Precisely."
'How can I get hold of you if I need to?" Johnny passed me an access
chip.
'A secure line?" ! said.
' Very. '
'Okay,' I said, 'I'11 get back to you if and when I get some
information."
We moved out of the bar and toward the terminex. He was moving away
when I took three quick steps and grabbed his arm. It was the first
time that I had touched him. 'Johnny. What's the name of the Old Earth
poet
they resurrected..."
'Retrieved."
'Whatever. The one they built your AI persona on?"
The attractive cybrid hesitated. 1 noticed that his eyelashes were very
long. 'How can it be important?" he asked.
'Who knows what's important?"
He nodded. 'Keats,' he said. 'Born in A.D. 1795. Died of
tuberculosis in 1821. John Keats."
Following someone through a series of farcaster changes is damn near
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

impossible. Especially if you want to remain undetected. The Web cops
can do it, given about fifty agents assigned to the task, plus some
exotic and damned expensive high-tech toys, not to mention the
cooperation of the Transit Authority. For a solo, the task is almost
impossible.
Still, it was fairly important for me to see where my new client was
headed.
Johnny did not look back as he crossed the terminex plaza. I moved to a
nearby kiosk and watched through my pocket-sized imager as he punched
codes on a manual diskey, inserted his card, and stepped through the
glowing rectangle.
The use of the manual diskey probably meant that he was headed for a
general access portal since private 'caster codes are usually imprinted
on eyes-only chips.
Great. I'd narrowed his destination down to approximately two million
portals on a hundred and fifty-some Web worlds and half that many moons.
With one hand I pulled the red 'lining' out of my overcoat while I hit
replay on the imager, watching through the eyepiece as it magnified the
diskey sequence.
I tugged out a red cap to go with my new red jacket and pulled the brim
low over my face. Moving quickly across the plaza, I queried my comlog
about the nine-digit transfer code I'd seen on the imager. I knew the
first three digits meant the world of Tsingtao-Hsishuang Parma -I'd
memorized all the planetary prefixes - and was told an instant later
that the portal code led to a residential district in the First
Expansion city of Wansiehn.
I hurried to the first open booth and 'cast there, stepping out onto a
small terminex plaza paved in worn brick. Ancient oriental shops leaned
against one
another, caves of their pagoda roofs hanging over narrow side streets.
People thronged the plaza and stood in doorways and, while most of those
in sight were obviously descendants of the Long Flight exiles who
settled THP, many were offworlders. The air smelled of alien
vegetation, sewage, and cooking rice.
'Damn,' I whispered. There were three other farcaster portals there and
none were in constant use. Johnny could have farcast out immediately.
Instead of 'casting back to Lusus, I spent a few minutes checking the
plaza and side streets. By this time the melanin pill I'd swallowed had
worked and I was a young black woman - or man, it was hard to tell in my
trendy red balloon jacket and polarized visor, strolling idly while
taking pictures with my tourist imager.
The trace pellet I'd dissolved in Johnny's second German beer had had
more than enough time to work. The UV-positive microspores were almost
hanging in the air by now - I could almost follow the trail of
exhalations he had left. Instead, I found a bright yellow handprint on
a dark wall (bright yellow to my especially fitted visor of course,
invisible out of the UV spectrum) and then followed the trail of vague
blotches where saturated clothing had touched market stalls or stone.
Johnny was eating in a Cantonese restaurant less than two blocks from
the terminex plaza. The frying food smelled delicious but I restrained
myself from entering - checking prices in alley bookstalls and haggling
in the market for almost an hour before he finished, returned to the
plaza, and farcast out. This time he used a chip code - a private
portal, certainly, possibly a private home - and I two took chances by
using my pilot-fish card to follow him. Two chances because first the
card is totally illegal and would someday cost me my license if caught -
less than likely if I kept using Daddy Silva's obscenely expensive but
aesthetically perfect shapechanger chips - and, second, I ran a better
than even chance of ending up in the living room of Johnny's house ...
never an easy situation to talk one's way out of.
It was not his living room. Even before I'd located the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

street signs I recognized the familiar extra tug of gravity, the dim,
bronze light, the scent of oil and ozone in the air, and knew I was home
on Lusus.
Johnny had 'cast into a medium-security private residential tower in one
of the Bergson Hives. Perhaps that was why he'd chosen my agency- we
were almost neighbors, less than six hundred klicks apart.
My cybrid was not in sight. I walked purposefully so as not to alert
any security vids programmed to respond to loitering. There was no
residents' directory, no numbers or names on the apartment doorways, and
no listings accessible by comlog. I guessed that there were about
twenty thousand residential cubbies in East Bergson Hive.
The telltales were fading as the spore soup died, but 1 checked only two
of the radial corridors before I found a trail. Johnny lived far out on
a glass-floored wing above a methane lake. His palmlock showed a
faintly glowing handprint. I used my cat-burglar tools to take a
reading of the lock and then I 'cast home.
All in all, I'd watched my man go out for Chinese food and then go home
for the night. Enough accomplished for one day.
BB Surbringer was my Al expert. BB worked in Hegemony Flow Control
Records and Statistics and spent most of his life reclining on a
free-fall couch with half a dozen microleads running from his skull
while he communed with other bureaucrats in datumplane. I'd known him
in college when he was a pure cyberpuke, a twentieth-generation hacker,
cortically shunted when he was twelve standard. His real name was
Ernest but he'd earned the nickname BB when he went out with a friend of
mine named Shayla Toyo. Shayla'd seen him naked on their second date
and had laughed for a solid half hour: Ernest was - and is - almost two
meters tall but masses less than fifty kilos. Shayla said that he had a
butt like two BBs and - like most cruel things do - the nickname stuck.
I visited him in one of the windowless worker monoliths on TC2. No
cloud towers for BB and his ilk.
'So, Brawne,' he said, 'how come you're getting information-literate in
your old age? You're too old to get a real job."
'I just want to know about-Als, BB."
'Only one of the most complex topics in the known universe,' he sighed
and looked longingly at his disconnected neural shunt and metacortex
leads.
Cyberpukes never come down, but civil servants are required to dismount
for lunch. BB was like most cyberpukes in that he never felt
comfortable exchanging information when he wasn't riding a data wave.
'So what do you want to know?" he said.
'Why did the Als drop out?" I had to start somewhere.
BB made a convoluted gesture with his hands. 'They said they had
projects which were not compatible with total immersion in Hegemony -
read human - affairs.
Truth is, nobody knows."
'But they're still around. Still managing things?" 'Sure. The system
couldn't run without them. You know that, Brawne. Even the All Thing
couldn't work without AI management of the real-time Schwarzschild
patterning..."
'Okay,' I said, cutting him off before he lapsed into cyberpukese, 'but
what are their "other projects"?"
'No one knows. Branner and Swayze up at ArtIntel Corp think that the
Als are pursuing the evolution of consciousness on a galactic scale. We
know they have their own probes out far deeper into the Outback than..."
'What about cybrids?"
'Cybrids?" BB sat up and looked interested for the first time. 'Why do
you mention cybrids?"
'Why are you surprised that I mentioned them, BB?" He absently rubbed
his shunt socket. 'Well, first of all, most people forget they exist.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Two centuries ago it was all alarmism and pod people taking over and all
that, but now nobody thinks about them. Also, I just ran across an
anomaly advisory yesterday that said that cybrids were disappearing."
'Disappearing?" It was my turn to sit up.
'You know, being phased out. The Als used to maintain
about a thousand licensed cybrids in the Web. About half of them based
right here on TC2. Last week's census showed about two thirds of
those'd been recalled in the past month or so."
'What happens when an AI recalls its cybrid?"
'I dunno. They're destroyed, I suppose. AIs don't like to waste
things, so I imagine the genetic material's recycled somehow."
'Why are they being recycled?"
'Nobody knows, Brawne. But then most of us don't
know why the AIs do most of the things they do."
'Do experts see them - the AIs - as a threat?"
'Are you kidding? Six hundred years ago, maybe. Two centuries ago the
Secession made us leery. But if the things wanted to hurt humanity,
they could're done it long before this. Worrying about Als turning on
us is about as productive as worrying that farm animals are going to
revolt."
'Except the Als are smarter than us,' I said.
'Yeah, well, there is that."
'BB, have you heard of personality retrieval projects?" 'Like the
Glennon-Height thing? Sure. Everyone has.
I even worked on one at Reichs University a few years
ago. But they're passe. No one's doing them anymore." 'Why's that?"
'Jesus, you don't know shit about anything, do you, Brawne? The
personality retrieval projects were all washouts. Even with the best
sim control... they got the FORCE OCS:HTN network involved... you
can't factor all variables successfully. The persona template becomes
self-aware . . . I don't mean just self-aware, like you and me, but
self-aware that it's an artificially self-aware persona - and that leads
to terminal Strange Loops and nonharmonic labyrinths that go straight to
Escher-space."
'Translate,' I said.
BB sighed and glanced at the blue and gold time band on the wall. Five
minutes and his mandatory lunch hour was over. He could rejoin the real
world. 'Translated,' he said, 'the retrieved personality breaks down.
Goes crazy. Psycho City. Bugfuck."
'All of them?"
'All of them."
'But the Als are still interested in the process?"
'Oh, yeah? Who says? They've never done one. All the retrieval
efforts I've ever heard of were human-run...
mostly botched university projects. Brain-dead academics spending
fortunes to bring back dead academic brains."
I forced a smile. 'There were three minutes until he could plug back
in. 'Were all the retrieved personalities given cybrid remotes?"
'Uh-uh. What gave you that idea, Brawne? None
were. Couldn't work."
'Why not?"
'It'd just fuck up the stimsim. Plus you'd need perfect clone stock and
an interactive environment precise to the last detail. You see, kiddo,
with a retrieved personality, you let it live in its world via
full-scale sim and then you just sneaked a few questions in via dreams
or scenario interactives. Pulling a persona out of sim reality into
slow time..."
This was the cyberpukes' age-old term for the . . .
pardon the expression... real world.
'... would just drive it bugfuck all the sooner,' he finished.
I shook my head. 'Yeah, well, thanks, BB." I moved to the door. There
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

were thirty seconds left before my old college friend could escape from
slow time.
'BB,' I said as an afterthought, 'have you ever heard of a persona
retrieved from an Old Earth poet named John Keats?"
'Keats? Oh, sure there was a big write-up on that in my undergrad text.
Marti Carollus did that about fifty years
ago at New Cambridge."
'What happened?"
'The usual. Persona went Strange Loop. But before it broke up it died
a full sim death. Some ancient disease." BB glanced at the clock,
smiled, and lifted his shunt.
Before clicking it into his skull socket he looked at me again, almost
beatifically. 'I remember now,' he said through his dreamy smile, 'it
was tuberculosis."
If our society ever opted for Orwell's Big Brother approach, the
instrument of choice for oppression would have to be the credit wake. In
a totally noncash economy with only a vestigial barter black market, a
person's activities could be tracked in real time by monitoring the
credit wake of his or her universal card. There were strict laws
protecting card privacy but laws had a bad habit of being ignored or
abrogated when societal push came to totalitarian shove.
Johnny's credit wake for the five-day period leading to his murder
showed a man of regular habits and modest expenses. Before following up
the leads on the credit flimsy l'd spent a dull two days following
Johnny himself.
Data: He lived alone in East Bergson Hive. A routine check showed that
he'd lived there about seven local months - less than five standard. In
the morning he had breakfast at a local cafe and then farcast to
Renaissance Vector where he worked for about five hours, evidently
gathering research of some sort in the print archives, followed by a
light lunch at a courtyard vendor's stand, another hour or two in the
library, and then 'cast home to Lusus or to some favorite eating spot on
another world. In his cubby by 2200 hours. More farcasting than the
average Lusian middle-class drone, but an otherwise uninspiring
schedule. The credit flimsies confirmed that he had held to the agenda
on the week he was murdered, with the addition of a few extra purchases
- shoes one day, groceries the next - and one stop at a bar on
Renaissance V on the day of his 'murder."
I joined him for dinner at the small restaurant on Red Dragon Street
near the Tsingtao-Hsishuang Panna por tal. The food was very hot, very
spicy, and very good.
'How is it going,' he asked.
'Great. l'm a thousand marks richer than when we met and I found a good
Cantonese restaurant."
'I'm glad my money is going toward something important."
'Speaking of your money... where does it come from?
Hanging out in a Renaissance Vector library can't pay much."
Johnny raised an eyebrow. 'I live on a small ...
inheritance."
'Not too small, I hope. I want to be paid."
'It will be adequate for our purposes, M. Lamia. Have you discovered
anything of interest?"
I shrugged. 'Tell me what you do in that library." 'Can it possibly be
germane?" 'Yeah, could be."
He looked at me strangely. Something about his eyes made me go weak at
the knees. 'You remind me of someone,' he said softly.
'Oh?" From anyone else that line would have been cause for an exit.
'Who?" I asked.
'A... woman I once knew. Long ago." He brushed fingers across his brow
as if he were suddenly tired or dizzy.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'What was her name?"
'Fanny." The word was almost whispered.
I knew who he was talking about. John Keats had a fiancce named Fanny.
Their love affair had been a series of romantic frustrations which
almost drove the poet mad. When he died in Italy, alone except for one
fellow traveler, feeling abandoned by friends and his lover, Keats had
asked that unopened letters from Fanny and a lock of her hair be buried
with him.
l'd never heard of John Keats before this week; I'd accessed all this
shit with my comlog. I said, 'So what do you do at the library?"
The cybrid cleared his throat. 'l'm researching a
poem. Searching for fragments of the original." 'Something by Keats?"
'Yes."
'Wouldn't it be easier to access it?"
'Of course. But it is important for me to see the original...
to touch it."
I thought about that. 'What's the poem about?"
He smiled... or at least his lips did. The hazel eyes still seemed
troubled. 'It's called Hyperion. It's difficult to describe what it's
about. Artistic failure, I suppose.
Keats never finished it."
I pushed aside my plate and sipped warm tea. 'You say
Keats never finished it. Don't you mean you never finished it?"
His look of shock had to be genuine... unless Als were consummate
actors. For all I knew, they could be.
'Good God,' he said, 'I'm not John Keats. Having a persona based upon a
retrieval template no more makes me Keats than having the name Lamia
makes you a monster.
There've been a million influences that have separated me from that
poor, sad genius."
'You said I reminded you of Fanny."
'An echo of a dream. Less. You've taken RNA learn ing medication,
yes?"
,yes.,
'It's like that. Memories which feel... hollow."
A human waiter brought fortune cookies.
'Do you have any interest in visiting the real
Hyperion?" I asked.
'What's that?"
'The Outback world. Somewhere beyond Parvati, I think."
Johnny looked puzzled. He had broken open the cookie but had not yet
read the fortune.
'It used to be called Poets' World, I think,' I said. 'It even has a
city named after you... after Keats."
The young man shook his head. 'I'm sorry, I haven't heard of the
place."
'How can that be? Don't Als know everything?"
His laugh was short and sharp. 'This one knows very little." He read
his fortune: BE WARY OF SUDDEN IMPULSES.
I crossed my arms. 'You know, except for that parlor trick with the
bank manager holo, I have no proof that
you are what you say you are." 'Give me your hand." 'My hand?"
'Yes. Either one. Thank you."
Johnny held my right hand in both of his. His fingers
were longer than mine. Mine were stronger.
'Close your eyes,' he said.
I did. There was no transition: one instant I was sitting in the Blue
Lotus on Red Dragon Street and the next I
was... nowhere. Somewhere. Streaking through gray-blue datumplane,
banking along chrome-yellow information highways, passing over and under
and titrough great cities of glowing information storage, red
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

skyscrapers sheathed in black security ice, simple entities like
personal accounts or corporate files blazing like burning refineries in
the night. Above it all, just out of sight as if poised in twisted
space, hung the gigantic weights of the AIs, their simplest
communications pulsing like violent heat lightning along the infinite
horizons.
Somewhere in the distance, all but lost in the maze of three-dimensional
neon that partitioned one tiny second of arc in the incredible
datasphere of one small world, I sensed rather than saw those soft,
hazel eyes waiting for me.
Johnny released my hand. He cracked my fortune cookie open. The strip
of paper read: INVEST WISELY IN NEW VENTURES.
'Jesus,' I whispered. BB had taken me flying in datumplane before, but
without a shunt the experience had been a shadow of this. It was the
difference between watching a black and white holo of fireworks display
and being there. 'How do you do that?"
'Will you be making any progress on the case tomorrow?" he asked.
I regained my composure. 'Tomorrow,' I said, 'I 101an to solve it."
Well, maybe not solve it, but at least get things moving.
The last charge on Johnny's credit flimsy had been the bar on
Renaissance V. I'd checked it out the first day, of course, talked to
several of the regulars since there was no human bartender, but had come
up with no one who remembered Johnny. I'd been back twice with no
greater luck. But on the third day I went back to stay until something
broke.
The bar was definitely not in the class of the wood and brass place
Johnny and I had visited on TC2. This place was tucked on a second
floor of a decaying building in a run-down neighborhood two blocks from
the Renaissance library where Johnny spent his days. Not the kind
of place he would stop in on the way to the farcaster plaza, but just
the kind of place he might end up if he met someone in or near the
library - someone who wanted to talk in private.
l'd been there six hours and was getting damned tired of salted nuts and
fiat beer when an old derelict came in.
I guessed that he was a regular by the way he didn't pause in the
doorway or look around, but headed straight for a small table in the bak
and ordered a whiskey before the serving mech had come to a full stop.
When I joined him at the table I realized that he wasn't so much a
derelict as an example of the tired men and women .I'd seen in the junk
shops and street stalls in that neighborhood. He
squinted up at me through defeated eyes.
'May I sit down?"
'Depends, sister. What're you selling?"
'l'm buying." I sat, set my beer mug on the table, and slid across a
fiat photo of Johnny entering the farcaster booth on TC2. 'Seen this
guy?"
The old man Danced at the photo and returned his full attention to his
whiskey. 'Maybe."
I waved over the mech for another round. 'If you did see him, it's your
lucky day."
The old man snoed and rubbed the back of his hand against the gray
stubble on his cheek. 'If it is, it'll be the first time in a long
fucking time." He focused on me.
'How much? For what?"
'Information. How much depends on the information.
Have you seen him?" I removed a black market
fifty-mark bill from my tunic pocket.
'eaho'
The bill came down to the table but remained in my hand. 'When?"
'Last Tuesday. Tuesday morning."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

That was the correct day. I slid the fifty marks to him and removed
another bill. 'Was he alone?"
The old man licked his lips. 'Let me think. I don't think... no, he
was there." He pointed toward a table at the rear. 'Two other guys with
him. One of them...
well, that's why I remembered."
'What's that?"
The old man rubbed finger and thumb in a gesture as old as greed.
'Tell me about the two men,' I coaxed.
'The young guy... your guy... he was with one of them, you know, the
nature freaks with robes. You see'em on HTV all the time. Them and
their damn trees."
Trees? 'A Templar?" I said, astounded. What would a Templar be doing
in a Renaissance V bar? If he'd been after Johnny, why would he wear
his robe? That would be like a murderer going out to do business in a
clown suit.
'Yeah. Templar. Brown robe, sort of oriental-looking." 'A man?"
'Yeah, I said he was."
'Can you describe him more?"
'Nah, Templar. Tall son of a bitch. Couldn't see his face very well."
'What about the other one?"
The old man shrugged. I removed a second bill and set them both near my
glass.
'Did they come in together?" I prompted. 'The three of them?"
'I don't... I can't... No, wait. Your guy and the Templar guy came in
first. I remember seeing the robe
before the other guy sat down."
'Describe the other man."
The old man waved over the mech and ordered a third drink. I used my
card and the servitor slid away on noisy repellers.
'Like you,' he said. 'Sort of like you."
'Short?" I said. 'Strong arms and legs? A Lusian?" 'Yeah. I guess so.
Never been there." 'What else?"
' No hair,' said the old man." Just a whattyacallit like my
niece used to wear. A pony tail."
'A queue,' I said.
'Yeah. Whatever." He started to reach for the bills.
'Couple more questions. Did they argue?"
'Nab. Don't think so. Talked real quiet. Place's pretty empty that
time of day."
'What time of day was it ?"
'Morning. About ten o'clock."
This coincided with the credit flimsy code.
'Did you hear any of the conversation?" 'Uh-uh."
'Who did most of the talking?"
The old man took a drink and furrowed his brow in thought. 'Templar guy
did at first. Your man seemed to be answering questions. Seemed
surprised once when I was looking."
'Shocked?"
'Uh-uh, just surprised. Like the guy in the robe'd said something he
didn't expect."
'You said the Templar did most of the talking at first.
Who spoke later? My guy?"
'Uh-uh, the one with the pony tail. Then they left." 'All three of them
left?"
'Nah. Your guy and the pony tail."
'The Templar stayed behind?"
'Yeah. I guess so. I think. I went to the lay. When I got back I
don't think he was there."
'What way did the other two go?"
'I don't know, goddammit. I wasn't paying much attention. I was having
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

a drink, not playing spy!'
I nodded. The mech rolled over again but I waved it away. The old man
scowled at its back.
'So they weren't arguing when they left? No sign of a
disagreement or that one was forcing the other to leave?" 'Who?"
'My guy and the queue."
'Uh-uh. Shit, I don't know." Hc looked down at the bills in his grimy
hand and at the whiskey in the mech's display panel, realizing, perhaps,
that he wasn't going to get any more of either from me. 'Why do you
want to know all this shit, anyway?"
Tm looking for the guy,' I said. I looked around the bar. About twenty
customers sat at tables. Most of them looked like neighborhood
regulars. 'Anyone else here who might've seen them? Or somebody else
you might remember who was here?"
'Uh-uh,' he said dully. I realized then that the old man's eyes were
precisely the color of the whiskey he'd been drinking.
I stood, set a final twenty-mark bill on the table.
'Thanks, friend."
'Any time, sister."
The mech was rolling toward him before l'd reached the door.
I walked back toward the library, paused a minute in the busy farcaster
plaza, and stood there a minute. Scenario so far: Johnny had met the
Templar or been approached by him, either in the library or outside when
he arrived in midmorning. They went somewhere private to talk, the bar,
and something the Templar said surprised Johnny.
A man with a queue - possibly a Lusian - showed up and took over the
conversation. Johnny and Queue left together. Sometime after that,
Johnny farcast to TC2 and then farcast from there with one other person
- possibly Queue or the Templar - to Madhya where someone tried to kill
him. Did kill him.
Too many gaps. Too many 'someones." Not a hell of a lot to show for a
day's work.
I was debating whether to 'cast back to Lusus when my comlog chirped on
the restricted comm frequency I'd given to Johnny.
His voice was raw. 'M. Lamia. Come quickly, please.
I think they've just tried again. To kill me." The coordinates which
followed were for the East Bergson Hive.
I ran for the farcaster.
The door to Johnny's cubby was open a crack. There was no one in the
corridor, no sounds from the apartment.
Whatever had happened hadn't brought the authorities yet.
I brought out Dad's automatic pistol from my coat pocket, jacked a round
info the chamber, and clicked on the laser targeting beam with a single
motion.
I went in low, both arms extended, the red dot sliding across the dark
walls, a cheap print on the far wall, a darker hall leading into the
cubby. The foyer was empty.
The living room and media pit were empty.
Johnny lay on the floor of the bedroom, his head against the bed. Blood
soaked the sheet. He struggled to
prop himself up, fell back. The sliding door behind him was open and a
dank industrial wind blew in from the open mall beyond.
I checked the single closet, short hall, kitchen niche, and came back to
step out on the balcony. The view was spectacular from the perch two
hundred or so meters up the curved Hive wall, looking down the ten or
twenty kilometers of the Trench Mall. The roof of the Hive was a dark
mass of girders another hundred or so meters above. Thousands of
lights, commercial hoios, and neon lights glowed from the mall, joining
in the haze of dis rance to a brilliant, throbbing electric blur.
There were hundreds of similar balconies on this wall of the Hive, all
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

deserted. The nearest was twenty meters away. They were the kind of
thing rental agents like to point to as a plus - God knows that Johnny
probably paid plenty extra for an outside room - but the balconies were
totally impractical because of the strong wind rushing up toward the
ventilators, carrying the usual grit and debris as well as the eternal
Hive scent of oil and ozone.
I put my pistol away and went back to check on Johnny.
The cut ran from his hairline to his eyebrow, superficial but messy. He
was sitting up as I returned from the bathroom with a sterile drypad and
pressed it against the cut. 'What happened?" I said.
'Two men... were waiting in the bedroom when 1 came in. They'd
bypassed the alarms on the balcony door."
'You deserve a refund on your security tax,' I said.
'What happened next?"
'We struggled. They seemed to be dragging me toward the door. One of
them had an injector but I managed to knock it out of his hand."
'What made them leave?"
'I activated the in-house alarms."
'But not Hive security?"
'No. I didn't want them involved."
'Who hit you?"
Johnny smiled sheepishly. 'I did. They released me, I went after them.
I managed to trip and fall against the nightstand."
'Not a very graceful brawl on either side,' I said. I switched on a
lamp and checked the carpet until I found
the injection ampule where it had rolled under the bed.
Johnny eyed it as if it were a viper.
'What's your guess?" I said. 'More AIDS II?"
He shook his head.
'I know a place where we can get it analyzed,' I said.
'My guess is that it's just a hypnotic trank. They just wanted you to
come along... not to kill you."
Johnny moved the drypad and grimaced. The blood was still flowing. 'Why
would anyone want to kidnap a cybrid?"
'You tell me. I'm beginning to think that the so-called
murder was just a botched kidnapping attempt." Johnny shook his head
again.
I said, 'Did one of the men wear a queue?"
'I don't know. They wore caps and osmosis masks."
'Was either one tall enough to be a Templar or strong enough to be a
Lusian?"
'A Templar?" Johnny was surprised. 'No. One was about average Web
height. The one with the ampule could have been Lusian. Strong
enough."
'So you went after a Lusian thug with your bare hands. Do you have some
bioprocessors or augmenta tion implants I don't know about?"
'No. I was just mad."
I helped him to his feet. 'So Als get angry?"
'I do."
'Come on,' I said, 'I know an automated med clinic that's discount. Then
you'll be staying with me for a while."
'With you7 Why?"
'Because you've graduated from just needing a detective,' I said. 'Now
you need a bodyguard."
My cubby wasn't registered in the Hive zoning schematic as an apartment;
I'd taken over a renovated warehouse loft from a friend of mine who'd
run afoul of loan sharks. My friend had decided late in life to
emigrate to
one of the Outback colonies and I'd gotten a good deal on a place just a
klick down the corridor from my office.
The environment was a littl rough and sometimes the noise from the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

loading docks could drown out conversation, but it gave me ten times the
room of a normal cubby and I could use my weights and workout equipment
right at home.
Johnny honestly seemed intrigued by the place and I had to kick myself
for being pleased. Next thing you knew, l'd be putting on lipstick and
body rouge for this cybrid.
'So why do you live on Lusus?" I asked him. 'Most offworiders find the
gravity a pain and the scenery monotonous. Plus your research
material's at the library on Renaissance V. Why here?"
I found myself looking and listening very carefully as he answered. His
hair was straight on top, parted in the middle, and fell in
reddish-brown curls to his collar. He had the habit of resting his
cheek on his fist as he spoke.
It struck me that his dialect was actually the nondialect of someone who
has learned a new language perfectly but without the lazy shortcuts of
someone born to it.
And beneath that there was a hint of lilt that brought back the
overtones of a cat burglar l'd known who had grown up on Asquith, a
quiet, backwater Web world settled by First Expansion immigrants from
what had once been the British Isles.
'I have lived on many worlds,' he said. 'My purpose is to observe."
He shook his head, winced, and gingerly touched the stitches. 'No. I'm
not a poet. He ,,os."
Despite the circumstances, there was an energy and vitality to Johnny
that l'd found in too few men. It was hard to describe, but I'd seen
rooms full of more important personages rearrange themselves to orbit
around personalities like his. It was not merely his reticence and
sensitivity, it was an intensity that he emanated even when merely
observing.
'Why doyou live here?" he asked.
'I was born here."
'Yes, but you spent your childhood years on Tau Ceti
Center. Your father was a senator."
I said nothing.
'Many people expected you to go into politics,' he
said. 'Did your father's suicide dissuade you?" 'It wasn't suicide,' I
said.
'No?"
'All the news reports and the inquest said it was,' I said tonelessly,
'but they were wrong. My father never would
have taken his own life." 'So it was murder?" 'Yes."
'Despite the fact that there was no motive or hint of a
suspect?"
'Yes."
'I see,' said Johnny. The yellow glow from the loading dock lamps came
through the dusty windows and made his hair gleam like new copper. 'Do
you like being a detective?"
'When I do it well,' I said. 'Are you hungry?"
' No. '
'Then let's get some sleep. You can have the couch." 'Do you do it well
often?" he said. 'Being a detective?" 'We'll see tomorrow."
In the morning Johnny farcast to Renaissance Vector at about the usual
time, waited a moment in the plaza, and then 'cast to the Old Settlers'
Museum on Sol Draconi Septera. From there he jumped to the main
terminex on Nordholm and then 'cast to the Templar world of God's Grove.
We'd worked out the timing ahead of time and I was waiting for him on
Renaissance V, standing back in the shadows of the colonnade.
A man with a queue was the third through after Johnny. There was no
doubt he was Lusian - between the Hive pallor, the muscle and body mass,
and the arrogant way of walking, he might have been my long-lost
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

brother.
He never looked at Johnny but I could tell that he was surprised when
the cybrid circled around to the outbound
portals. I stayed back and only caught a glimpse of his card but
would've bet anything that it was a tracer.
Queue was careful in the Old Settlers' Museum, keeping Johnny in sight
but checking his own back as well. i was dressed in a Zen Gnostic's
meditation jumper, isolation visor and all, and I never looked their way
as 1 circled to the museum outportal and 'cast directly to God's Grove.
It made me feel funny, leaving Johnny alone through the museum and
Nordholm terminex, but both were public places and it was a calculated
risk.
Johnny came through the Worldtree arrival portal right on time and
bought a ticket for the tour. His shadow had to scurry to catch up,
breaking cover to board the omnibus skimmer before it left. I was
already settled in the rear seat on the upper deck and Johnny found a
place near the front, just as we had planned.
Now I was wearing basic tourist garb and my imager was one of a dozen in
action when Queue hurried to take his place three rows behind Johnny.
The tour of the Worldtree is always fun - Dad first took me there when I
was only three standard - but this time as the skimmer moved above
branches the size of freeways and circled higher around a trunk the
width of Olympus Mons, I found myself reacting to the glimpses of hooded
Templars with something approaching anxiety.
Johnny and I had discussed various clever and infinitely subtle ways to
trail Queue if he showed up, to follow him to his lair and spend weeks
if necessary deducing his game. In the end I opted for something less
than the subtle approach.
The omnibus had dumped us out near the Muir Museum and people were
milling around on the plaza, torn between spending ten marks for a
ticket to educate themselves or going straight for the gift shop, when I
walked up to Queue, gripped him by the upper arm, and said in
conversational tones, 'Hi. Do you mind telling me what the fuck you
want with my client?"
There's an old stereotype that says that Lusians are as subtle as a
stomach pump and about half as pleasant. If
I'd helped confirm the first part of that, Queue went a long way toward
reinforcing the second prejudice.
He was fast. Even with my seemingly casual grip paralyzing the muscles
of his right arm, the knife in his left hand sliced up and around in
less than a second.
I let myself fall to my right, the knife slicing air centimeters from my
cheek, hitting pavement and rolling as I palmed the neural stunner and
came up on one knee to meet the threat.
No threat. Queue was running. Away from me. Away from Johnny. He
shoved tourists aside, dodged behind them, moving toward the museum
entrance.
I slid the stunner back into its wristband and began running myself.
Stunners are great close-range weapons - as easy to aim as a shotgun
without the dire effects if the spread pattern finds innocent bystanders
- but they aren't worth anything beyond eight or ten meters.
On full dispersal, I could give half the tourists in the plaza a
miserable headache but Queue was already too far away to bring down. I
ran after him.
Johnny ran toward me. I waved him back. 'My place!' I shouted. 'Use
the locks!'
Queue had reached the museum entrance and now he looked back at me; the
knife was still in his hand.
I charged at him, feeling something like joy at the thought of the next
few minutes.
Queue vaulted a turnstile and shoved tourists aside to get through the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

doors. I followed.
It was only when I reached the hushed interior of the Grand Hall and saw
him shoving his way up the crowded escalator to the Excursion Mezzanine
that I realized where he was headed.
My father had taken me on the Templar Excursion when I was three. The
farcaster portals were permanently open; it took about three hours to
walk all the guided tours on the thirty worlds where the Templar
ecologists had preserved some bit of nature which they thought would
please the Muir. I couldn't remember for sure, but I thought the paths
were loop trails with the portals relatively close together for easy
transit by Templar guides and maintenance people.
Shit.
A uniformed guard near the tour portal saw the confusion as Queue cut
through and stepped forward to intercept the rude intruder. Even from
fifteen meters away I could see the shock and disbelief on the old
guard's face as he staggered backward, the hilt of Queue's long knife
protruding from his chest.
The old guard, probably a retired local cop, looked down, face white,
touched the bone hilL gingerly as if it were a gag, and collapsed face
first on the mezzanine tiles. Tourists screamed. Someone yelled for a
medic. I saw Queue shove a Templar guide aside and throw himself
through the glowing portal.
This was not going as I'd planned.
I vaulted for the portal without slowing.
Through and half sliding on the slippery grass of a hillside. Sky lemon
yellow above us. Tropical scents. I saw startled faces turned my way.
Queue was halfway to the other farcaster, cutting through elaborate
flower beds and kicking aside bonsai topiary. I recognized the world of
Fuji and careened down the hillside, clambering uphill again through the
flower beds, following the trail of destruction Queue had left. 'Stop
that man!" I screamed, realizing how foolish it sounded. No one made a
move except for a Nipponese tourist who raised her imager and recorded a
sequence.
Queue looked back, shoved past a gawking tour group, and stepped through
the farcast portal.
I had the stunner in my hand again and waved it at the crowd. 'Back!
Back!" They hastily made room.
I went through warily, stunner raised. Queue no longer had his knife
but I didn't know what other toys he carried.
Brilliant light on water. The violent waves of Mare Infinitus. The
path was a narrow wooden walkway ten meters above the support floats. It
led out and away, curving above a fairyland coral reef and a sargasso of
yellow island kelp before curving back, but a narrow catwalk cut across
to the portal at the end of the trail.
Queue had climbed the NO ACCESS gate and was halfway across the catwalk.
I ran the ten paces to the edge of the platform, selected tightbeam, and
held the stunner on full auto, sweeping the invisible beam hack and
forth as if I were aiming a garden hose.
Queue seemed to stumble a half step but then made the last ten meters to
the portal and dived through. I cursed and climbed the gate, ignoring
shouts from a Templar guide behind me. I caught a glimpse of a sign
which reminded tourists to don therm gear and then I was through the
portal, barely sensing the shower-tingle sensation of passing through
the farcaster screen.
A blizzard roared, whipping against the arched con-talnment field which
turned the tourist trail into a tunnel through fierce whiteness. Sol
Draconi Septem- the northern reaches where Templar lobbying of the All
Thing had stopped the colonial heating project in order to save the
arctic wraiths. I could feel the 1.7-standard gravity on my shoulders
like the yoke of my workout machine. It was a shame that Queue was a
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Lushan also; if he'd been Web-standard in physique, there would have
been no contest if I caught him here. Now we would see who was in
better shape.
Queue was fifty meters down the trail and looking back over his
shoulder. The other farcaster was somewhere near but the blizzard made
anything off the trail invisible and inaccessible. I began loping after
him. In deference to the gravity, this was the shortest of the Templar
Excursion trails, curving back after only two hundred or so meters. I
could hear Queue's panting as I closed on him. I was running easily;
there was no way that he was going to beat me to the next farcaster. I
saw no tourists on the trail and so far no one had given chase.
I thought that this would not be a bad place to interrogate him.
Queue was thirty meters short of the exit portal when he turned, dropped
to one knee, and aimed an energy pistol. The first bolt was short,
possibly because of the unaccustomed weight of the weapon in Sol
Draconi's gravity field, but it was close enough to leave a scorched
slash of slagged walkway and melted permafrost to within a meter of me.
He adjusted his aim.
I went out through the containment field, shouldering my way through the
elastic resistance and stumbling into drifts above my waist. The cold
air burned my lungs and wind-driven snow caked my face and bare arms in
seconds.
I could see Queue looking for me from within the lighted pathway, but
the blizzard dimness worked in my favor now as I threw myself through
drifts in his direction.
Queue forced his head, shoulders, and right arm through the field wall,
squinting in the barrage of icy particles which coated his cheeks and
brow in an instant.
His second shot was high and I felt the heat of the bolt as it passed
over. I was within ten meters of him now; I set the stunner on widest
dispersal and sprayed it in his direction without lifting my head from
the snowdrift where I had dropped.
Queue let the energy pistol tumble into the snow and fell back through
the containment field.
I screamed in triumph, my shout lost in the wind roar, and staggered
toward the field wall. My hands and feet were distant things now,
beyond the pain of cold. My cheeks and ears burned. I put the thought
of frostbite out of my mind and threw myself against the field.
It was a class-three field, designed to keep out the elements and
anything as huge as an arctic wraith, while allowing the occasional
errant tourist or errand-bent Templar reentry to the path, but in my
cold-weakened condition I found myself batting against it for a moment
like a fly against plastic, my feet slipping on snow and ice. Finally I
threw myself forward, landing heavily and clumsily, dragging my legs
through.
The sudden warmth of the pathway set me to shaking uncontrollably.
Shards of sleet fell from me as I forced myself to my knees, then to my
feet.
Queue ran the last five yards to the exit portal with his right arm
dangling as if broken. I knew the nerve-fire agony of a neural stunner
and did not envy him. He looked back once as I began running toward him
and then he went through.
Maui-Covenant. The air was tropical and smelled of ocean and
vegetation. The sky was an Old Earth blue. I saw immediately that the
trail had led to one of the few free motile isles which the Templars had
saved from Hegemony domestication. It was a large isle, perhaps half a
kilometer from end to end, and from the access portal's vantage point on
a wide deck encircling the main treesail trunk I could see the expansive
sail leaves filling with wind and the indigo rudder vines trailing far
behind.
The exit portal lay only fifteen meters away down a staircase but I saw
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

at once that Queue had run the other way, along the main trail, toward a
cluster of huts and concession stands near the edge of the isle.
It was only here, halfway along the Templar Excursion trail, that they
allowed human structures to shelter weary hikers while they purchased
refreshments or souvenirs to benefit the Templar Brotherhood. I began
jogging down the wide staircase to the trail below, still shivering, my
clothes soaked with rapidly melting snow.
Why was Queue running toward the cluster of people there?
I saw the bright carpets laid out for rental and understood.
The hawking mats were illegal on most Web worlds but still a tradition
on Maui-Covenant because of the Siri legend; less than two meters long
and a meter wide, the ancient playthings lay waiting to carry tourists
out over the sea and back again to the wandering isle. If Queue reached
one of those... I broke into a full sprint, catching the other Lusian a
few meters short of the hawking mat area and tackling him just below the
knees.
We rolled into the concession stand area and the few tourists there
shouted and scattered.
My father taught me one thing which any child ignores at his or her own
peril: a good big guy can always beat a good little guy. In this case
we were about even. Queue twisted free and jumped to his feet, falling
into an arms-out, fingers-splayed oriental fighting stance. Now we'd
see who the better guy was.
Queue got the first blow in, feinting a straight-fingered jab with his
left hand and coming up and around with a swinging kick instead. I
ducked but he connected solidly enough to make my left shoulder and
upper arm go numb.
Queue danced backward. I followed. He swung a close-fisted
right-handed punch. I blocked it. He chopped with his left hand. I
blocked with my right forearm.
Queue danced back, whirled, and unleashed a left-footed kick. I ducked,
caught his leg as it passed over, and dumped him on the sand.
Queue jumped up. I knocked him down with a short left hook. He rolled
away and scrambled to his knees. 1 kicked him behind his left ear,
pulling the blow enough to leave him conscious.
Too conscious, I realized a second later as he ran four fingers under my
guard in an attempted heart jab.
Instead, he bruised the layers of muscle under my right breast. I
punched him full force in the mouth, sending blood spraying as he rolled
to the waterline and lay still.
Behind us, people ran toward the exit portal, calling to the few others
to get the police.
I lifted Johnny's would-be assassin by his queue, dragged him to the
edge of the isle, and dipped his face in the water until he came to.
Then I rolled him over and lifted him by his torn and stained
shirtfront. We would have only a minute or two until someone arrived.
Queue stared up at me with a glazed glare. I shook him once and leaned
close. 'Listen, my friend,' I whispered.
'We're going to have a short but sincere conversation.
We'll start with who you are and why you're bothering the guy you were
following."
I felt the surge of current before I saw the blue. I cursed and let go
of his shirtfront. The electrical nimbus seemed to surround Queue's
entire body at once. I jumped back but not before my own hair stood on
end and surge control alarms on my comlog chirped urgently. Queue
opened his mouth to scream and I could see the blue within like a poorly
done holo special effect.
His shirtfront sizzled, blackened, and burst into flame.
Beneath it his chest grew blue spots like an ancient film burning
through. The spots widened, joined, widened again. I looked into his
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

chest cavity and saw organs melting in blue flame. He screamed again,
audibly this time, and I watched as teeth and eyes collapsed into blue
fire.
I took another step back.
Queue was burning now, the orange-red flames superseding the blue glow.
His flesh exploded outward with flame as if his bones had ignited.
Within a minute he was a smoking caricature of charred flesh, the body
reduced to the ancient dwarf-boxer posture of burning victims
everywhere. I turned away and put a hand over my mouth, searching the
faces of the few watchers to see if any of them could have done this.
Wide, frightened eyes stared back. Far above, gray security uniforms
burst from the farcaster.
Damn. I looked around. The treesails surged and bil-lowed overhead.
Radiant gossamers, beautiful even in daylight, flitted among tropical
vegetation of a hundred hues. Sunlight danced on blue ocean. The way
to both portals was blocked. The security guard leading the group had
drawn a weapon.
I was to the first hawking mat in three strides, trying to remember from
my own ride two decades earlier how the flight threads were activated. I
tapped designs in desperation.
The hawking mat went rigid and lifted ten centimeters off the beach. I
could hear the shouts now as security guards reached the edge of the
crowd. A woman in gaudy Renaissance Minor garb pointed my way. I
jumped off the hawking mat, gathered up the other seven mats, and jumped
aboard my own. Barely able to find the flight designs under the tumble
of rugs, I slapped the forward controls until the mat lurched into
flight, almost tumbling me off as it rose.
Fifty meters out, thirty meters high, I dumped the other mats into the
sea and swiveled to see what was happening on the beach. Several gray
uniforms were huddled around the burned remains. Another pointed a
silver wand in my direction.
Delicate needles of pain tingled along my arm, shoulders, and neck. My
eyelids drooped and I almost slid off the mat to my right. I gripped
the far side with my left hand, slumped forward, and tapped at the
ascent design with fingers made of wood. Climbing again, I fumbled at
my right sleeve for my own stunner. The wristband was empty.
A minute later I sat up and shook off most of the effects of the stun,
although my fingers still burned and I had a fierce headache. The
motile isle was far behind, shrinking more each second. A century ago
the island would have been driven by the bands of dolphins brought here
originally during the Hegira, but the Hegemony pacification program
during the Siri Rebellion had killed off most of the aquatic mammals and
now the islands wandered listlessly, carrying their cargo of Web
tourists and resort owners·
I checked the horizons for another island, a hint of one of the rare
mainlands. Nothing. Or, rather, blue sky, endless. ocean, and soft
brushstrokes of clouds far to the west. Or was it to the east?
I pulled my comiog off my belt lock and keyed in general datasphere
access, then stopped. If the authorities had chased me this far, the
next step would be to pinpoint my location and send out a skimmer or
security EMV. I wasn't sure if they could trace my comlog when I logged
in but I saw no reason to help them. I thumbed the comm-link on standby
and looked around again.
Good move, Brawne. Poking along at two hundred meters on a
three-century-old hawking mat with who knows how many... or how few!...
hours of charge in its flight threads, possibly a thousand klicks or
more from land of any sort. And lost. Great. I crossed my arms and
sat back to think.
'M. Lamia?" Johnny's soft voice almost made me jump off the mat.
'Johnny?" I stared at the cornlog. It was still on standby. The
general comm frequency indicator was dark. 'Johnny, is that you?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Of course. I thought you'd never turn your comlog on."
'How did you trace me? What band are you calling o!i?"
'Never mind that. Where are you headed?"
I laughed and told him that I didn't have the slightest idea. 'Can you
help?"
'Wait." There was the briefest second of pause. 'All
right, I have you on one of the weather-mapping sats. A terribly
primitive thing. Good thing your hawking mat has a passive
transponder."
I stared at the rug that was the only thing between me and a long, loud
fall to the sea. 'It does? Can the others track me?"
'They could,' said Johnny, 'but I'm jamming this par ticular signal.
Now, where do you want to go?" 'Home."
'I'm not sure if that's wise after the death of... ah · . . our
suspect."
I squinted, suddenly suspicious. 'How do you know about that? I didn't
say anything."
'Be serious, M. Lamia. The security bands are full of it on six
worlds. They have a reasonable description of you. '
'Shit."
'Precisely. Now where would you like to go?" 'Where are you?" I asked.
'My place?"
'No. I left there when the security bands mentioned you. I'm... near
a farcaster."
'That's where I need to be." I looked around again.
Ocean sky, a hint of clouds. At least no fleets of EMVs.
'All right,' said Johnny's disembodied voice. 'There's a powered-down
FORCE multi-portal less than ten klicks from your present location."
I shielded my eyes and rotated three hundred and sixty degrees. 'The
hell there is,' I said. 'I don't know how far away the horizon is on
this world, but it's at least forty klicks and I can't see anything."
'Submersible base,' said Johnny. 'Hang on. l'm going to take control."
The hawking mat lurched again, dipped once, and then fell steadily. I
held on with both hands and resisted the urge to scream.
'Submersible,' I called against the wind rush, 'how far?"
'Do you mean how deep?"
'Yeah!'
'Eight fathoms."
I converted the archaic units to meters. This time I did
scream. 'That's almost fourteen meters underwater!' 'Where else do you
expect a submersible to be?"
'What the hell do you expect me to do, hold my breath?" The ocean rushed
toward me.
'Not necessary,' said my comlog. 'The hawking mat has a primitive crash
field. It should easily hold for a mere eight fathoms. Please hang
on."
I hung on.
Johnny was waiting for me when I arrived. The submersible had been dark
and dank with the sweat of abandonment; the farcaster had been of a
military variety l'd never seen before. It was a relief to step into
sunlight and a city street with Johnny waiting.
I told him what had happened to Queue. We walked empty streets past old
buildings. The sky was pale blue fading toward evening. No one was in
sight. 'Hey,' I said, stopping, 'where are we?" It was an incredibly
Earthlike world but the sky, the gravity, the texture of the place was
like nothing I'd visited.
Johnny smiled. 'I'11 let you guess. Let's walk some more."
There were ruins to our left as we walked down a wide street. I stopped
and stared. 'That's the Colosseum,' I said. 'The Roman Colosseum on
Old Earth." I looked around at the aging buildings, the cobblestone
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

streets, and the trees swaying slightly in a soft breeze. 'This is a
reconstruction of the Old Earth city of Rome,' I said, trying to keep
the astonishment out of my voice. 'New Earth?" I knew at once that it
wasn't. I'd been to New Earth numerous times and the sky tones, smells,
and gravity had not been like this.
Johnny shook his head. 'This is nowhere in the Web." I stopped walking.
'That's impossible." By definition, any world which could be reached by
farcaster was in the Web.
'Nonetheless, it is not in the Web." 'Where is it then?" 'Old Earth."
We walked on. Johnny pointed out another ruin. 'The Forum." Descending
a long staircase, he said, 'Ahead is the Piazza di Spagna where we'll
spend the night."
'Old Earth,' I said, my first comment in twenty minutes.
'Time travel?"
'That is not possible, M. Lamia."
'A theme park then?"
Johnny laughed. It was a pleasant laugh, unself-conscious and easy.
'Perhaps. I don't really know its purpose or function. It is... an
analog."
'An analog." I squinted at the red, setting sun just visible down a
narrow street. 'It looks like the holos I've seen of Old Earth. It
feels right, even though l've never been there."
'It is very accurate."
'Where is it? I mean, what star?"
'I don't know the number,' said Johnny. 'It's in the Hercules Cluster."
I managed not to repeat what he said but I stopped and sat down on one
of the steps. With the Hawking drive humankind had explored, colonized,
and linked with farcaster worlds across many thousands of light-years.
But no one had tried to reach the exploding Core suns.
We had barely crawled out of the cradle of one spiral arm. The Hercules
Cluster.
'Why has the TechnoCore built a replica of Rome in the Hercules
Cluster?" 1 asked.
Johnny sat next to me. We both looked up as a whirling mass of pigeons
exploded into flight and wheeled above the rooftops. 'I don't know, M.
Lamia.
There is much that I have not learned ... at least partially because I
have not been interested until now. '
'Brawne,' I said.
'Excuse me?" 'Call me Brawne."
Johnny smiled and inclined his head. 'Thank you, Brawne. One thing,
though. I do not believe that it is a replica of the city of Rome
alone. It is all of Old Earth."
l set both hands on the sun-warmed stone of the step I was sitting on.
'All of Old Earth? All of its... continents, cities?"
'l believe so. I haven't been out of ltaly and England
except for a sea voyage between the two, but I believe the analog is
complete."
'Why, for God's sake?"
Johnny nodded slowly. 'That may indeed be the case.
Why don't we go inside and eat and talk more about this? It may relate
to who tried to kill me and why."
'Inside' was an apartment in a large house at the foot of the marble
stairs. Windows looked out on what Johnny called the 'piazza' and I
could see up the staircase to a large, yellow-brown church above, and
down to the square where a boat-shaped fountain tossed water into the
evening stillness. Johnny said that the fountain had been designed by
Bernini but the name meant nothing to me.
The rooms were small but high-ceilinged, with rough but elaborately
carved furniture from an era I did not recognize. There was no sign of
electricity or modern appliances. The house did not respond when I
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

spoke to it at the door and again in the apartment upstairs. As dusk
fell over the square and city outside the tall windows, the only lights
were a few streetlamps of gas or some more primitive combustible.
'This is out of Old Earth's past,' I said, touching the thick pillows. I
raised my head, suddenly understanding.
'Keats died in Italy. Early... nineteenth or twentieth century. This
is... then."
'Yes. Early nineteenth century: 1821, to be precise." 'The whole world
is a museum?"
'Oh no. Different areas are different eras, of course. It depends upon
the analog being pursued."
'I don't understand." We had moved into a room cluttered with thick
furniture and I sat on an oddly carved couch by a window. A film of
gold evening light still touched the spire of the tawny church up the
steps.
Pigeons wheeled white against blue sky. 'Are there millions of
people... cybrids... living on this fake Old Earth?"
'I do not believe so,' said Johnny. 'Only the number necessary for the
particular analog project." He saw that ! still did not understand and
took a breath before continuing. 'When I... awoke here, there were
cybrid analogs of Joseph Severn, Dr Clark, the landlady Anna Angeletti,
young Lieutenant Elton, and a few others.
Italian shopkeepers, the owner of the trattoria across the square who
used to bring us our food, passersby, that
sort of thing. No more than a score at the most." 'What happened to
them?"
'They were probably... recycled. Like the man with the queue."
'Queue..." I suddenly stared across the darkening room at Johnny. 'He
was a cybrid?"
'Without doubt. The self-destruction you described is precisely the way
I would rid myself of this cybrid if I had tO."
My mind was racing. I realized how stupid I had been, how little I had
learned about anything. 'Then it was
another AI who tried to kill you." 'It seems that way." 'Why?"
Johnny made a gesture with his hands. 'Possibly to erase some quantum
of knowledge that died with my cybrid. Something I had learned only
recently and the other AI ... or Als knew would be destroyed in my
systems crash."
I stood, paced back and forth, and stopped at the window. The darkness
was settling in earnest now. There were lamps in the room but Johnny
made no move to light them and I preferred the dimness. It made the
unreality of what I was hearing even that much more unreal. I looked
into the bedroom. The western windows admitted the last of the light;
bedclothes glowed whitely.
'You died here,' I said.
'He did,' said Johnny. 'I am not he." 'But you have his memories."
'Half-forgotten dreams. There are gaps." 'But you know what he felt."
'1 remember what the designers thought that he felt." 'Tell me."
'What?" Johnny's skin was very pale in the gloom. His short curls
looked black.
'What it was like to die. What it was like to be reborn."
Johnny told me, his voice very soft, almost melodic, lapsing sometimes
into an English too archaic to be understood but far more beautiful to
the ear than the hybrid tongue we speak today.
He told me what it was like to be a poet obsessed with perfection, far
harsher toward his own efforts than even the most vicious critic. And
the critics were vicious. His work was dismissed, ridiculed, described
as derivative and silly. Too poor to marry the woman he loved, loaning
money to his brother in America and thus losing the last chance of
financial security... and then the brief glory of growing into the full
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

maturation of his poetic powers just as he fell prey to the
'consumption' which had claimed his mother and his brother Tom. Then
sent off to exile in Italy, reputedly 'for his health' while knowing all
the while it meant a lonely, painful death at the age of twenty-six. He
talked of the agony of seeing Fanny's handwriting on the letters he
found too painful to open; he talked of the loyalty of the young artist
Joseph Severn, who had been chosen as a traveling companion for Keats by
'friends' who had abandoned the poet at the end, of how Severn had
nursed the dying man and stayed with him during the final days. He told
of the hemorrhages in the night, of Dr Clark bleeding him and
prescribing 'exercise and good air,' and of the ultimate religious and
personal despair which had led Keats to demand his own epitaph be carved
in stone as: 'Here lies One Whose Name was writ in Water."
Only the dimmest light from below outlined the tall windows. Johnny's
voice seemed to fioat in the night-scented air. He spoke of awakening
after his death in the bed where he died, still attended by the loyal
Severn and Dr Clark, of remembering that he was the poet John Keats the
way one remembers an identity from a fast-fading dream while all the
while knowing that he was something else.
He told of the illusion continued, the trip back to England, the reunion
with the Fanny-who-was-not-Fanny and the near mental breakdown this had
engendered.
He told of his inability to write further poetry, of his increasing
estrangement from the cybrid impostors,
of his retreat into something resembling catatonia combined with
'hallucinations' of his true AI existence in the nearly incomprehensible
(to a nineteenth-century poet) TechnoCore, and of the ultimate crumbling
of the illusion and the abandonment of the 'Keats Project."
'In truth,' he said, 'the entire, evil charade made me think of nothing
so much as a passage in a letter I wrote · . . he wrote... to his
brother George some time before his illness. Keats said:
'May there not be superior beings amused with any graceful, though
instinctive attitude my mind may fall into, as I am entertained with the
alertness of a Stoat or the anxiety of a Deer? Though a quarrel in the
streets is a thing to be hated, the energies dis· played in it are fine.
By a superior being our reasonings may take the same tone - though
erroneous they may be fine - This is the very thing in which consists
poetry."
'You think the . . . Keats Project . . . was evil?" I asked.
'Anything which deceives is evil, I believe."
'Perhaps you are more John Keats than you are willing to admit."
'No. The absence of poetic instinct showed otherwise even in the midst
of the most elaborate illusion."
I looked at the dark outlines of shapes in the dark house. 'Do the AIs
know that we're here?"
'Probably. Almost surely. There is no place that I can go that the
TechnoCore cannot trace and follow. But it was the Web authorities and
brigands from whom we fled, no?"
'But you know now that it was someone . . . some intelligence in the
TechnoCore who assaulted you."
'Yes, but only in the Web. Such violence in the Core would not be
tolerated."
There came a noise from the street. A pigeon, I hoped.
Wind blowing trash across cobblestones perhaps. 1 said, 'How will the
TechnoCore respond to my being here?"
'1 have no idea."
'Surely it must be a secret."
'It is ... something they consider irrelevant to humanity."
I shook my head, a futile gesture in the darkness. 'The re-creation of
Old Earth... the resurrection of... how many? ... human
personalities as cybrids on this re-created world... AIs killing Als...
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

irrelevant!" I laughed but managed to keep the laughter under control.
'Jesus wept, Johnny."
'Almost certainly."
I moved to the window, not caring what sort of target l would afford
anyone in t he dark street below, and fumbled out a cigarette. They
were damp from the afteruoon's chase through the snowdrifts but one
lighted when I struck it. 'Johnny, earlier when you said that the Old
Earth analog was complete, I said,"Why, for God's sake?" and you said
something like "That may be the case." Was that
just a wiseass comment or did you mean something?" 'I mean that it might
indeed be for God's sake." 'Explain."
Johnny sighed in the darkness. 'I don't understand the exact purpose of
the Keats Project or the other Old Earth analogs, but I suspect that it
is part of a TechnoCore project going back at least seven standard
centuries to realize the Ultimate Intelligence."
'The Ultimate Intelligence,' I said, exhaling smoke.
'Uh-huh. So theTechnoCore is trying to... what?... to
build God." 'Yes,' 'Why?"
'There is no simple answer, Brawne. Any more than there is a simple
answer to the question of why humankind has sought God in a million
guises for ten thousand generations.
But with the Core, the interest lies more in the quest for more
efficiency, more reliable ways to handle...
variables."
'But the TechnoCore can draw on itself and the mega-datasphere of two
hundred worlds."
'And there still will be blanks in the . . . predictive powers."
I threw my cigarette out the window, watching the ember fall into the
night. The breeze was suddenly cold; 1 hugged my arms. 'How does all
this... Old Earth, the resurrection projects, the cybrids... how does
it lead to creating the Ultimate Intelligence?"
'I don't know, Brawne. Eight standard centuries ago, at the beginning
of the First Information Age, a man named Norbert Wiener wrote: "Can God
play a significant game with his own creature? Can any creator, even a
limited one, play a significant game with his own creature?"
Humanity dealt with this inconclusively with their early Als. The Core
wrestles with it in the resurrection projects. Perhaps the UI program
has been completed and all of this remains a function of the ultimate
Creature/Creator, a personality whose motives are as far beyond the
Core's understanding as the Core's are beyond humanity's."
I started to move in the dark room, bumped a low table with my knee, and
remained standing. 'None of which tells us who is trying to kill you,'
I said.
'No." Johnny rose and moved to the far wall. A match flared and he
lighted a candle. Our shadows wavered on the walls and ceiling.
Johnny came closer and softly gripped my upper arms. The soft light
painted his curls and eyelashes copper and touched his high cheekbones
and firm chin.
'Why are you so tough?" he asked.
I stared at him. His face was only inches from mine.
We were the same height. 'Let go,' I said.
Instead, he leaned forward and kissed me. His lips were soft and warm
and the kiss seemed to last for hours.
He's a machine, I thought. Human, but a machine behind that. 1 closed
my eyes. His soft hand touched my cheek, my neck, the back of my head.
'Listen..." I whispered when we broke apart for an instant.
Johnny did not let me finish. He lifted me in his arms and carried me
into the other room. The tall bed. The soft mattress and deep
comforter. The candlelight from the other room flickered and danced as
we undressed each other in a sudden urgency.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

We made love three times that night, each time responding to slow, sweet
imperatives of touch and warmth and closeness and the escalating
intensity of sensation.
I remember looking down at him the second time; his eyes were closed,
hair fell loosely across his forehead, the candlelight showing the flush
across his pale chest, his surprisingly strong arms and hands rising to
hold me in place. He had opened his eyes that second to look back at me
and I saw only the emotion and passion of that moment reflected there.
Sometime before dawn we slept; just as I turned away and drifted off, I
felt the cool touch of his hand on my hip in a movement protective and
casual without being possessive.
They hit us just after first light. There were five of them, not Lusian
but heavily muscled, all men, and they worked well together as a team.
The first I heard of them was when the door to the apartment was kicked
open. I rolled out of bed, jumped to the side of the bedroom door, and
watched them come through. Johnny sat up and shouted something as the
first man leveled a stunner. Johnny had pulled on cotton shorts before
going to sleep; I was nude. There are real disadvantages to fighting in
the nude when one's opponents are dressed, but the greatest problem is
psychological.
If you can get over the sense of heightened vulnerability, the rest is
easy to compensate for.
The first man saw me, decided to stun Johnny anyway, and paid for the
mistake. I kicked the weapon out of his hand and clubbed him down with
a blow behind the left ear. Two more men pushed into the room. This
time both of them were smart enough to deal with me first. Two others
leaped for Johnny.
I blocked a stiff-fingered jab, parried a kick that would have done real
damage, and backed away. There was a tall dresser to my left and the
top drawer came out smooth and heavy. The big man in front of me
shielded his face with both arms so that the thick wood splintered, but
the instinctive reaction gave me a second's opening and I took it,
putting my entire body into the kick.
Number two man grunted and fell back against his partner.
Johnny was struggling but one of the intruders had him around the throat
in a choke hold while the other pinned his legs. I came off the floor
in a crouch, accepted the blow from my number two, and leaped across the
bed. The guy holding Johnny's legs went through the glass and wood of
the window without a word.
Someone landed on my back and I completed the roll across the bed and
floor, bringing him up against the wall. He was good. He took the blow
on his shoulder and went for a nerve pinch beneath my ear. He had a
second of trouble because of the extra layers of muscle there and I got
an elbow deep into his stomach and rolled away.
The man choking Johnny dropped him and delivered a text-book-perfect
kick to my ribs. I took half the impact, feeling at least one rib go,
and spun inside, attempting no elegance as I used my left hand to crush
his left testicle.
The man screamed and was out of it.
I'd never forgotten the stunner on the floor and neither had the last of
the opposition. He scurried around to the far side of the bed, out of
reach, and dropped to all fours to grab the weapon. Definitely feeling
the pain from the broken rib now, I lifted the massive bed with Johnny
in it and dropped it on the guy's head and shoulders.
I went under the bed from my side, retrieved the stunner, and backed
into an empty corner.
One guy had gone out the window. We were on the second floor. The
first man to enter was still lying in the doorway. The guy I'd kicked
had managed to get to one knee and both elbows. From the blood on his
mouth and chin, I guessed that a rib had punctured a lung. He was
breathing very raggedly. The bed had crushed the skull of the other man
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

on the floor. The guy who'd been choking Johnny was curled up near the
window, holding his crotch and vomiting. I stunned him into silence and
went over to the one I'd kicked and lifted him by the hair.
'Who sent you?"
'Fuck you." He sprayed some bloody spittle in my face.
'Maybe later,' I said· 'Again, who sent you?" I placed three fingers
against his side where the ribcage seemed concave and pressed.
The man screamed and went very white. When he coughed the blood was too
red against pale skin.
'Who sent you?" I set four fingers against his ribs.
'The bishop!" He tried to levitate away from my fingers.
'What bishop?"
'Shrike Temple... Lusus... don't, please... oh, shit..."
'What were you going to do with him... us?"
'Nothing ... Oh, God damn . . . don't! I need a medic, please!'
'Sure. Answer."
'Stun him, bring him . . . back to the Temple . . .
Lusus. Please. I can't breathe."
'And me?"
'Kill you if you resisted."
'Okay,' I said, lifting him a little higher by his hair, 'we're doing
fine here. What did they want him for?"
'I don't know." He screamed very loudly. I kept one eye on the doorway
to the apartment. The stunner .was still in my palm under a fistful of
hair. 'I... don't...
know..." he gasped. He was hemorrhaging in earnest
now. The blood dripped on my arm and left breast.
'How'd you get here?" 'EMV... roof." 'Where'd you 'cast in?"
'Don't know... I swear... some city in the water.
Cat's set to return there... please!'
I ripped at his clothes. No comlog. No other weapons.
There was a tattoo of a blue trident just above his heart.
'Goonda?" I said.
'Yeah... Parvati Brotherhood."
Outside the Web. Probably very hard to trace. 'All of you?"
'Yeah... please... get me some help... oh, shit ·.. please..." He
sagged, almost unconscious.
I dropped him, stepped back, and sprayed the stun beam over him.
Johnny was sitting up, rubbing his throat, and staring at me with a
strange gaze.
'Get dressed,' I said. 'We're leaving."
The EMV was an old, transparent Vikken Scenic with no palmlocks on the
ignition plate or diskey. We caught up to the terminator before we had
crossed France and looked down on darkness that Johnny said was the
Atlantic Ocean. Except for lights of the occasional floating city or
drilling platform, the only illumination came from the stars and the
broad, swimming-pool glows of the undersea colonies.
'Why are we taking their vehicle?" asked Johnny.
'I want to see where they farcast from." :He said the Lusus Shrike
Temple." 'Yeah. Now we'll see."
Johnny's face was barely visible as he looked down at the dark sea
twenty klicks below. 'Do you think those men will die?"
'One was already dead,' I said. 'The guy with the punctured lung will
need help. Two of them'll be okay. I don't know about the one who went
out the window. Do you care?"
'Yes. The violence was... barbaric."
' "Though a quarrel in the street is a thing to be hated, the energies
displayed in it are fine," ' I quoted. 'They
weren't cybrids, were they?"
'I think not."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'So there are at least two groups out to get you the Als and the bishop
of the Shrike Temple. And we still don't know why."
'I do have an idea now."
I swiveled in the foam reelinet. The constellations above us - familiar
neither from holos of Old Earth's skies nor from any Web world I knew -
cast just enough light to allow me to see Johnny's eyes. 'Tell me,' I
said.
'Your mention of Hyperion gave me a clue,' he said.
'The fact that I had no knowledge of it. Its absence said that it was
important."
'The strange case of the dog barking in the night,' l said.
'What?"
'Nothing. Go on."
Johnny leaned closer· 'The only reason that I would not be aware of it
is that some elements of the Techno-Core have blocked my knowledge of
it."
'Your cybrid..." It was strange to talk to Johnny that way now. 'You
spend most of your time in the Web,
don't you?"
'Yes."
'Wouldn't you run across mention of Hyperion somewhere?
It's in the news every once in a while, especially when the Shrike
Cult's topical."
'Perhaps I did hear. Perhaps that is why I was murdered."
I lay back and looked at the stars. 'Let's go ask the bishop,' I said.
Johnny said that the lights ahead were an analog of New York City in the
mid-twenty-first century. He didn't know what resurrection project the
city had been rebuilt for. I took the EMV off auto and dropped lower.
Tall buildings from the phallic-symbol era of urban architecture rose
from the swamps and lagoons of the North American littoral. Several had
lights burning.
Johnny pointed to one decrepit but oddly elegant structure and said,
'The Empire State Building."
'Okay,' I said. 'Whatever it is, that's where the EMV
wants to land."
'Is it safe?"
I grinned at him. 'Nothing in life's safe." I let the car have its head
and we dropped to a small, open platform below the building's spire. We
got out and stood on the cracked balcony. It was quite dark except for
the few building lights far below and the stars. A few paces away, a
vague blue glow outlined a farcaster portal where elevator doors may
once have been.
'I'11 go first,' I said but Johnny had already stepped through. I
palmed the borrowed stunner and followed him.
I'd never been in the Shrike Temple on Lusus before but there was no
doubt that we were there now. Johnny stood a few paces ahead of me but
other than him there was no one around· The place was cool and dark and
cavernous if caverns could really be that large. A frightening
polychrome sculpture which hung from invisible cables rotated to unfelt
breezes. Johnny and I both turned as the farcaster portal winked out of
existence.
'Well, we did their work for them, didn't we?" I whispered to Johnny.
Even the whisper seemed to echo in the red-lit hall. I hadn't planned
on Johnny 'casting to the Temple with me.
The light seemed to come up then, not really illuminating the great hall
but widening its scope so that we could see the semicircle of men there.
I remembered that some were called exorcists and others lectors and
there was some other category I forgot. Whoever they were, it was
alarming to see them standing there, at least two dozen of them, their
robes variations on red and black and their high foreheads glowing from
the red light above. I had no trouble recognizing the bishop. He was
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

from my world, although shorter and fatter than most of us, and his robe
was very red.
I did not try to hide the stunner. It was possible that if they all
tried to rush us I could bring them all down.
Possible but not probable. I could not see any weapons but their robes
could have hidden entire arsenals.
Johnny walked toward the bishop and I followed. Ten paces from the man
we stopped. The bishop was the only one not standing. His chair was
made of wood and looked as if it could be folded so that the intricate
arms, supports, back, and legs could be carried in a compact form. One
couldn't say the same of the mass of muscle and fat evident under the
bishop's robes.
Johnny took another step forward. 'Why did you try to kidnap my
cybrid?" He spoke to the Shrike Cult holy man as if the rest of us were
not there.
The bishop chuckled and shook his head. 'My dear · . . entity... it
is true that we wished your presence in our place of worship, but you
have no evidence that we were involved in any attempt to kidnap you."
'I'm not interested in evidence,' said Johnny. 'I'm curious as to why
you want me here." I heard a rustling behind us and I swiveled quickly,
the
stunner charged and pointed, but the broad circle of Shrike priests
remained motionless. Most were out of the stunner's range. I wished
that I had brought my father's projectile weapon with me.
The bishop's voice was deep and textured and seemed to fill the huge
space. 'Surely you know that the Church of the Final Atonement has a
deep and abiding interest in
the world of Hyperion."
'Yes."
'And surely you are aware that during the past several centuries the
persona of the Old Earth poet Keats has been woven into the cultural
mythos of the Hyperion colony?"
'Yes. So?"
The bishop rubbed his cheek with a large red ring on one finger. 'So
when you offered to go on the Shrike Pilgrimage we agreed. We were
distressed when you reneged on this offer."
Johnny's look of amazement .was most human. 'I offered? When?"
'Eight local days ago,' said the bishop. 'In this room.
You approached us with the idea."
'Did I say why I wanted to go on the . . . Shrike Pilgrimage?"
'You said that it was... I believe the phrase you used was...
"important for your education." We can show you the recording if you
wish. All such conversations in the Temple are recorded. Or you may
have a duplicate of
the recording to view at your own convenience."
'Yes,' said Johnny.
The bishop nodded and an acolyte or whatever the hell he was disappeared
into the gloom for a moment and returned with a standard video chip in
his hand. The bishop nodded again and the blackrobed man came forward
and handed the chip to Johnny. I kept the stunner ready until the guy
had returned to the semicircle of watchers.
'Why did you send the goondas after us?" I asked. It was the first time
I'd spoken in front of the bishop and my voice sounded too loud and too
raw.
The Shrike holy man made a gesture with one pudgy
hand. 'M. Keats had expressed an interest in joining our holiest
pilgrimage. Since it is our belief that the Final Atonement is drawing
closer each day, this is of no little importance to us. Consequently,
our agents reported that M. Keats may have been the victim of one or
more assaults and that a certain private investigator... you, M.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Lamia... was responsible for destroying the cybrid
bodyguard provided M. Keats by the TechnoCore." 'Bodyguard!" It was my
turn to sound amazed.
'Of course,' said the bishop. He turned toward Johnny. 'The gentleman
with the queue who was recently murdered on the Temple Excursion, was
this not the same man whom you introduced as your bodyguard a week
earlier? He is visible in the recording."
Johnny said nothing. He seemed to be straining to remember something.
'At any rate,' continued the bishop, 'we must have your answer about the
pilgrimage before the week is out.
The Sequoia Sernpervirens departs from the Web in nine local days."
'But that'S a Templar treeship,' said Johnny. 'They don't make the long
leap to Hyperion."
The bishop smiled. 'In this case it does. We have reason to believe
that this may be the last Church-sponsored pilgrimage and we have
chartered the Templar craft to allow as many of the faithful as possible
to make the trip." The bishop gestured and red-and-black-robed men faded
back into darkness. Two exorcists came forward to fold his stool as the
bishop stood. 'Please give us your answer as soon as possible." He was
gone. The remaining exorcist stayed to show us out.
There were no more farcasters. We exited by the main door of the Temple
and stood on the top step of the long staircase, looking down on the
Concourse Mall of Hive Center and breathing in the cool, oil-scented
air.
My father's automatic was in the drawer where I'd left it.
I made sure there was a full load of fl6chettes, palmed the magazine
back in, and carried the weapon into the kitchen where breakfast was
cooking. Johnny sat at the long table, staring down through gray
windows at the
loading dock. I carried the omelets over and set one in front of him.
He looked up as I poured the coffee.
'Do you believe him?" I asked. 'That it was your idea7' 'You saw the
video recording." 'Recordings can be faked." 'Yes. But this one
wasn't."
'Then why did you volunteer to go on this pilgrimage?
And why did your bodyguard try to kill you after you talked to the
Shrike Church and the Templar captain?"
Johnny tried the omelet, nodded, and took another forkful. 'The...
bodyguard... is a complete unknown to me. He must have been assigned
to me during the week lost to memory. His real purpose obviously was to
make sure that I did not discover something... or, if I did stumble
upon it, to eliminate me."
'Something in the Web or in datumplane?"
'In the Web, I presume."
'We need to know who he... it... worked for and why they assigned him
to you."
'I do know,' said Johnny. 'I just asked. The Core responds that I
requested a bodyguard. The cybrid was controlled by an AI nexus which
corresponds to a security force."
'Ask why he tried to kill you."
'I did. They emphatically deny that such a thing is possible."
'Then why was this so-called bodyguard slinking around after you a week
after the murder?"
'They respond that while I did not request security again after my...
discontinuity... the Core authorities felt that it would be prudent to
provide protection."
I laughed. 'Some protection. Why the hell did he run on the Templar
world when I caught up to him? They aren't
even trying to give you a plausible story, Johnny."
'No."
'Nor did the bishop explain how the Shrike Church had farcaster access
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

to Old Earth... or whatever you call that stage-set world."
'And we did not ask."
'/didn't ask because I wanted to get out of that damn Temple in one
piece."
Johnny didn't seem to hear. He was sipping his coffee,
his gaze focused somewhere else.
'What?" I said.
He turned to look at me, tapping his thumbnail on his
lower lip. 'There is a paradox here, Brawne."
'What7'
'If it was truly my aim to go to Hyperion... for my cybrid to travel
there... I could not have remained in the TechnoCore. I would have had
to invest all consciousness in the cybrid itself."
'Why?" But even as I asked I saw the reason.
'Think. Datumplane itself is an abstract. A commingling of computer
and AI-generated dataspheres and the quasi-perceptual Gibsonian matrix
designed originally for human operators, now accepted as common ground
for man, machine, and AI."
'But AI hardware exists somewhere in real space,' I said. 'Somewhere in
the TechnoCore."
'Yes, but that is irrelevant to the function of AI consciousness,' said
Johnny. 'I can "be" anywhere the overlapping dataspheres allow me to
travel . . . all of the Web worlds, of course, datumplane, and any of
the TechnoCore constructs such as Old Earth... but it's only within
that milieu that I can claim "consciousness" or operate sensors or
remotes such as this cybrid."
I set my coffee cup down and stared at the thing I had loved as a man
during the night just past. 'Yes?"
'The colony worlds have limited dataspheres,' said Johnny. 'While there
is some contact with the Techno-Core via fatline transmissions, it is an
exchange of data only... rather like the First Information Age computer
interfaces ... rather than a flow of consciousness.
Hyperion's datasphere is primitive to the point of nonexistence.
And from what I can access, the Core has no contact whatsoever with that
world."
'Would that be normaIT I asked. 'I mean with a colony world that far
away?"
'No. The Core has contact with every colony world, with such
interstellar barbarians as the Ousters, and with other sources the
Hegemony could not imagine."
I sat stunned. 'With the Ousters?" Since the war on
Bressia a few years earlier, the Ousters had been the Web's prime
bogeymen. The idea of the Core . . . the same congregation of Als
which advises the Senate and the All Thing and which allows our entire
economy, farcaster system, and technological civilization to run · . .
the idea of the Core being in touch with the Ousters was frightening.
And what the hell did Johnny mean by 'other sources'? I didn't really
want to know right then.
'But you said it is possible for your cybrid to travel there?" I said.
'What did you mean by "investing all consciousness" in your cybrid? Can
an AI become...
human? Can you exist only in your cybrid?"
'It has been done,' Johnny said softly. 'Once. A personality
reconstruction not too different from my own.
A twentieth-century poet named Ezra Pound. He abandoned his AI persona
and fled from the Web in his
cybrid. But the Pound reconstruction was insane." 'Or sane,' I said.
'Yes."
'So all of the data and personality of an AI can survive in a cybrid's
organic brain."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Of course not, Brawne. Not one percent of one percent of my total
consciousness would survive the transition. Organic brains can't
process even the most primitive information the way we can. The
resultant personality would not be the AI persona . . . neither would
it be a truly human consciousness or cybrid..." Johnny stopped in
mid-sentence and turned quickly to look out the window.
After a long minute I said, 'What is it?" I reached out a hand but did
not touch him.
He spoke without turning. 'Perhaps I was wrong to say that the
consciousness would not be human,' he whispered. 'It is possible that
the resulting persona could be human touched with a certain divine
madness and meta-human perspective. It could be . . . if purged of
all memory of our age, of all consciousness of the Core · . . it could
be the person the cybrid was programmed to be..."
'John Keats,' I said.
Johnny turned away from the window and closed his eyes. His voice was
hoarse with emotion. It was the first time I had heard him recite
poetry:
'Fanatics have their dreams, wherewith they weave A paradise for a sect,
the savage too
From forth the loftiest fashion of his sleep Guesses at Heaven; pity
these have not
Traced upon vellum or wild Indian leaf
The shadows of melodious utterance.
But bare of laurel they live, dream, and die;
For Poesy alone can tell her dreams,
With the fine spell of words alone can save Imagination from the sable
charm
And dumb enchantment. Who alive can say, "Thou art no Poet - mayst not
tell thy dreams"?
Since every man whose soul is not a clod
Hath visions, and would speak, if he had loved, And been well nurtured
in his mother tongue.
Whether the dream now purposed to rehearse
Be Poet's or Fanatic's will be known
When this warm scribe my hand is in the grave."
'I don't get it,' I said. 'What does it mean?"
'It means,' said Johnny, smiling gently, 'that I know what decision I
made and why I made it. I wanted to cease being a cybrid and become a
man. I wanted to go to Hyperion. I still do."
'Somebody killed you for that decision a week ago,' 1 said.
'Yes."
'And you're going to try again?"
'Yes."
'Why not invest consciousness in your cybrid here?
Become human in the Web?"
'It would never work,' said Johnny. 'What you see as a complex
interstellar society is only a small part of the Core reality matrix. I
would be constantly confronted with and at the mercy of the Als. The
Keats persona...
reality... would never survive."
'All right,' I said, 'you need to get out of the Web. But there are
other colonies. Why Hyperion?"
Johnny took my hand. His finger were long and warm and strong. 'Don't
you see, Brawne? There is some con-neetion here. It may well be that
Keats's dreams of Hyperion were some sort of transtemporal communication
between his then persona and his now persona. If nothing else, Hyperion
is the key mystery of our age - physical and poetic - and it is quite
probable that he... that I was born, died, and was born again to
explore it."
'It sounds like madness to me,' I said. 'Delusions of grandeur."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Almost certainly,' laughed Johnny. 'And I never have been happier!" He
grabbed my arms and brought me to my feet, his arms around me. 'Will
you go with me, Brawne? Go with me to Hyperion?"
I blinked in surprise, both at his question and the answer, which filled
me like a rush of warmth. 'Yes,' I said. 'I'11 go."
We went into the sleeping area then and made love the rest of that day,
sleeping finally to awaken to the low light of Shift Three in the
industrial trench outside.
Johnny was lying on his back, his hazel eyes open and staring at the
ceiling, lost in thought. But not so lost he did not smile and put his
arm around me. I nestled my cheek against him, settling into the small
curve where shoulder meets chest, and went back to sleep.
I was wearing my best clothes - a suit of black whipcord, a blouse woven
of Renaissance silk with a Carvnel blood-stone at the throat, a cocked
Eulin Br6 tricorne - when Johnny and I farcast to TC2 the next day. I
left him in the wood and brass bar near the central terminex, but not
before I slid Dad's automatic across to him in a paper bag and told him
to shoot anyone who even looked cross-eyed at him.
'Web English is such a subtle tongue,' he said.
'That phrase is older than the Web,' I said. 'Just do it." I squeezed
his hand and left without looking back.
I took a skycab to the Administration Complex and walked my way through
about nine security checks before they let me into the Center grounds. I
walked the half klick across Deer Park, admiring the swans in the nearby
lake and the white buildings on the hilltop in the distance, and then
there were nine more checkpoints before a Center security woman led me
up the flagstoned path to Government House, a low, graceful building set
amid flower gardens and landscaped hills. There was an elegantly
furnished waiting room but I barely had time to sit down on an authentic
pre-Hegira de Kooning before an aide appeared and ushered me into the
CEO's private office.
Meina Gladstone came around the desk to shake my hand and show me to a
chair. It was strange to see her in person again after all those years
of watching her on HTV. She was even more impressive in the flesh: her
hair was cut short but seemed to be blowing back in gray-white waves;
her cheeks and chin were as sharp and Lincolnesque as all the
history-prone pundits insisted, but it was the large, sad, brown eyes
which dominated the face and made one feel as if he or she were in the
presence of a truly original person.
I found that my mouth was dry. 'Thank you for seeing me, M. Executive.
I know how busy you are."
'I'm never too busy to see you, Brawne. Just as your father was never
too busy to see me when I was a junior senator."
I nodded. Dad had once described Meina Gladstone as the only political
genius in the Hegemony. He knew that she would be CEO someday despite
her late start in poli tics. I wished Dad had lived to see it.
'How is your mother, Brawne?"
'She's well, M. Executive. She rarely leaves our old summer place on
Freeholm anymore but I see her every Christmas Fest."
Gladstone nodded. She had been sitting casually on the edge of a
massive desk which the tabloids said had once belonged to an
assassinated President- not Lincoln - of the pre-Mistake USA, but now
she smiled and went around to the simple chair behind it. 'I miss your
father, Brawne. I wish he were in this administration.
Did you see the lake when you came in?"
'Yes."
'Do you remember sailing toy boats there with my Kresten when you were
both toddlers?"
'Just barely, M. Executive. I was pretty young."
Meina Gladstone smiled. An intercom chimed but she waved it into
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

silence. 'How can I help you, Brawne?"
I took a breath. 'M. Executive, you may be aware that I'm working as
an independent private investigator..." I didn't wait for her nod. 'A
case I've been working on recently has led me back to Dad's suicide..."
'Brawne, you know that was investigated most thoroughly.
I saw the commission's report."
'Yeah,' I said. 'I did too. But recently l've discovered some very
strange things about the TechnoCore and its attitude toward the world
Hyperion. Weren't you and Dad working on a bill that would have brought
Hyperion into the Hegemony Protectorate?"
Gladstone nodded. 'Yes, Brawne, but there were over a dozen other
colonies being considered that year. None were allowed in."
'Right. But did the Core or the AI Advisory Council take a special
interest in Hyperion?"
The CEO tapped a stylus against her lower lip. 'What kind of
information do you have, Brawne?" I started to answer but she held up a
blunt finger. 'Wait!" She keyed an interactive. 'Thomas, VII be
stepping out for a few minutes. Please be sure that the Sol Draconi
trade delegation is entertained if I fail a bit behind schedule."
I didn't see her key anything else but suddenly a blue and gold
farcaster portai hummed into life near the far wall. She gestured me to
go through first.
A plain of gold, knee-high grass stretched to horizons which seemed
farther away than most. The sky was a pale yellow with burnished copper
streaks which may have been clouds. I didn't recognize the world.
Meina Gladstone stepped through and touched the comlog design on her
sleeve. The farcaster portal winked out. A warm breeze blew spice
scents to us.
Gladstone touched her sleeve again, glanced skyward, and nodded. 'I'm
sorry for the inconvenience, Brawne.
Kastrop-Rauxel has no datasphere or sats of any kind.
NOw please go ahead with what you were saying. What kind of information
have you come across?"
I looked around at the empty grasslands. 'Nothing to warrant this
security... probably. l've just discovered that the TechnoCore seems
very interested in Hyperion.
They've also built some sort of analog to Old Earth... an entire
world!'
If I expected shock or surprise I was disappointed.
Gladstone nodded. 'Yes. We know about the Old Earth analog."
I was shocked. 'Then why hasn't it even been announced? If the Core
can rebuild Old Earth, a lot of people would be interested."
Gladstone began walking and I strolled with her, walking faster to keep
up with her long-legged strides.
'Brawne, it would not be in the Hegemony's interest to announce it. Our
best !uman intelligence sources have no idea why the Core is doing such
a thing. They have offered no insight. The best policy now is to wait.
What information do you have about Hyperion?"
I had no idea whether I could trust Meina Gladstone, old times or not.
But I knew that if I was going to get information I would have to give
some. 'They built an analog reconstruction of an Old Earth poet,' I
said, 'and they seem obsessed with keeping any information about
Hyperion away from him."
Gladstone picked a long stem of grass and sucked on it.
'The John Keats cybrid."
'Yes." I was careful not to show surprise this time. 'I know that Dad
was pushing hard to get Protectorate status for Hyperion. If the Core
has some special interest in the place, they may have had something to
do... may have manipulated..."
'His apparent suicide?"
'Yeah?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

The wind moved gold grass in waves. Something very small scurried away
in the stalks at our feet. 'It is not beyond the realm of possibility,
Brawne. But there was absolutely no evidence. Tell me what this cybrid
is going to do."
'First tell me why the Core is so interested in Hyperion."
The older woman spread her hands. 'If we knew that, Brawne, I would
sleep much easier nights. As far as we know, the TechnoCore has been
obsessed with Hyperion for centuries. When CEO Yevshensky allowed King
Billy of Asquith to recolonize the planet, it almost precipitated a true
secession of AIs from the Web. Recently the establishment of our
fatline transmitter there brought about a similar crisis."
'But the AIs didn't secede."
'No, Brawne, it appears that, for whatever reason, they need us almost
as badly as we need them."
'But if they're so interested in Hyperion, why don't they allow it into
the Web so they can go there themselves?"
Gladstone ran a hand through her hair. The bronze clouds far above
rippled in what must be a fantastic jet stream. 'They are adamant about
Hyperion not being admitted to the Web,' she said. 'It is an
interesting paradox.
Tell me what the cybrid is going to do."
'First tell me why the Core is obsessed with Hyperion." 'We do not know
for sure." 'Best guess then."
CEO Gladstone removed the stem of grass from her mouth and regarded it.
'We believe that the Core is embarked on a truly incredible project
which would allow them to predict . . . everything. To handle every
variable of space, time, and history as a quantum of manageable
information."
'Their Ultimate Intelligence Project,' I said, knowing that I was being
careless and not caring.
This time CEO Gladstone did register shock. 'How do you know about
that?"
'What does that project have to do with Hyperion?" Gladstone sighed. 'We
don't know for sure, Brawne.
But we do know that there is an anomaly on Hyperion which they have not
been able to factor into their predictive analyses. Do you know about
the so-called Time Tombs that the Shrike Church holds holy?"
'Sure. They've been off limits to tourists for a while."
'Yes. Because of an accident to a researcher there a few decades ago,
our scientists have confirmed that the anti-entropic fields around the
Tombs are not merely a protection against time's erosive effects as has
been widely believed."
'What are they?"
'The remnants of a field... or force... which has actually propelled
the Tombs and their contents backward in time from some distant future."
'Contents?" I managed. 'But the Tombs are empty.
Ever since they were discovered."
'Empty now,' said Meina Gladstone. 'But there is evidence that they
were full... will be full... when they open. In our near future."
I stared at her. 'How near?"
Her dark eyes remained soft but the movement of her head was final.
'l've told you too much already, Brawne.
You are forbidden to repeat it. We'll ensure that silence if
necessary."
I hid my own confusion by finding a piece of grass to strip for chewing.
'All right,' I said. 'What's going to come out of the Tombs? Aliens?
Bombs? Some sort of reverse time capsules?"
Gladstone smiled tightly. 'If we knew that, Brawne, we would be ahead
of the Core, and we are not." The smile disappeared. 'One hypothesis is
that the Tombs relate to some future war. A settling of future scores
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

by rearranging the past, perhaps."
'A war between who, for Chrissakes?"
She opened her hands again. 'We need to be getting back, Brawne. Would
you please tell me what the Keats cybrid is going to do now?"
I looked down and then back up to meet her steady gaze. I couldn't
trust anyone, but the Core and the Shrike Church already knew Johnny's
plans. If this was a three-sided game, perhaps each side should know in
case there was a good guy in the bunch, 'He's going to invest all
consciousness in the cybrid,' I said rather clumsily. 'He's going to
become human, M. Gladstone, and then go to Hyperion. I'm going with
him."
The CEO of the Senate and All Thing, chief officer for a government
which spanned almost two hundred worlds and billions of people, stared
at me in silence for a
long moment. Then she said, 'He plans to go with the
Templar ship on the pilgrimage then."
'Yes."
'No,' said Meina Gladstone.
'What do you mean?"
'I mean that the Sequoia Sempervirens will not be allowed to leave
Hegemony space. There will be no pilgrimage unless the Senate decides
it is in our interest." Her voice was iron-hard.
'Johnny and VII go by spinship,' I said. 'The pilgrimage is a loser's
game anyway."
'No,' she said. 'There will be no more civilian spin-ships to Hyperion
for some time."
The word 'civilian' tipped me. 'War?"
Gladstone's lips were tight. She nodded. 'Before most
spinships could reach the region."
'A war with... the Ousters?"
'Initially. View it as a way to force the issue between the TechnoCore
and ourselves, Brawne. We will either have to incorporate the Hyperion
system into the Web to allow it FORCE protection, or it will fall to a
race which despises and distrusts the Core and all Als."
I didn't mention Johnny's comment that the Core had been in touch with
the Ousters. I said, 'A way to force the issue. Fine. But who
manipulated the Ousters into attacking?"
Gladstone looked at me. If her face was Lincolnesque at that moment,
then Old Earth's Lincoln was one tough son of a bitch. 'It's time to
get back, Brawne. You appreciate how important it is that none of this
information gets out."
'I appreciate the fact that you wouldn't have told me unless you had a
reason to,' I said. 'I don't know who you want the stuff to go to, but
I know l'm a messenger, not a confidante."
'Don't underestimate our resolve to keep this classified, Brawne."
I laughed. 'Lady, I wouldn't underestimate your resolve in anything."
Meina Gladstone gestured for me to step through the farcaster portal
first.
' I know a way we can discover what the Core is up to,' said Johnny as
we rode alone in a rented jetboat on Mare
I nfinitus. 'But it would be dangerous."
'So what else is new?"
'I'm serious. We should only attempt it if we feel that it is
imperative to understand what the Core fears from
Hyperion."
'Ido."
'We will need an operative. Someone who is an artist in datumplane
operations. Someone smart but not so smart that they won't take a
chance. And someone who would risk everything and keep the secret just
for the ultimate in cyberpuke pranks."
I grinned at Johnny. 'l'vegot just the man."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

BB lived alone in a cheap apartment at the base of a cheap tower in a
cheap TC2 neighborhood. But there was nothing cheap about the hardware
that filled most of the space in the four-room flat. Most of BB's
salary for the past standard decade had gone into state-of-the art
cyberpuke toys.
I started by saying that we wanted him to do something illegal. BB said
that, as a public employee, he couldn't consider such a thing. He asked
what the thing was. Johnny began to explain. BB leaned forward and I
saw the old cyberpuke gleam in his eyes from our college days. I half
expected him to try to dissect Johnny right there just to see how a
cybrid worked. Then Johnny got to the interesting part and BB's gleam
turned into a sort of green glow.
'When I self-destruct my AI persona,' said Johnny, 'the shift to cybrid
consciousness will take only nanoseconds, but during that time my
section of the Core perimeter defenses will drop. The security phages
will fill the gap before too many more nanoseconds pass, but during the
time..."
'Entry to the Core,' whispered BB, his eyes glowing like some antique
VDT.
'It would be very dangerous,' stressed Johnny. 'To my knowledge, no
human operator has ever penetrated Core periphery."
BB rubbed his upper lip. 'There's a legend that Cowboy
Gibson did it before the Core seceded,' he mumbled.
'But nobody believes it. And Cowboy disappeared."
'Even if you penetrate,' said Johnny, 'there would be insufficient time
to access except for the fact that I have the data coordinates."
'Fan-fucking-tastic,' whispered BB. He turned back
to his console and reached for his shunt. 'Let's do it." 'Now?" I said.
Even Johnny looked taken aback.
'Why wait?" BB clicked in his shunt and attached metacortex leads, but
left the deck idling. 'Are we doing this, or what?"
I went over next to Johnny on the couch and took his hand. His skin was
cool. He showed no expression now but I could imagine what it must be
like to be facing imminent destruction of one's personality and previous
existence. Even if the transfer worked, the human with
the John Keats persona would not be 'Johnny."
'He's right,' said Johnny. 'Why wait?"
I kissed him. 'All right,' I said. 'l'm going in with BB."
'No!" Johnny squeezed my hand. 'You can't help and the danger would be
terrible."
I heard my own voice, as implacable as Meina Gladstone's. 'Perhaps. But
I can't ask BB to do this if I won't. And I won't leave you in there
alone." I squeezed his hand a final time and went over to sit by BB at
the console. 'How do I connect with this fucking thing, BB?"
You've read all the cyberpuke stuff. You know all about the terrible
beauty of datumplane, the three-dimensional highways with their
landscapes of black ice and neon perimeters and Day-Glo Strange Loops
and shimmering skyscrapers of data blocks under hovering clouds of AI
presence. I saw all of it riding piggyback on BB's carrier wave. It
was almost too much. Too intense. Too terrifying.
I could hear the black threats of the hulking security phages; I could
smell death on the breath of the counterthrust tapeworm viruses even
through the ice screens; I could feel the weight of the AIs' wrath above
us- we were insects under elephants' feet- and we hadn't even done
anything yet except travel approved dataways on a logged-in access
errand BB had dreamed up, some homework stuff for his Flow Control
Records and Statistics job.
And I was wearing stick-on leads, seeing things in a datumplane version
of fuzzy black and white TV while Johnny and BB were viewing full
stimsim holo, as it were.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

I don't know how they took it.
'OK,' whispered BB in some datumplane equivalent of a whisper, 'we're
here."
'Where?" All I saw was an infinite maze of bright lights and even
brighter shadows, ten thousand cities arrayed in four dimensions.
'Core periphery,' whispered BB. 'Hang on. It's about time."
I had no arms to hang on with and nothing physical in this universe to
grasp, but I concentrated on the
waveform shades that were our data truck and clung.
Johnny died then.
I've seen a nuclear explosion firsthand. When Dad was a senator he took
Mom and me to Olympus Command School to see a FORCE demonstration. For
the last course the audience viewing pod was farcast to some godforsaken
world . . . Armaghast, I think . . . and a FORCE:ground recon
platoon fired a clean tactical nuke at a pretend adversary some nine
klicks away. The viewing pod was shielded with a class ten containment
field, polarized, the nuke only a fifty-kiloton field tactical, but I'll
never forget the blast, the shock wave rocking the eighty-ton pod like a
leaf on its repellers, the physical shock of light so obscenely bright
that it polarized our field to midnight and still brought tears to our
eyes and
clamored to get in.
This was worse.
A section of datumplane seemed to flash and then to implode on itself,
reality flushed down a drain of pure black.
'Hang on!" BB screamed against datumplane static that rasped at my bones
and we were whirling, tumbling, sucked into the vacuum like insects in
an oceanic vortex.
Somehow, incredibly, impossibly, black-armored phages thrust toward us
through the din and madness.
BB avoided one, turned the other's acid membranes against itself. We
were being sucked into something colder and blacker than any void in our
reality could ever be.
'There!" called BB, his voice analog almost lost in the tornado rush of
ripping datasphere.
There what? Then I saw it: a thin line of yellow rippling in the
turbulence like a cloth banner in a hurricane.
BB rolled us, found our own wave to carry us against the storm, matched
coordinates that danced past me too quickly to see, and we were riding
the yellow band into...
· . . into what? Frozen fountains of fireworks. Transparent mountain
ranges of data, endless glaciers of ROMworks, access ganglia spreading
like fissures, iron clouds of semisentient internal pro:ess bubbles,
glowing pyramids of primary source stuff, each guarded by lakes
of black ice and armies of black-pulse pilages.
'Shit,' I whispered to no one in particular.
BB followed the yellow band down, in, through. I felt a connection as
if someone had suddenly given us a great mass to carry.
'Got it)." screamed BB, and suddenly there was a sound louder and larger
than the maelstrom of noise surrounding and consuming us. It was
neither klaxon nor siren, but it was both in its tone of warning and
aggression.
We were climbing out of it all. I could see a vague wall of gray
through the brilliant chaos and somehow knew it to be the periphery, the
vacuum dwindling but still breaching the wall like a shrinking black
stain. We were climbing out.
But not quickly enough.
The phages hit us from five sides. During the twelve years I've been an
investigator I've been shot once, knifed twice· l'd had more than this
one rib broken. This hurt more than all that combined. BB was fighting
and climbing at the same time.
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

My contribution to the emergency was to scream. I felt cold claws on
us, pulling us down, back into the brightness and noise and chaos· BB
was using some program, some formula of enchantment to fight them
off. But not enough. I could feel the blows slamming home - not
against me primarily, but connecting to the matrix analog that was BB.
We were sinking back. Inexorable forces had us in tow. Suddenly I felt
Johnny's presence and it was as if a huge, strong hand had scooped us
up, lifted us through the periphery wall an instant before the stain
snapped our lifeline to existence and the defensive field crashed
together like steel teeth.
We moved at impossible speed down congested data-ways, passing
datumplane couriers and other operator analogs like an EMV ripping past
oxcarts. Then we were approaching a slow-time gate, leapfrogging
gridlocked exiting operator analogs in some four-dimensional high jump.
I felt the inevitable nausea of transition as we came out of the matrix.
Light burned my retinas. Real light. Then the pain washed in and I
slumped over the console and groaned.
'Come on, Brawne." It was Johnny - or someone just like Johnny - helping
me to my feet and moving us both toward the door.
'BB,' I gasped.
' No. '
I opened aching eyes long enough to see BB Surbringer draped across his
console. His Stetson had fallen off and rolled to the floor. BB's head
had exploded, spattering most of the console with gray and red. His
mouth was open and a thick white foam still issued from it. It looked
like his eyes had melted.
Johnny caught me, half lifted me. 'We have to go,' he whispered.
'Someone will be here any minute."
I closed my eyes and let him take me away from there.
I awoke to dim red light and the sound of water dripping.
I smelled sewage, mildew, and the ozone of uninsulated power cables. I
opened one eye.
We were in a low space more cave than room with cables snaking from a
shattered ceiling and pools of water on the slime-caked tiles. The red
light came from somewhere beyond the cave- a maintenance access
shaft perhaps, or automech tunnel. I moaned softly.
Johnny was there, moving from the rough bedroll of blankets to my side.
His face was darkened with grease
or dirt and there was at least one fresh cut.
'Where are we?"
He touched my cheek. His other arm went around my shoulders and helped
me to a sitting position. The awful view shifted and tilted and for a
moment I thought I was going to be sick. Johnny helped me drink water
from a plastic tumbler.
'Dregs' Hive,' said Johnny.
l'd guessed even before I was fully conscious. Dregs' Hive is the
deepest pit on Lusus, a no man's land of mech tunnels and illegal
burrows occupied by half the Web's outcasts and outlaws. It was in
Dregs' Hive that I'd been shot several years ago and still bore the
laser scar above my left hipbone.
I held the tumbler out for more water. Johnny fetched some from a steel
therm and came back. I panicked for a second as I fumbled in my tunic
pocket and on my belt: Dad's automatic was gone. Johnny held the weapon
up and I relaxed, accepting the cup and drinking thirstily.
'BB?" I said, hoping for a moment that it had all been a terrible
hallucination.
Johnny shook his head. 'There were defenses that neither of us had
anticipated. BB's incursion was brilliant, but he couldn't outright
Core omega phages. But half the operators in datumplane felt echoes of
the battle. BB is already the stuff of legend."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'Fucking great,' I said and gave a laugh that sounded suspiciously like
the beginning of a sob. 'The stuff of legend. And BB's dead. For
fuck-all nothing."
Johnny's arm was tight around me. 'Not for nothing, Brawne. He made
the grab. And passed the data to me before he died."
I managed to sit fully upright and to look at Johnny.
He seemed the same- the same soft eyes, same hair, same voice. But
something was subtly different, deeper.
More human? 'You?" I said. 'Did you make the transfer?
Are you..."
'Human?" John Keats smiled at me. 'Yes, Brawne. Or
as close to human as someone forged in the Core could ever be."
'But you remember ... me ... BB ... what's happened."
'Yes. And I remember first looking into Chapman's Homer. And my
brother Tom's eyes as he hemorrhaged in the night. And Severn's kind
voice when I was too weak to open my own eyes to face my fate. And our
night in Piazza di Spagna when I touched your lips and imagined Fanny's
cheek against mine. I remember, Brawne."
For a second I was confused, and then hurt, but then he set his palm
against my cheek and he touched me, there was no one else, and I
understood. I closed my eyes. 'Why are we here?" I whispered against
his shirt.
'I couldn't risk using a farcaster. The Core could trace us at once. I
considered the spaceport but you were in no condition to travel. I
chose the Dregs'."
I nodded against him. 'They'll try to kill you."
'Yes."
'Are the local cops after us? The Hegemony police?
Transit cops?"
'No, I don't think so. The only ones who're challenged us so far were
two bands of goondas and some of the Dregs' dwellers."
I opened my eyes. 'What happened with the goondas?" There were more
deadly hoodlums and contract killers in the Web but I'd never run across
any.
Johnny held up Dad's automatic and smiled.
'I don't remember anything after BB,' I said.
'You were injured by the phage backlash. You could walk but we were the
cause of more than a few odd looks in the Concourse."
'I bet. Tell me about what BB discovered. Why is the Core obsessed
with Hyperion?"
'Eat first,' said Johnny. 'It's been more than twenty-eight hours." He
crossed the dripping width of the cave room and returned with a
self-heating packet. It was basic hoio fanatic fare - flash-dried and
reheated cloned beef, potatoes which had never seen soil, and carrots
which looked like some sort of deep-sea slugs. Nothing had ever tasted
so good.
'OK,' I said, 'tell me."
'The TechnoCore has been divided into three groups for as long as the
Core has existed,' said Johnny. 'The Stables are the old-line Als, some
of them dating back to pre-Mistake days; at least one of them gained
sentience in the First Information Age. The Stables argue that a
certain level of symbiosis is necessary between humanity and the Core.
They've promoted the Ultimate Intelligence Project as a way to avoid
rash decisions, to delay until all variables can be factored. The
Volatiles are the force behind the Secession three centuries ago. The
Vola-tiles have done conclusive studies that show how humankind's
usefulness is past and from this point on human beings constitute a
threat to the Core. They advocate immediate and total extinction."
'Extinction,' I said. After a moment I asked, 'Can they do it?"
'Of humans in the Web, yes,' said Johnny. 'Core intelligences not only
create the infrastructure for Hegemony society but are necessary for
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

everything from FORCE deployment to the failsafes on stockpiled nuclear
and plasma arsenals."
'Did you know about this when you were... in the Core?"
'No,' said Johnny. 'As a pseudo-poet cybrid retrieval project, I was a
freak, a pet, a partial thing allowed to roam the Web the way a pet is
let out of the house each day. I had no idea there were three camps of
AI influence."
'Three camps,' I said. 'What's the third? And where does Hyperion come
in?"
'Between the Stables and the Volatiles are the Ultimates.
For the past five centuries the Ultimates have been obsessed with the UI
Project. The existence or extinction of the human race is of interest
to them only in how it applies to the project. To this date, they have
been a force for moderation, an ally of the Stables, because it is their
perception that such reconstruction and retrieval projects as the Old
Earth experiment are necessary to the culmination of the UI.
'Recently, however, the Hyperion issue has caused the Ultimates to move
toward the Volatiles' views. Since Hyperion was explored four centuries
ago, the Core has been concerned and nonplussed. It was immediately
obvious that the so-called Time Tombs were artifacts launched backward
in time from a point at least ten thousand years in the galaxy's future.
More disturbing, however, is the fact that Core predictive formulae have
never been able to factor the Hyperion variable.
'Brawne, to understand this, you must realize how much the Core relies
upon prediction. Already, without UI input, the Core knows the details
of the physical, human, and AI future to a margin of 98.9995 percent for
a period of at least two centuries. The AI Advisory Council to the All
Thing with its vague, delphic utterancesconsidered so indispensable by
humans- is a joke. The Core drops tidbits of revelations to the
Hegemony when it serves the Core's purposes - sometimes to aid the
Volatiles, sometimes the Stables, but always to please the Ultimates.
'Hyperion is a rent in the entire predictive fabric of the Core's
existence. It is the penultimate oxymoron- a nonfactorable variable.
Impossible as it seems, Hyperion appears to be exempt from the laws of
physics, history, human psychology, and AI prediction as practiced by
the Core.
'The result has been two futures - two realities if you will- one in
which the Shrike scourge soon to be released on the Web and interstellar
humanity is a weapon from the Core-dominated future, a retroactive first
strike from the Volatiles who rule the galaxy millennia hence. The
other reality sees the Shrike invasion, the coming interstellar war, and
the other products of the Time Tombs' opening as a human fist struck
back through time, a final, twilight effort by the Ousters,
ex-colonials, and other small bands of humans who escaped the Volatiles'
extinction programs."
Water dripped on tile. Somewhere in the tunnels nearby a mech
cauterizer's warning siren echoed from ceramic and stone. I leaned
against the wall and stared at Johnny.
'Interstellar war,' I said. 'Both scenarios demand an interstellar
war?"
'Yes. There is no escaping that."
'Can both Core groups be wrong in their prediction?" 'No. What happens
on Hyperion is problematic, but the disruption in the Web and elsewhere
is quite clear.
The Ultimates use this knowledge as the prime argument for hurrying the
next step in Core evolution."
'And what did BB's stolen data show about us, Johnny?"
Johnny smiled, touched my hand, but did not hold it.
'It showed that I am somehow part of the Hyperion unknown. Their
creation of a Keats cybrid was a terrible amble. Only my apparent lack
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

of success as a Keats analog allowed the Stables to preserve me. When I
made up my mind to go to Hyperion, the Volatiles killed me with the
clear intention of obliterating my AI existence if
my cybrid again made that decision."
'You did. What happened?"
'They failed. In the Co.re's limitless arrogance, they failed to take
two things into account. First, that I might invest all consciousness
in my cybrid and thus change the nature of the Keats analog. Second,
that I would go to you."
'Me!'
He took my hand. 'Yes, Brawne. It seems that you also are part of the
Hyperion unknown."
I shook my head. Realizing that there was a numbness in my scalp above
and behind my left ear, I raised my hand, half expecting to find damage
from the datumplane fight. Instead, my fingers encountered the plastic
of a neural shunt socket.
I jerked my other hand from Johnny's grasp and stared at him in horror.
He'd had me wired while I was unconscious.
Johnny held up both hands, palms toward me. 'I had to, Brawne. It may
be necessary for the survival of both of us."
I made a fist. 'You fucking low-life son of a bitch.
Why do I need to interface directly, you lying bastard?"
'Not with the Core,' Johnny said softly. 'With me."
'You?" My arm and fist quivered with the anticipation of smashing his
vat-cloned face. 'You!" I sneered.
'You're human now remember?"
'Yes. But certain cybrid functions remain. Do you remember when I
touched your hand several days ago and brought us to datumplane?"
I stared at him. 'I'm not going to datumplane again." 'No. Nor am I.
But I may need to relay incredible amounts of data to you within a very
short period of time. I brought you to a black market surgeon in the
Dregs' last night. She implanted a SchrOn loop."
'Why?" The SchrOn loop was tiny, no larger than my thumbnail, and very
expensive. It held countless field-bubble memories, each capable of
holding near infinite bits of information. $chrOn loops could not be
accessed by the biological carrier and thus were used for courier
purposes. ^ man or woman could carry AI personalities or entire
planetary dataspheres in a Schrn loop. Hell, a dog could carry all
that.
'Why?" I said again, wondering if Johnny or some forces behind Johnny
were using me as such a courier.
'Why?"
Johnny moved closer and put his hand around my fist.
'Trust me, Brawne."
I don't think I'd trusted anyone since Dad blew his brains out twenty
years ago and Mom retreated into the pure selfishness of her seclusion.
There was no reason in
the universe to trust Johnny now.
But I did.
I relaxed my fist and took his hand.
'All right,' said Johnny. 'Finish your meal and we'll get busy trying
to save our lives."
Weapons and drugs were the two easiest things to buy in Dregs' Hive. We
spent the last of Johnny's considerable stash of black marks to buy
weapons.
By 2200 hours, we each wore whiskered titan-poly body armor. Johnny had
a goonda's mirror-black helmet and I wore a FORCE-surplus command mask.
Johnny's power gauntlets were massive and a bright red.
I wore osmosis gloves with killing trim. Johnny carried
an Ouster hellwhip captured on Bressia and had tucked a laser wand in
his belt. Along with Dad's automatic, I now carried a Steiner-Ginn
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

mini-gun on a gyroed waist brace. It was slaved to my command visor and
I could keep both hands free while firing.
Johnny and I looked at each other and began giggling.
When the laughter stopped there was a long silence.
'Are you sure the Shrike Temple here on Lusus is our best chance?" I
asked for the third or fourth time."
'We can't farcast,' said Johnny. 'All the Core has to do is record a
malfunction and we're dead. We can't even take an elevator from the
lower levels. We'll have to find unmonitored stairways and climb the
hundred and twenty floors. The best chance to make the Temple is
straight down the Concourse Mall."
'Yes, but will the Shrike Church people take us in?" Johnny shrugged, a
strangely insectoid gesture in his combat outfit. The voice through the
goonda helmet was metallic. 'They're the only group which has a vested
interest in our survival. And the only ones with enough political pull
to shield us from the Hegemony while finding transit for us to
Hyperion."
I pushed up my visor. 'Meina Gladstone said that no future pilgrimage
flights to Hyperion would be allowed."
The dome of mirror black nodded judiciously. 'Well, fuck Meina
Gladstone,' said my poet lover.
I took a breath and walked to the opening of our niche, our cave, our
last sanctuary. Johnny came up behind me. Body armor rubbed against
body armor.
'Ready, Brawne?"
I nodded, brought the mini-gun around on its pivot, and started to
leave.
Johnny stopped me with a touch. 'I love you, Brawne."
I nodded, still tough. I forgot that my visor was up and he could see
my tears.
The Hive is awake all twenty-eight hours of the day, but through some
tradition, Third Shift was the quietest, the least populated. We would
have had a better chance at the height of First Shift rush hour along
the pedestrian
causeways. But if the goondas and thuggees were waiting for us, the
death toll of civilians would have been staggering.
It took us more than three hours to climb our way to Concourse Mall, not
up a single staircase but along an endless series of mech corridors,
abandoned access verticals swept clean by the Luddite riots eighty years
ago, and a final stairway that was more rust than metal. We exited onto
a delivery corridor less than half a klick from the Shrike Temple.
'I can't believe it was so easy,' I whispered to him on intercom.
'They are probably concentrating people on the space-port and private
farcaster clusters."
We took the least exposed walkway onto the Concourse, thirty meters
below the first shopping level and four hundred meters below the roof.
The Shrike Temple was an ornate, free-stranding structure now less than
half a klick away. A few off-hour shoppers and joggers glanced at us
and then moved quickly away. I had no doubt that the Mall police were
being paged, but I'd be surprised if they showed up too quickly.
A gang of brightly painted street thugs exploded from a lift shaft,
hollering and whooping. They carried pulse-knives, chains, and power
gauntlets. Startled, Johnny wheeled toward them with the hellwhip
sending out a score of targeting beams. The mini-gun whir-whirred out
of my hands, shifting from aiming point to aiming point as I moved my
eyes.
The gang of seven kids skidded to a halt, held up their hands, and
backed away, eyes wide. They dropped into the lift shaft and were gone.
I looked at Johnny. Black mirrors looked back. Neither of us laughed.
We crossed to the northbound shopping lane. The few pedestrians
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

scurried for open shopfronts. We were less than a hundred meters from
the Temple stairs. I could actually hear my heartbeat in the FORCE
helmet ear-phones.
We were within fifty meters of the stairs. As if called, an acolyte or
priest of some sort appeared at the ten-meter door of the Temple and
watched us approach.
Thirty meters. If anyone was going to intercept us, they would have
done it before this.
I turned toward Johnny to say something funny. At least twenty beams
and half that many projectiles hit us at once. The outer layer of the
titan-poly exploded outward, deflecting most of the projectile energy in
the counterblast. rhe mirrored surface beneath bounced most of the
killing light. Most of it.
Johnny was flung off his feet by the impact. I went to one knee and let
the mini-gun train on the laser source.
Ten stories up along the residential Hive wall. My visor opaqued. Body
armor burned off in a steam of reflective gas. The mini-gun sounded
precisely like the kind' of chainsaw they used in history hoiodramas.
Ten stories up, a five-meter section of balcony and wall disintegrated
in a cloud of explosive flchettes and armor-piercing rounds.
Three heavy slugs struck me from behind.
I landed on my palms, silenced the mini-gun, and swiveled. There were
at least a dozen of them on each level, moving quickly in precise combat
choreography.
Johnny had reached his knees and was firing the hell-whip in
orchestrated bursts of light, working his way through the rainbow to
beat bounce defenses.
One of the running figures exploded into flame as the shopwindow behind
it turned to molten glass and spattered fifteen meters onto the
Concourse. Two more men came up over the level railings and I sent them
back with a burst from the mini-gun.
An open skimmer came down from the rafters, repellers laboring as it
banked around pylons. Rocket fire slammed into concrete around Johnny
and me. Shop-fronts vomited a billion shards of glass over us. I
looked, blinked twice, targeted, and fired. The skimmer lurched
sideways, struck an escalator with a dozen cowering civilians on it, and
tumbled in a mass of twisting metal and exploding ordnance. I saw one
shopper leap in flames to the Hive floor eighty meters below.
'Left!" shouted Johnny over the tightbeam intercom.
Four men in combat armor had dropped from an upper level using personal
lift packs. The polymerized chameleon armor labored to keep up with the
shifting Iackground but only succeeded in turning each man into a
brilliant kaleidoscope of reflections. One moved inside the sweep arch
of my mini-gun to neutralize me while the other three went for Johnny.
He came in with a pulse-blade, ghetto style. I let it chew at my armor,
knowing it would get through to forearm flesh but using it to buy the
second I needed. I got it. I killed the man with the rigid edge of my
gauntlet and swept the mini-gun fire into the three worrying Johnny.
Their armor went rigid and I used the gun to sweep them backward like
someone hosing down a littered sidewalk.
Only one of the men got to his feet before I blew them all off the level
overhang.
Johnny was down again. Parts of his chest armor were gone, melted away.
I smelled cooking flesh but saw no mortal wounds. I half crouched,
lifted him.
'Leave me, Brawne. Run. The stairs." The tightbeam was breaking up.
'Fuck off,' I said, getting my left arm around him enough to support him
while allowing room for the mini-gun to track. 'l'm still getting paid
to be your bodyguard."
They were sniping at us from both walls of the Hive, the rafters, and
the shopping levels above us. I counted at least twenty bodies on the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

walkways; about half were brightly clad civilians. The power assist on
the left leg of my armor was grinding. Straight-legged, I awkwardly
pulled us another ten meters toward the Temple stairs.
There were several Shrike priests at the head of the stairs now,
seemingly oblivious to the gunfire all around them.
'Above!'
I swiveled, targeted, and fired in one moment, hearing the gun go empty
after one burst and seeing the second skimmer get off its missiles in
the instant before it became a thousand pieces of hurtling, unrelated
metal and torn flesh. I dropped Johnny heavily to the pavement and fell
on him, trying to cover his exposed flesh with my body.
The missiles detonated simultaneously, several in
airburst and at least two burrowing. Johnny and I were lifted into the
air and hurled fifteen or twenty meters down the pitching walkway. Good
thing. The alloy and ferroconcrete pedestrian strip where we had been a
second before burned, bubbled, sagged, and tumbled down onto the flaming
walkway below. There was a natural moat there now, a gap between most
of the other ground troops and us.
I rose, slapped away the useless mini-gun and mount, pulled off useless
shards of my own armor, and lifted Johnny in both arms. His helmet had
been blown off and his face was very bad. Blood seeped through a score
of gaps in his armor. His right arm and left foot had been blown off. I
turned and began carrying him up the Shrike Temple stairs.
There were sirens and security skimmers filling the Concourse flyspace
now. The goondas on the upper levels and far side of the tumbled
walkway ran for cover.
Two of the commandos who had dropped on lift packs ran up the stairs
after me. I did not turn. I had to lift my straight and useless left
leg for every step. I knew that I had been seriously burned on my back
and side and there were shrapnel wounds elsewhere.
The skimmers whooped and circled but avoided the Temple steps. Gunfire
rattled up and down the Mall. I could hear metal-shod footsteps coming
rapidly behind me. I managed another three steps. Twenty steps above,
impossibly far away, the bishop stood amid a hundred Temple priests.
I made another step and looked down at Johnny. One eye was open,
staring up at me. The other was closed with blood and swollen tissue.
'It's all right,' I whispered, aware for the first time that my own
helmet was gone. 'It's all right. We're almost there." I managed one
more step.
The two men in bright black combat armor blocked my way. Both had
lifted visors streaked with deflection scars and their faces were very
hard.
'Put him down, bitch, and maybe we'll let you live."
I nodded tiredly, too tired to take another step or do anything but
stand there and hold him in both arms.
Johnny's blood dripped on white stone.
'I said, put the son of a bitch down and..."
I shot both of them, one in the left eye and one in the right, never
lifting Dad's automa(ic from where I held it under Johnny's body.
They fell away. I managed another step. And then another. I rested a
bit and then lifted my foot for another.
At the top of the stairs the group of black and red robes parted. The
doorway was very tall and very dark. I did not look back but I could
hear from the noise behind us that the crowd on the Concourse was very
large. The bishop walked by my side as I went through the doors and
into the dimness.
I laid Johnny on the cool floor. Robes rustled around us. I pulled my
own armor off where I could, then batted at Johnny's. It was fused to
his flesh in several places.
I touched his burned cheek with my good hand. 'I'm sorry..."
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

Johnny's head stirred slightly and his eye opened. He lifted his bare
left hand to touch my cheek, my hair, the back of my head. 'Fanny..."
I felt him die then. I also felt the surge as his hand found the neural
shunt, the white-light warmth of the surge to the Schrn loop as
everything Johnny Keats ever was or would be exploded into me; almost,
almost it was like his orgasm inside me two nights earlier, the surge
and throb and sudden warmth and stillness after, with the echo of
sensation there.
I lowered him to the floor and let the acolytes remove the body, taking
it out to show the crowd and the authorities and the ones who waited to
know.
I let them take me away.
I spent two weeks in a Shrike Temple recovery crche.
Burns healed, scars removed, alien metal extracted, skin grafted, flesh
regrown, nerves rewoven. And still I hurt.
Everyone except the Shrike priests lost interest in me.
The Core made sure that Johnny was dead; that his presence in the Core
had left no trace; that his cybrid was dead.
The authorities took my statement, revoked my license, and covered
things up as best they could. The Web press reported that a battle
between Dregs' Level Hive gangs had erupted onto the Concourse Mail.
Numerous gtng members and innocent bystanders were killed. The police
contained it.
A week before word came that the Hegemony would allow the Yggdrasill to
sail with pilgrims for the war zone near Hyperion, I used a Temple
farcaster to 'cast to Renaissance Vector where I spent an hour alone in
the archives there.
The papers were in vacuum-press so I could not touch them. The
handwriting was Johnny's; I had seen his writing before. The parchment
was yellow and brittle with age. There were two fragments. The first
read:
The day is gone, and all its sweets are gone!
Sweet voice, sweet lips, soft hand, and softer breast, Warm breath,
light whisper, tender semi-tone,
Bright eyes, accomplished shape, and languorous waist.t
Faded the flower and all its budded charms,
Faded the sight of beauty from my eyes,
Faded the shape of beauty from my arms,
Faded the voice, warmth, whiteness, paradisem Vanished unseasonably at
shut of eve,
When the dusk holiday - or holinight- Of fragrant-curtained love begins
to weave
The woof of darkness thick, for hid delight;
But, as I've read iove's missal through today,
He'll let me sleep, seeing I fast and pray.
The second fragment was in a wilder hand and on rougher paper, as if
slashed across a notepad in haste:
This living hand, now warm and capable
Of earnest grasping, would, if it were cold
And in the icy silence of the tomb,
So haunt thy days and chill thy dreaming nights
That thou wouldst wish thine own heart dry of blood
So in my veins red life might stream again,
And thou be conscience-calm'd - see here it is- I hoM it towards you
I'm pregnant. I think that Johnny knew it. I don't know for sure.
I'm pregnant twice. Once with Johnny's child and once with the
Schr6n-loop memory of what he was. I don't know if the two are meant to
be linked. It will be months before the child is born and only days
before I face the Shrike.
But I remember those minutes after Johnny's torn body was taken out to
the crowd and before I was led away for help. They were all there in
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

the darkness, hundreds of the priests and acolytes and exorcists and
ostiaries and worshipers... and as one voice they began to chant, there
in that red dimness under the revolving sculpture of the Shrike, and
their voices echoed in Gothic vaults. And what they chanted went
something like this:
'BLESSED BE SHE
BLESSED BE THE MOTHER OF OUR
SALVATION
BLESSED BE THE INSTRUMENT OF OUR
ATONEMENT
BLESSED BE THE BRIDE OF OUR CREATION BLESSED BE SHE'
I was injured and in shock. I didn't understand it then.
I don't understand it now.
But I know that, when the time arrives and the Shrike comes, Johnny and
I will face it together.
It was long after dark. The tramcar rode between stars and ice. The
group sat in silence, the only sound the creak of cable.
After a time had passed, Lenar Hoyt said to Brawne Lamia, 'You also
carry the cruciform."
Lamia looked at the priest.
Colonel Kassad leaned toward the woman. 'Do you think Het Masteen was
the Templar who had spoken to Johnny?"
'Possibly,' said Brawne Lamia. 'I never found out."
Kassad did not blink. 'Were you the one who killed
Masteen?"
'No."
Martin Silenus stretched and yawned. 'We have a few hours before
sunrise,' he said. 'Anyone else interested in getting some sleep?"
Several heads nodded.
'I'11 stay up to keep watch,' said Fedmahn Kassad.
'I'm not tired."
'I'll keep you company,' said the Consul.
'I'll heat some coffee for the therm,' said Brawne Lamia.
When the others slept, the infant Rachel making soft cooing sounds in
her sleep, the other three sat at the windows and watched the stars burn
cold and distant in the high night.
SIX
Chronos Keep jutted from the easternmost rim of the great Bridle Range:
a grim, baroque heap of sweating stones with three hundred rooms and
halls, a maze of lightless corridors leading to deep halls, towers,
turrets, balconies overlooking the northern moors, airshafts rising half
a kilometer to light and rumored to drop to the world's labyrinth
itself, parapets scoured by cold winds from the peaks above, stairways-
inside and out-carved from the mountain stone and leading nowhere,
stained-glass windows a hundred meters tall set to catch the first rays
of solstice sun or the moon on midwinter night, paneless windows the
size of a man's fist looking out on nothing in particular, an endless
array of bas-relief, grotesque sculptures in half-hidden niches, and
more than a thousand gargoyles staring down from eave and parapet,
transept and sepulcher, peering down through wood rafters in the great
halls and positioned so as to peer in the blood-tinted windows of the
northeast face, their winged and hunchbacked shadows moving like grim
sundial hours, cast by sunlight in the day and gas-fed torches at night.
And everywhere in Chronos Keep, signs of the Shrike Church's long
occupation -atonement altars draped in red velvet, hanging and
free-standing sculptures of the Avatar with polychrome steel for blades
and bloodgems for eyes, more statues of the Shrike carved from the stone
of narrow stairways and dark halls so that nowhere in the night would
one be free of the fear of touching hands emerging from rock, the sharp
curve of blade descending from stone, four arms enveloping in a final
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

embrace. As if in a last measure of ornamentation, a filigree of blood
in many of the once occupied halls and rooms, arabesques
of red spattered in almost recognizable patterns along walls and tunnel
ceilings, bedclothes caked hard with rust-red substance, and a central
dining hall filled with the stench of food rotting from a meal abandoned
weeks earlier, the floor and table, chairs and wall adorned with blood,
stained clothing and shredded robes lying in mute heaps. And everywhere
the sound of flies.
'Jolly fucking place, isn't it?" said Martin Silenus, his voice echoing.
Father Hoyt took several steps deeper into the great hall. Afternoon
light from the west-facing skylight forty meters above fell in dusty
columns. 'It's incredible,' he whispered. 'St Peter's in the New
Vatican is nothing like this."
Martin Silenus laughed. Thick light outlined his cheekbones and satyr's
brows. 'This was built for a living deity,' he said.
Fedmahn Kassad lowered his travel bag to the floor and cleared his
throat. 'Surely this place predates the Shrike Church."
'It does,' said the Consul. 'But they've occupied it for the past two
centuries."
'It doesn't look too occupied now,' said Brawne Lamia. She held her
father's automatic in her left hand.
They had all shouted during their first twenty minutes in the Keep, but
the dying echoes, silences, and buzz of flies in the dining hall had
reduced them to silence.
'Sad King Billy's androids and bond clones built the goddamn thing,'
said the poet. 'Eight local years of labor before the spinships
arrived. It was supposed to be the greatest tourist resort in the Web,
the jumping-off point for the Time Tombs and the City of Poets. But l
suspect that even then the poor schmuck android laborers knew the
locals' version of the Shrike story."
Sol Weintraub stood near an eastern window, holding his daughter up so
that soft light fell across her cheek and curled fist. 'All that
matters little now,' he said. 'Let's find a corner free of carnage
where we can sleep and eat our evening meal."
'Are we going on tonight?" asked Brawne Lamia.
'To the Tombs?" asked Silenus, showing real surprise for the first time
on the voyage. 'You'd go to the Shrike in the dark?"
Lamia shrugged. 'What difference does it make?" The Consul stood near a
leaded glass door leading to a stone balcony and closed his eyes. His
body still lurched and balanced to the movement of the tramcar. The
night and day of travel above the peaks had blurred together in his
mind, lost in the fatigue of almost three days without sleep and his
rising tension. He opened his eyes before he dozed off standing up.
'We're tired,' he said. 'We'll stay here tonight and go down in the
morning."
Father Hoyt had gone out onto the narrow ledge of balcony. He leaned on
a railing of jagged stone. 'Can we see the Tombs from here?"
'No,' said Silenus. 'They're beyond that rise of hills.
But see those white things to the north and west a bit...
those things gleaming like shards of broken teeth in the sand?"
'Yes."
'That's the City of Poets. King Billy's original site for Keats and for
all things bright and beautiful. The locals
say that it's haunted now by headless ghosts."
'Are you one of them?" asked Lamia.
Martin Silenus turned to say something, looked a moment at the pistol
still in her hand, shook his head, and turned away.
Footsteps echoed from an unseen curve of staircase and Colonel Kassad
reentered the room. 'There are two small storerooms above the dining
hall,' he said. 'They have a section of balcony outside but no other
access than this stairway. Easy to defend. The rooms are...
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

clean. '
Silenus laughed. 'Does that mean nothing can get at us or that, when
something does get at us, we'll have no way to get out?"
'Where would we go?" asked Sol Weintraub.
'Where indeedT' said the Consul. He was very tired.
He lifted his gear and took one handle of the heavy M6bius cube, waiting
for Father Hoyt to lift the other end. 'Let's do what Kassad says. Find
a space to spend
the night. Let's at least get out of this room. It stinks of death."
Dinner was the last of their dried rations, some wine from Silenus's
last bottle, and some stale cake which Sol Weintraub had brought along
to celebrate their last evening together. Rachel was too little to eat
the cake, but she took her milk and went to sleep on her stomach on a
mat near her father.
Lenar Hoyt removed a small balalaika from his pack and strummed a few
chords.
'I didn't know you played,' said Brawne Lamia.
'Poorly."
The Consul rubbed his eyes. 'I wish we had a piano." 'You do have one,'
said Martin Silenus.
The Consul looked at the poet.
'Bring it here,' said Silenus. 'I'd welcome a Scotch."
'What are you talking about?" snapped Father Hoyt.
'Make sense."
'His ship,' said Silenus. 'Do you remember our dear, departed Voice of
the Bush Masteen telling our Consul friend that h/s secret weapon was
that nice Hegemony singleship sitting back at Keats Spaceport? Call it
up, Your Consulship. Bring it on in."
Kassad moved away from the stairway where he had been placing tripbeams.
'The planet's datasphere is dead. The comsats are down. The orbiting
FORCE ships are on tightbeam. How is he supposed to call it?"
It was Lamia who spoke. 'A fatline transmitter." The Consul moved his
stare to her.
'Fatline transmitters are the size of buildings,' said Kassad.
Brawne Lamia shrugged. 'What Masteen said made sense. If I were the
Consul... if I were one of the few thousand individuals in the entire
damn Web to own a singleship . . . I'd be damn sure I could fly it in
on remote if I needed it. The planet's too primitive to depend on its
comm net, the ionosphere's too weak for shortwave, the comsats are the
first things to go in a skirmish... I'd call it by fatline."
'And the size?" said the Consul.
Brawne Lamia returned the diplomat's level gaze.
'The Hegemony can't yet build portable fatline transmitters.
There are rumors that the Ousters can."
The Consul smiled. From somewhere there came a scrape and then the
sound of metal crashing.
'Stay here,' said Kassad. He removed a deathwand from his tunic,
canceled the tripbeams with his tactical comlog, and descended from
sight.
'I guess we're under martial law now,' said Silenus
when the Colonel was gone. 'Mars ascendant."
'Shut up,' said Lamia.
'Do you think it's the Shrike?" asked Hoyt.
The Consul made a gesture. 'The Shrike doesn't have to clank around
downstairs. It can simply appear...
here."
Hoyt shook his head. 'I mean the Shrike that has been the cause of
everyone's... absence. The signs of slaughter here in the Keep."
'The empty villages might be the result of the evacuation order,' said
the Consul. 'No one wants to stay behind to face the Ousters. The SDF
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

forces have been running wild. Much of the carnage could be their
doing."
'With no bodies?" laughed Martin Silenus. 'Wishful thinking. Our
absent hosts downstairs dangle now on the
Shrike's steel tree. Where, ere long, we too will be." 'Shut up,'
Brawne Lamia said tiredly.
'And if I don't,' grinned the poet, 'will you shoot me,
madam?"
'Yes."
The silence lasted until Colonel Kassad returned. He reactivated the
tripbeams and turned to the group seated on packing crates and flowfoam
cubes. 'It was nothing.
Some carrion birds - harbingers, I think the locals call them - had come
in through the broken glass doors in the dining hall and were finishing
the feast."
Silenus chuckled. 'Harbingers. Very appropriate." Kassad sighed, sat
on a blanket with his back to a crate, and poked at his cold food. A
single lantern brought from the windwagon lighted the room and the
shadows were beginning to mount the walls in the corners away from the
door to the balcony. 'It's our last
night,' said Kassad. 'One more story to tell." He looked at the Consul.
The Consul had been twisting his slip of paper with the number 7
scrawled on it. He licked his lips. 'What's the purpose? The purpose
of the pilgrimage has been destroyed already."
The others stirred.
'What do you mean?" asked Father Hoyt.
The Consul crumpled the paper and threw it into a corner. 'For the
Shrike to grant a request, the band of pilgrims must constitute a prime
number. We had seven.
Masteen's ... disappearance ... reduces us to six.
We go to our deaths now with no hope of a wish being granted."
'Superstition,' said Lamia.
The Consul sighed and rubbed his brow. 'Yes. But that is our final
hope."
Father Hoyt gestured toward the sleeping infant.
'Can't Rachel be our seventh?"
Sol Weintraub rubbed his beard. 'No. A pilgrim must come to the Tombs
of his or her own free will."
'But she did once,' said Hoyt. 'Maybe it qualifies." 'No,' said the
Consul.
Martin Silenus had been writing notes on a pad but now he stood and
paced the length of the room. 'Jesus Christ, people. Look at us. We're
not six fucking pilgrims, we're a mob. Hoyt there with his cruciform
carrying the ghost of Paul Dur6. Our "semisentient" erg in the box
there. Colonel Kassad with his memory of Moneta. M. Brawne there, if
we are to believe her tale, carrying not only an unborn child but a dead
Romantic poet. Our scholar with the child his daughter used to be.
Me with my muse. The Consul with whatever fucking baggage he's brought
to this insane trek. My God, people, we should have received a fucking
group rate for this trip."
'Sit down,' said Lamia in a dead even tone.
'No, he's right,' said Hoyt. 'Even the presence of Father Dur6 in
cruciform must affect the prime-number superstition somehow. I say that
we press on in the morning in the belief that..."
'Look!" cried Brawne Lamia, pointing to the balcony doorway where the
fading twilight had been replaced with pulses of strong light.
The group went out into the cool evening air, shielding their eyes from
the staggering display of silent explosions which filled the sky: pure
white fusion bursts expanding like explosive ripples across a lapis
pond; smaller, brighter plasma implosions in blue and yellow and
brightest red, curling inward like flowers folding for the night: the
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

lightning dance of gigantic heliwhip displays, beams the size of small
worlds cutting their swath across light-hours and being contorted by the
riptides of defensive singularities: the aurora shimmer of defense
fields leaping and dying under the assault of terrible energies only to
be reborn nanoseconds later. Amid it all, the blue-white fusion tails
of torchships and larger warships slicing perfectly true lines across
the sky like diamond scratches on blue glass.
'The Ousters,' breathed Brawne Lamia.
'The war's begun,' said Kassad. There was no elation in his voice, no
emotion of any kind.
The Consul was shocked to discover that he was weeping silently. He
turned his face from the group.
'Are we in danger here?" asked Martin Silenus. He sheltered under the
stone'archway of the door, squinting at the brilliant display.
'Not at this distance,' said Kassad. He raised his combat binoculars,
made an adjustment, and consulted his tactical tomlog. 'Most of the
engagements are at least three AU away. The Ousters are testing the
FORCE:space defenses." He lowered the glasses. 'It's just begun."
'Has the farcaster been activated yet?" asked Brawne Lamia. 'Are the
people being evacuated from Keats and the other cities?"
Kassad shook his head. 'I don't believe so. Not yet.
The fleet will be fighting a holding action until the cislunar sphere is
completed. Then the evacuation portals will be opened to the Web while
FORCE units come through by the hundreds." He raised the binoculars
again. 'It'll be a hell of a show."
'Look!" It was Father Hoyt pointing this time, not at the fireworks
display in the sky but out across the low dunes of the northern moors.
Several kilometers toward the unseen Tombs, a single figure was just
visible as a speck of a form throwing multiple shadows under the
fractured sky.
Kassad trained his glasses on the figure.
'The Shrike?" asked Lamia.
'No, I don't think so... I think it's... a Templar by the looks of the
robe."
'Het Masteen!" cried Father Hoyt.
Kassad shrugged and handed the glasses around. The Consul walked back
to the group and leaned on the balcony.
There was no sound but the whisper of wind, but that made the violence
of explosions above them more ominous somehow.
The Consul took his turn looking when the glasses came to him. The
figure was tall and robed, its back to the Keep, and strode across the
flashing vermilion sands with purposeful intent.
'Is he headed toward us or the Tombs?" asked Lamia.
'The Tombs,' said the Consul.
Father Hoyt leaned elbows on the ledge and raised his gaunt face to the
exploding sky. 'If it is Masteen, then we're back to seven, aren't we?"
'He'll arrive hours before us,' said the Consul. 'Half a day if we
sleep here tonight as we proposed."
Hoyt shrugged. 'That can't matter too much. Seven set out on the
pilgrimage. Seven will arrive. The Shrike will be satisfied."
'If it/s Masteen,' said Colonel Kassad, 'why the charade on the
windwagon? And how did he get here before us? There were no other
tramcars running and he couldn't have walked over the Bridle Range
passes."
'We'll ask him when we arrive at the Tombs tomorrow,' Father Hoyt said
tiredly.
Brawne Lamia had been trying to raise someone on her comlog's general
comm frequencies. Nothing emerged but the hiss of static and the
occasional growl of distant EMPs. She looked at Colonel Kassad. 'When
do they start bombing?"
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

'1 don't know. It depends uporr the strength of the FORCE fleet
defenses."
'The defenses weren't very good the other day when the Ouster scouts got
through and destroyed the
Yggdrasi!i,' said Lamia.
Kassad nodded.
'Hey,' said Martin Silenus, 'are we sitting on a fucking target?"
'Of course,' said the Consul. 'If the Ousters are attacking Hyperion to
prevent the opening of the Time Tombs, as M. Lamia's tale suggests,
then the Tombs and this entire area would be a primary target."
'For nukes?" asked Silenus, his voice strained.
'Almost certainly,' answered Kassad.
'1 thought something about the anti-entropic fields kept ships away from
here,' said Father Hoyt.
'Crewed ships,' said the Consul without looking back at the others from
where he leaned on the railing. 'The anti-entropic fields won't bother
guided missiles, smart bombs, or hellwhip beams. It won't bother mech
infantry, for that matter. The Ousters could land a few attack skimmers
or automated tanks and watch on remote while they destroy the valley."
'But they won't,' said Brawne Lamia. 'They want to control Hyperion,
not destroy it."
'I wouldn't wager my life on that supposition,' said Kassad.
Lamia smiled at him, 'But we are, aren't we, Colonel?"
Above them, a single spark separated itself from the continuous
patchwork of explosions, grew into a bright orange ember, and streaked
across the sky. The group on the terrace could see the flames, hear the
tortured shriek of atmospheric penetration. The fireball disappeared
beyond the mountains behind the Keep.
Almost a minute later, the Consul realized that he had been holding his
breath, his hands rigid on the stone railing. He let out air in a gasp.
The others seemed to be taking a breath at the same moment. There had
been no explosion, no shock wave rumbling through the rock.
'A dud?" asked Father Hoyt.
'Probably an injured FORCE skirmisher trying to reach the orbital
perimeter or the spaceport at Keats,' said Colonel Kassad.
'He didn't make it, did he?" asked Lamia. Kassad did not respond.
Martin Silenus lifted the field glasses and searched the darkening moors
for the Templar. 'Out of sight,' said Silenus. 'The good Captain
either rounded that hill just this side of the Time Tombs valley or he
pulled his disappearing act again."
'It's a pity that we'll never hear his story,' said Father Hoyt. He
turned toward the Consul. 'But we'll hear yours, won't we?"
The Consul rubbed his palms against his pant legs. His heart was
racing. 'Yes,' he said, realizing even as he spoke that he had finally
made up his mind. 'I'11 tell mine."
The wind roared down the east slopes of the mountains and whistled along
the escarpment of Chronos Keep. The explosions above them seemed to
have diminished ever so slightly, but the coming of darkness made each
one look even more violent than the last.
'Let's go inside,' said Lamia, her words almost lost in the wind sound.
'It's getting cold."
They had turned off the single lamp and the interior of the room was
lighted only by the heat-lightning pulses of color from the sky outside.
Shadows sprang into being, vanished, and appeared again as the room was
painted in many colors. Sometimes the darkness would last several
seconds before the next barrage.
The Consul reached into his traveling bag and took out a strange device,
larger than a comlog, oddly orna-mented, and fronted with a liquid
crystal diskey like something out of a history holo.
'Secret fatline transmitter?" Brawne Lamia asked dryly.
The Consul's smile showed no humor. 'It's an ancient comlog. It came
 file:///F|/rah/Dan%20Simmons/Simmons,%20Dan%20-%2001%20-%20Hyperion.txt

out during the Hegira." He removed a standard micro-disk from a pouch on
his belt and inserted it. 'Like Father Hoyt, I have someone else's tale
to tell before you can understand my own."
'Christ on a stick,' sneered Martin Silenus, 'am I the only one who can
tell a straightforward story in this fucking herd? How long do I have
to..."
The Consui's movement surprised even himself. He rose, spun, caught the
smaller man by the cape and shirt-front, slammed him against the wail,
draped him over a packing crate with a knee in Silenus's belly and a
forearm against his throat, and hissed, 'One more word from you, poet,
and I'll kill you."
Silenus began to struggle but a tightening on his windpipe and a glance
at the Consul's eyes made him cease.
His face was very white.
Colonel Kassad silently, almost gently, separated the two. 'There will
be no more comments,' he said. He touched the deathwand in his belt.
Martin Silenus went to the far side of the circle, still rubbing his
throat, and slumped against a crate without a word. The Consul strode
to the door, took several deep breaths, and walked back to the group. He
spoke to everyone but the poet. 'l'm sorry. It is just that . . . I
never expected to share this."
The light from outside surged red and then white, followed by a blue
glow which faded to near darkness.
'We know,' Brawne Lamia said softly. 'We all felt that way."
The Consul touched his lower lip, nodded, roughly cleared his throat,
and came to sit by the ancient comlog.
'The recording is not as old as the instrument,' he said.
'It was made about fifty standard years ago. I'll have some more to say
when it's over." He paused as if there were more to be said, shook his
head, and thumbed the antique diskey.
There were no visuals. The voice was that of a young man. In the
background one could hear a breeze blowing through grass or soft
branches and, more distantly, the roll of surf.
Outside, the light pulsed madly as the tempo of the distant space battle
quickened. The Consul tensed as he waited for the crash and concussion.
There was none. He closed his eyes and listened with the others.