10. Languor of the Spirit


hen Pol Gnedykh appeared on the streets of the Volga-Unicorn Farm early one morning, people stared after him. Pol was deliberately unshaven and barefoot. On his shoulder he carried a
many-branched stick, with a dusty pair of shoes tied with twine dangling from the end. Starting near the latticed tower of the microweather installation, a litter robot began dogging his footsteps. From behind the openwork fence of one of the cottages came the laughter of many voices, and a pretty girl standing on a porch with a towel in her hand inquired of the whole street, “Hail pilgrim! Returning from some holy shrine?” Immediately, from the other side of the street came a question, “Don’t we have any opium for the masses?” The venture was working out gloriously well. Pol assumed a dignified air and began to sing loudly:


Oh, what a hero I,
Who cold or frost fear not! Hung from a stick
For a thousand kliks Of barefoot track, Or stuck in a sack
Or wrapped in a pack For the cobbler man To fix if he can
My shoes Ta-ra-ta-ta
I’ve brought.


Into the astounded silence came a frightened voice: “What is he?” Then Pol stopped, shoved the robot with his foot, and asked into space, “Does anyone know where I can find Aleksandr Kostylin?”
Several voices vied with each other to explain that Kostylin must be in the laboratory now, right over in that building.
“On thy left,” a single voice added after a short pause.
Pol politely thanked them and continued on. The lab building was low, round, light blue. A towheaded, freckled youth in a white lab coat stood in the doorway, leaning against the doorpost, with his arms folded across his chest. Pol went up the steps and stopped. The towhead looked at him placidly.
“Can I see Kostylin?” Pol asked.
The youth ran his eyes over Pol, looked over Pol’s shoulder at the shoes, looked at the litter robot, which was rocking on the step below Pol, its manipulators gaping greedily, and then turning his head slightly, he called softly, “Sasha, hey Sasha! Come out here a minute. Some castaway is here to see you.”
“Have him come in,” a familiar bass rumbled from the depths of the laboratory.
The towheaded youth looked Pol over again. “He can’t,” he said, “he’s highly septic.”
“So disinfect him,” came the voice from the laboratory. “I’ll be happy to wait.”
“You’ll have a long wait—” the youth began.
And here Pol appealed plaintively, “Zow, Lin! It’s me, Polly!” Something in the laboratory fell with a crash; out from the doorway, as
if from a subway tunnel, came a whiff of cold air, the towheaded youth stepped aside, and on the threshold appeared Aleksandr Kostylin, enormous, broad, in a gigantic white coat. His hands, with fingers spread wide, were thickly smeared with something, and he carried them off to the side, like a surgeon during an operation. “Zow, Polly!” he yelled, and the litter robot, driven out of its cybernetic mind, rolled down off the porch and rushed headlong through the street.
Poi threw down his stick and, forgetful of self, darted into the embrace of the white coat. His bones crunched. What a way to go, he thought, and croaked, “Mercy… Lin… friend…”


“Polly—Little Polly!” Kostylin cooed in his bass, squeezing Pol with his elbows. “It’s really great to see you here!”
Pol fought like a lion, and at last managed to free himself. The towheaded youth, who had been following the reunion with fright, sighed with relief, picked up the stick with the shoes, and gave it to Pol.
“So how are you?” asked Kostylin, smiling the whole width of his face. “All right, thanks,” said Pol. “I’m alive.”
“As you can see, we till the soil here,” Kostylin said. “Feeding all you parasites.”
“You look very impressive,” said Pol.
Kostylin glanced at his hands. “Yes,” he said, “I forgot.” He turned to the towhead. “Fedor, finish up by yourself. You can see that Polly has come for a visit. Little Lieber Polly.”
“Maybe we should just chuck it?” said Fedor. “I mean, it’s clear it’s not going to work.”
“No, we’ve got to finish,” said Kostylin. “You finish up, will you please?”
“Okay,” Fedor said reluctantly, and went off into the laboratory. Kostylin grabbed Pol by the shoulder and held him off at arm’s length to
look him over. “Haven’t grown a bit,” he said tenderly. “Have you been getting bad feed? Hold it…” He frowned worriedly. “What happened, your pterocar crack up? What kind of a getup is that?”
Pol grinned with pleasure. “No,” he said. “I’m playing pilgrim. I’ve walked all the way from the Big Road.”
“Wow!” Kostylin’s face showed the customary respect. “Almost three hundred kilometers. How was it?”
“Wonderful,” said Pol. “If only there’d been someplace to take a bath. And change clothes.”
Kostylin smiled happily and dragged Pol from the porch. “Let’s go,” he said. “Now you can have everything. A bath, and milk…”
He walked in the middle of the street, dragging the stumbling Pol after him, and passed sentence while waving the stick with the shoes: “… and a clean shirt… and some decent pants… and a massage… and an ion shower… and two or three lashes for not writing… and hello from Athos… and two letters from Teacher.”
“That’s great!” exclaimed Pol. “That’s great!”


“Yes, yes, you’ll have the works. And how about ignis fatuus? You remember ignis fatuus? And how I almost got married? And how I missed you!”
The workday was beginning on the farm. The street was full of people, men and girls, dressed colorfully and simply. The people made way for Kostylin and Pol. The two could hear cries:
“They’re bringing the Pilgrim!” “Vivisect it—it’s sick!”
“Some new hybrid?”
“Sasha, wait, let us have a look.”
Through the crowd spread a rumor that during the night, near Kostylin’s laboratory, a second Taimyr had landed.
“Eighteenth century,” someone stated. “They’re handing out the crew to researchers in comparative anatomy.”
Kostylin waved the stick, and Pol gaily bared his teeth. “I love attention,” he said.
Voices among the crowd sang, “O, what a hero I, / Who cold or frost fear not!”
Pol the Pilgrim sat on a broad wooden bench at a broad wooden table amid currant bushes. The morning sun pleasantly warmed his antiseptically clean back. Pol luxuriated. In his hand he had an enormous mug of cranberry juice. Kostylin, also shirtless and with wet hair, sat opposite and looked at him affectionately.
“I always believed that Athos was a great man,” said Pol, making sweeping motions with the mug. “He had the clearest head, and he knew best of any of us what he wanted.”
“Oh, no,” Kostylin said warmly. “The Captain saw his goal best of any of us. And he moved straight toward it.”
Pol took a sip from the mug and thought. “Maybe,” he said. “The Captain wanted to be a spacer, and he became a spacer.”
“Uh-huh,” said Kostylin, “and Athos is still more of a biologist than a spacer.”
“But what a biologist!” Pol raised a finger. “Honestly, I brag about having been friends with him in school.”
“Me too,” Kostylin agreed. “But you wait five years or so, and we’ll be bragging about being friends with the Captain.”


“Right,” said Pol. “And here I drift around like a bit of foil in the wind. I want to try everything. Now, you were just scolding me for not writing.” He put down his mug with a sigh. “I can’t write when I’m busy with something. Writing is boring then. When you’re working on a subject, writing is boring, because everything is ahead of you. And when you finish, it’s boring because it’s all behind you… And then you don’t know what’s ahead. You know, Lin, everything has really been working out stupidly for me. Here I work four years on theoretical servomechanics. One girl and I solved Chebotarev’s Problem—you remember, Teacher told us about it? We solve it, build two very good regulators… and I fall in love with the girl. And then everything ended and… everything ended.”
“You haven’t gotten married?” Kostylin asked sympathetically. “That’s not the point. It was just that when other people work, they
always get new ideas of some sort, but I didn’t. The work was finished, and it didn’t interest me any more. In these ten years I’ve gone through four specialties. And again I’m out of ideas. So I thought to myself, I’ll go find old Lin.”
“Quite right!” Kostylin said in his deep voice. “I’ll give you twenty ideas!”
“So give,” Pol said sluggishly. He grew gloomy and buried his nose in the mug.
Kostylin looked at him with thoughtful interest. “Couldn’t you get into endocrinology?” he proposed.
“Could be endocrinology,” said Pol. “Even if it is a hard word. And anyhow, all these ideas are utter languor of the spirit.”
Kostylin said suddenly, and without obvious relevance to what had gone before, “I’m getting married soon.”
“Wonderful!” Pol said sadly. “Just don’t tell me all about your happy love in X thousand boring words.” He became more lively. “Happy love is inherently boring anyhow,” he declared. “Even the ancients understood that. No real craftsman has been attracted by the theme of happy love. For great works, unhappy love was always an end in itself, but happy love is at best background.”
Kostylin assented reluctantly.
“True depth of feeling is characteristic only of unrequited love,” Pol continued with inspiration. “Unhappy love makes a person active, churns him up, but happy love calms him down, spiritually castrates him.”


“Cheer up, Polly,” said Kostylin. “It will all pass. The good thing about unhappy love is that it is usually short-lived. Let me pour you some more juice.”
“No, Lin,” said Pol, “I think this is long-lived. After all, two years have already gone by. She probably doesn’t even remember me, and I…” He looked at Kostylin. “Excuse me, Lin. I know it isn’t very nice when someone cries all over your shoulder. Only this is all so interminable. I sure as hell wasn’t lucky in love.”
Kostylin nodded helplessly. “Would you like me to put you in touch with Teacher?” he asked uncertainly.
Pol shook his head and said, “No. I don’t want to talk to Teacher when I’m like this. I’d feel like a fool.”
“Mmm, yes,” Kostylin said, and thought, What’s true is true. Teacher can’t stand unhappy people. He looked at Pol suspiciously. Could clever Polly be playing the unfortunate? He had a good appetite—it was a pleasure to watch him eating. And he loved attention, as always. “Do you remember Operation October?” Lin asked.
“Of course!” Pol once again came to life. “Do you remember how the plan failed?”
“Well-how should I put it?… We were too young.”
“Good heavens!” said Pol He grew more cheerful. “Teacher sicked us on Walter on purpose! And then he smashed us in the examination—”
“What examination?”
“Zow, Lin!” Pol shouted delightedly. “The Captain was right—you’re the only one who never figured it out!”
Kostylin slowly came to the realization. “Yes, of course,” he said. “But what do you mean, I never figured it out? I just forgot. And do you remember how the Captain tested us for acceleration?”
“That was when you ate all that chocolate to see if you could handle the extra weight?” Pol said wickedly.
“And do you remember how we tested the rocket fuel?” Kostylin recollected hurriedly.
“Yeah,” Pol said dreamily. “Boy, did it thunder!”
“I have the scar to this day,” Kostylin said with pride. “Here—feel it.” He turned his back to Pol.
Pol felt it with pleasure. “We were good kids,” he said. “Glorious. Do you remember when on parade we turned into a herd of crayspiders?”


“Uff, it was noisy!”
They were sweet memories. Pol suddenly jumped up and with unusual animation imitated a crayspider. The surroundings filled with the repulsive gnashing howl of the multilegged monster that stole through the jungles of fearsome Pandora. And as if in reply, a deep roaring sigh came from afar. Pol froze in fright. “What’s that?” he asked.
Kostylin laughed. “Some spider you make! That’s cattle!” “What sort of cattle?” Pol asked in indignation.
“Beef cattle,” Lin explained. “Astonishingly good either grilled or roasted.”
“Listen, Lin,” said Pol, “those are worthy opponents. I want a look at them. And anyhow, I want to see what you do around here.”
Kostylin’s face filled with boredom. “Forget it, Polly,” he said. “Cattle are cattle. Let’s sit here a little longer. I’ll get you some more juice. All right?”
But it was too late. Pol had filled with energy. “The unknown is calling us! Forward, on to the beef cattle, who throw down the gauntlet to crayspiders! Where’s my shirt? Didn’t some pedigreed bull promise me a clean shirt?”
“Polly, Polly,” Kostylin exhorted, “you’ve got cattle on the brain! Let’s go to the lab instead.”
“I’m septic,” Pol declared. “I don’t want to go to the lab. I want to go to the cattle.”
“They’ll butt you,” Kostylin said, and stopped short. That had been a mistake.
“Really?” Polly said with quiet rapture. “A shirt. Red. I’ll get a bullfight going.”
Kostylin slapped his hands on his thighs in despair. “Look what I get stuck with! A craymatador!”
He got up and headed for the building. As he walked past Pol, Pol stood on tiptoes, bent over, and did a semiveronica with great elegance. Lin began to bellow, and butted him in the stomach.
When he saw the cattle, Pol immediately realized that there would be no bullfight. Under the bright, hot sky, enormous spotted hulks moved slowly in a row through thick, succulent, man-high grass stretching out to the horizon. The line ate its way into the soft green plain-and behind it was left black steaming ground bare of a single blade of grass. A steady electric


odor hung over the plain—there was the smell of ozone, warm black soil, grass, and fresh manure.
“Zow!” Pol whispered, and sat down on a hummock.
The line of cattle moved past him. The school where Pol had studied was in a grain district and Pol knew little about cattle raising, and had long forgotten what little he had learned. He had never had occasion to think about beef cattle, either. He simply ate beef. And now, with a rumble and ceaseless crackling, a herd of beef on the hoof, crunching, tramping, and masticating, went past him with heart-rending sighs. From time to time some enormous brown dribbling muzzle, smeared with green, stuck up from the grass and let out an indistinct deep roar.
Then Pol noticed the cybers. They walked a bit ahead of the line—brisk, flat machines on broad soft caterpillar treads. Now and again they stopped and dug into the ground, lagged behind, and then rushed forward. There were few of them, perhaps fifteen in all. They rushed along the line with frightening speed, throwing moist black clods out from under their treads in fan-shaped showers.
Suddenly a dark cloud covered the sun. A heavy, warm rain began. Pol looked back at the village, at the white cottages scattered over the dark green of gardens. It seemed to him that the paraboloid grids of the weather condensers, on the openwork tower of the microweather station, were staring straight at him. The rain passed quickly; the cloud moved along after the herd. Dim silhouettes that had unexpectedly appeared on the horizon caught Pol’s attention, but here he started getting bitten. They were nasty-looking insects, small, gray, winged. Pol realized that these were flies. Perhaps even dung-covered ones. Once he had figured this out, Pol jumped up and rushed briskly back to the village. The flies did not pursue him.
Pol crossed a stream, stopped on the bank, and debated for some time whether or not to go swimming. Deciding it wasn’t worth it, he began climbing the path to the village. As he walked, he thought, It was right that I got the rain dumped on me. And the flies know who to land on… It’s what I get for being a parasite. Everybody works like human beings. The Captain is up in space… Athos catches fleas on blue stars… Lin, the lucky man, cures cattle. Why am I like this? Why should I, an honest, hard-working man, feel like a parasite? He shuffled down the path and thought about how good it had been the night when he latched onto the solution of


Chebotarev’s Problem, and had dragged Lida from her bed and made her verify it. When everything had turned out right, she even kissed him on the cheek. Pol touched his cheek and sighed. It would be great to bury himself now in some really good problem like Fermat’s Theorem! But there was nothing in his head but ringing emptiness and some idiotic voice that affirmed, “If we find a square root…”
On the edge of the village Pol stopped again. Under a spreading cherry tree, a one-seater pterocar was resting on its wing. Near the pterocar squatted a boy of about fifteen, with a sorrowful expression. In front of him, buzzing monotonously, a long-legged litter robot rolled through the grass. Evidently all was not well with the litter robot.
Pol’s shadow fell over the boy, and the boy raised his head and then got up. “I landed the pterocar on him,” he said with an unusually familiar guilty look.
“And now you’re repenting, huh?” Pol asked as a teacher might. “I didn’t do it on purpose,” the boy said angrily.
For some time they watched silently the evolutions of the squashed robot. Then Pol squatted down decisively. “Well, let’s see what we’ve got here,” he said, and took the robot by a manipulator. The robot let out a squeal.
“Does it hurt?” Pol sang tenderly, easing his fingers into the regulatory system. “Did im hurt ims paw? Poor baby hurt ims paw.”
The robot squealed again, shuddered, and was quiet. The boy sighed with relief and squatted down too. “That’s it,” he muttered. “Boy, was it yelling when I got out of the pterocar!”
“Of course we yelled, we did,” cooed Pol, unscrewing the armor. “We’ve got ourselves a good acoustics system, a loudmouthed one. It’s an itty bitty AKU-6, it is, with longitudinal vibration… molecular-notchedy-watchty, it is… ye-es.” Pol took off the armor plate and carefully laid it on the grass. “And what is your name?”
“Fedor,” said the boy, “Fedor Skvortsov.” He watched Pol’s deft hands enviously.
“Well, Uncle Fedor, the litter robot is as strong as three bears,” Pol communicated, extracting the regulator block from the depths of the robot. “I already know one Fedor here. A likable fellow, freckled. A very, very aseptic young man. Are you related to him?”


“No,” the boy said cheerfully. “I’m here for practical training. Are you a cyberneticist?”
“We’re passing through, we are,” Pol said, “in search of ideas. Do you-ums have any sparey-wary ideas?”
“I… my… in the laboratory we get a lot of ideas, and nothing ever works out.”
“I understand,” muttered Pol, digging into the regulator block. “A flock of ideas rush every whichway up into the air. At this point the hunter runs out and shoots the crayspider…”
“You’ve been on Pandora?” the boy asked with envy.
Pol looked around furtively, then let out the yelp of a crayspider that is overtaking its prey.
“Great!”
Pol put the litter robot back together, whispered to it through its steel-blue back, and the robot rolled into the direct sunlight to accumulate energy.
“Marvelous!” Pol said, wiping his hands on his pants. “Now let’s see what shape the pterocar’s in.”
“No, please,” Fedor said quickly. “I’ll do it myself, honest.”
“By yourself, then,” said Pol. “In that case I’ll go wash my hands. Who’s your teacher?”
“My teacher is Nikolai Kuzmich Belka, the oceanographer,” the boy said, bristling.
Pol did not risk anything witty, and silently clapped the boy on the shoulder and went on his way. He felt much better. He had already gone two blocks into the village when a familiar pterocar darted by with a whoosh and a boy’s voice, intolerably out of tune, imitated the yelp of a crayspider that is overtaking its prey.
Lost in thought, Pol ran into a two-headed calf. It shied off to the side and stared at Pol with both pairs of eyes. Then it lowered its left head to the grass under its feet and turned the right to a lilac branch hanging over the road. Here it was nicked with a switch, and it ran on, kicking. The two-headed calf was being herded by a very attractive suntanned girl who wore a colorful peasant dress and a tilted straw hat. Pol muttered crazily, “And everywhere that Mary went, her, uh, calf was sure to go.”
“What?” asked the girl, stopping.


No, she wasn’t just attractive. She was plain beautiful. So beautiful she couldn’t fail to be smart, so smart she couldn’t fail to be nice, so nice… Pol suddenly wanted to be tall and broad-shouldered, with an unfurrowed brow and steely calm eyes. His thoughts darted in a zigzag. If nothing else, I have to be witty. He said, “My name is Pol.”
The girl answered, “I’m Irina. Did you say something to me, Pol?” Pol broke out in a sweat. The girl waited, looking impatiently after the
calf, which was moving off. The thoughts in Pol’s head darted in three layers. Let us find the square root… Cupid fires from a double-barreled carbine… Now she’ll think I’m a stutterer. Aha! A stutterer—that was a thought.
“Y-you’re in a h-hurry, I see,” he said, stuttering with all his might. “I’ll Hook you up th-this evening, if I m-may. Th-this evening.”
“Of course.” The girl was obviously pleased.
“T-till evening,” Pol said, and went on. I talked a little, he thought. We had a little c-conversation. I’m a veritable skyrocket of wit. He pictured himself at the moment of that conversation, and even moaned nasally at his awkwardness.
Somewhere nearby a loudspeaker boomed: “Will all unoccupied anesthesia specialists please stop by Laboratory Three? Potenko calling. We’ve got an idea. Will all unoccupied anesthesia specialists please stop by Laboratory Three? And don’t come crashing into the main building like last time. Laboratory Three. Laboratory Three.”
Why aren’t I a specialist in anesthesia? thought Pol. After all, I wouldn’t dream of crashing into the main building. Two fair maidens in shorts rushed past, down the middle of the street, their elbows pressed to their sides. Probably specialists.
It was quiet and empty in the village. A lonely litter robot languished in the sun at a perfectly clean intersection. Out of pity, Pol threw it a handful of leaves. The robot immediately came to life and set to work. I haven’t met so many litter robots in any city, thought Pol. But then, on a stock farm anything can happen.
A solid thunder of hoofs sounded from behind. Pol turned around in fright, and four horses galloped headlong past him, flanks foaming. On the lead horse, crouched over the mane, was a fellow in white shorts, tanned almost black and glossy with sweat. The other steeds were riderless. Near a low building twenty yards from Pol, at full gallop, the fellow jumped


from the horse right onto the steps of the porch. He whistled piercingly and disappeared into the door. The horses, snorting and twisting their necks, described a semicircle and came back to the porch. Pol did not even have time to be properly envious. Three boys and a girl ran out of the low building, leaped onto the horses, and rushed back past Pol at the same mad gait. They were already turning the corner when the fellow in the white shorts jumped out onto the porch and shouted after them, “Take the samples right to the station. Aleshka!”
There was no longer anyone on the street. The fellow stood there a little while, wiped his forehead, and returned to the building. Pol sighed and went on.
He stopped and listened at the threshold to Kostylin’s laboratory. The sounds that reached him seemed strange: A muffled blow. A heavy sigh. Something sliding. A bored voice said, “Right.” Silence. Again a muffled blow. Pol looked around at the sun-flooded laboratory square. Kostylin’s voice said, “Liar. Hold it.” A muffled blow. Pol went into the entryway and saw a white door with a sign, SURGICAL LABORATORY. Behind the door the bored voice said, “Why do we always take the thigh? We could take the back.” Kostylin’s bass answered, “The Siberians tried that—it didn’t work.” Again a muffled blow.
Pol went up to the door. It opened noiselessly. There was a lot of light in the laboratory, and along the walls shined strange-looking installations frosted with white. The broad panes set in the wall showed dark. Pol asked, “Can someone septic come in?”
No one answered. There were about ten people in the laboratory. They all looked gloomy and pensive. Three sat together, silent, on a large low bench. They looked at Pol without any expression. Two others sat with their backs to the door, by the far wall, with their heads together, reading something. The rest were gathered together in a semicircle in a corner. In the center of the semicircle, his face to the wall, towered Kostylin. He was covering his eyes with his right hand. His left hand was pushed through under his right arm. Freckled Fedor, who was also standing in the semicircle, slapped him on the left palm. The semicircle stirred, and thrust forward fists with thumbs up. Kostylin silently turned and pointed to a person, who silently shook his head, and Kostylin took up his former pose.
“So can someone septic come in?” Pol asked again. “Or is this a bad time?”


“The Pilgrim,” one of the people sitting on the bench said in a bored voice. “Come on in, Pilgrim. We’re all septic here.”
Pol went in. The man with the bored voice said into space, “Peasants, I propose we look over the analyses one more time. Maybe there’s still not enough protein.”
“There’s even more protein than we calculated,” said one of the players of this strange game. An oppressive silence reigned; only the blows rang out, and somebody said from time to time, “Liar, you guessed wrong.”
Ha! thought Pol. All is not for the best in the surgical laboratory. Kostylin suddenly pushed the players apart and walked out into the
middle of the room. “A proposal,” he said briskly. Everyone, even the ones poring over their notes, turned toward him. “Let’s go swimming.”
“Let’s go,” the man with the bored voice said decisively. “We’ve got to think it all out from the beginning.”
No one responded further to the proposal. The surgeons spread out over the room and were quiet once again.
Kostylin went up to Pol and grasped him by the shoulders. “Let’s go, Polly,” he said sadly. “Let’s go, boy. We won’t be downhearted, right?”
“Of course not, Lin,” said Pol. “If it doesn’t work today, it’ll work day after tomorrow.”
They went out onto the sunny street. “Don’t hold back, Lin,” said Pol. “Don’t be afraid to cry a little on my shoulder. Don’t hold back.”
There were about one hundred thousand stock-raising farms on the Planet. There were farms that raised cattle, farms that raised pigs, farms that raised elephants, antelope, goats, llamas, sheep. In the middle stream of the Nile there were two farms which were trying to raise hippopotamuses.
On the Planet there were about two hundred thousand grain farms growing rye, wheat, corn, buckwheat, millet, oats, rice, kaoliang. There were specialized farms like Volga-Unicorn, and broad-based ones. Together they provided the foundation for abundance—giant, very highly automated complexes producing foodstuffs: everything from pigs and potatoes to oysters and mangoes. No accidental mishap, no catastrophe, could now threaten the Planet with crop failure and famine. The system for ample production, established once and for all, was maintained completely automatically and had developed so swiftly that it had been necessary to


take special precautions against overproduction. Just as there had never been a breathing problem, now mankind had no problem eating.
By evening Pol already had an idea, though only the most general, of what the livestock farmers did. The Volga Farm was one of the few thousand stock farms in the temperate zone. Evidently here you could busy yourself with practical genetics, embryomechanical veterinary science, the production side of economic statistics, zoopsychology, or agrological cybernetics. Pol also encountered here one soil scientist who was evidently loafing-he drank milk fresh from the cow, and courted a pretty zoopsychologist all out, continually striving to entice her off to the swamps of the Amazon, where there was still something for a self-respecting soil scientist to do.
There were about sixty thousand head in the Volga-Unicorn herd. Pol very much liked the herd’s total autonomy—around the clock cybers and autovets cared for the cattle as a group, and each individually. The herd, in its turn, around the clock, served, on the one hand, the delivery-line processing complex and, on the other, the ever-growing scientific demands of the stock-raisers. For example, you could get in touch with the dispatch office and demand of the cowherd on duty an animal seven hundred twenty-two days old, of such-and-such a color and with such-and-such parameters, descended from the pedigreed bull Mikolaj II. In half an hour the designated animal, accompanied by a manure-smeared cyber, would be waiting for you in the receiving compartment of, say, the genetics lab.
Moreover, the genetics lab conducted the most insane experiments and functioned as the continual source of a certain friction between the farm and the processing complex. The processing workers, humble but ferocious guardians of world gastronomy, would be driven to a frenzy by the discovery in the regular cattle consignment of a monstrous beast reminiscent in appearance, and, more important, in flavor, of Pacific crab. A representative of the complex would quickly appear on the farm. He would immediately go to the genetics lab and demand to see “the creator of this unappetizing joke.” All one hundred eighty staff members of the genetics lab (not counting schoolchildren doing field work) would invariably step forward to claim the title of creator. The representative of the complex would, with restraint, recall that the farm and the complex were responsible for the uninterrupted supply to the delivery line of all forms of beef, and not of frog’s legs or canned jellyfish. The one hundred


eighty progressively inclined geneticists would object as one man to this narrow approach to the supply problem. To them, the geneticists, it seemed strange that such an experienced and knowledgeable worker as so-and-so should hold such conservative views and should attach no significance to advertising, which, as everyone knew, existed to alter and perfect the taste of the populace. The processing representative would remind them that not one new food product could be introduced into the distribution network without the approbation of the Public Health Academy. (Shouts from the crowd of geneticists: “The great heroes saving us from indigestion!” “The Appendix-Lovers’ Society!”) The processing representative would spread his hands and indicate by his entire appearance that he was helpless. The shouts would turn into a muted growl and soon die out: the authority of the Public Health Academy was enormous. Then the geneticists would take the processing representative through the laboratories to show him “a little something new.” The processing representative would go pale, and assert with oaths that “all this” was completely inedible. In response the geneticists would give him a formal tasting consisting of meat that did not need spices, meat that did not need salt, meat that melted in the mouth like ice cream, special meat for cosmonauts and nuclear technicians, special meat for expectant mothers, meat that could be eaten raw. The processing representative would taste, and then shout in ecstacy, “This is good! This is great!” and would demand amid oaths that all this should get through the experimental stage within the next year. Completely pacified, he would take his leave and depart, and within a month it would all start over again.
The information gathered during the day encouraged Pol, and inspired him with a certainty that there was something to do here. For a start I’ll join the cyberneticists, I’ll herd cattle, thought Pol, sitting on the open veranda of the cafe and looking absentmin d-edly at a glass of carbonated sour milk. I’ll send half the litter robots into the fields. Let them catch flies. Evenings I’ll work with the geneticists. It’ll be neat if Irina turns out to be a geneticist. Of course they’d attach me to her. Every morning I’d send her a cyber with a bouquet of flowers. Every evening too, Pol finished the milk and looked down at the black field across the river. Young grass already showed faint green there. Very clever! thought Pol. Tomorrow the cybers will turn the herd around and drive it back. There we have it, shuttle pasture. But it’s all just routine—I see no new principles. Irina and I will


develop cattle that eat dirt. Like earthworms. That will be something! If only the Public Health Academy…
A large company, arguing noisily about the meaning of life, tumbled onto the veranda, and immediately began moving tables around. Someone muttered, “A person dies, and he doesn’t care whether he has successors or not, descendants or not.”
“It doesn’t matter to Mikolaj II the bull, but—”
“Stuff the bull! You don’t care either! You’re gone, dissolved, disappeared. You don’t exist, understand?”
“Hold on, guys. There is a certain logic in that, of course. Only the living are interested in the meaning of life.”
“I wonder where you would be if your ancestors had thought like that. You’d still be making furrows with a wooden plow.”
“Nonsense! What has the meaning of life got to do with anything here? It’s simply the law of the development of productive forces.”
“What’s a law got to do with it?”
“The fact that productive forces keep developing whether you like it or not. After the plow came the tractor, after the tractor, the cyber—”
“Okay, leave our ancestors out of it. But do you mean there were people for whom the meaning of life consisted in inventing the tractor?”
“Why are you talking nonsense? Why do you always talk nonsense? The question is not what any given person lives for but what the human race lives for! You don’t understand a thing, and—”
“You’re the one who doesn’t understand a thing!”
“Listen to me! Everybody listen! Peasants! I’ll explain everything to you-Ow!”
“Let him talk! Let him talk!”
“This is a complex question. There are as many people arguing about the meaning of their existence as there are people in—”
“Shorter!”
“—in existence. First, ancestors don’t have anything to do with it. A person is given life independently of whether he wants it or—”
“Shorter!”
“Well, then explain it yourself.” “Right, Alan, make it shorter.”
“Shorter? Here you go: Life is interesting, ergo we live. And as for those who don’t find it interesting, well, right in Snegirevo there’s a fertilizer


factory.”
“‘Ataway, Allan!”
“No, guys. There’s also a certain logic to this.”
“It’s cracker-barrel philosophy! What does ‘interesting’ or ‘uninteresting’ mean? What do we exist for? That’s the question!”
“So what does displacement of the perihelion exist for? Or Newton’s law?”
“‘What for’ is the stupidest question there is. What does the sun rise in the east for?”
“Bah! One fool brings that question up to lead a thousand sages astray.” “Fool? I’m as much a fool as you are sages.”
“Forget the whole thing! Let’s talk about love instead!” “‘What is this thing called love?’”
“What does love exist for-there’s the question! Well, Zhora?” “You know, peasants, pretend somebody is looking at you in a
laboratory—people are just people. As to how philosophy begins… love, life…”
Pol took his chair and squeezed into the company. They recognized him. “Ah! The Pilgrim! Pilgrim, what is love?”
“Love,” said Pol, “is a characteristic property of highly organized matter.”
“What’s the ‘organized’ for and what’s the matter for—there’s the question!”
“So then will you—”
“Pilgrim, know any new jokes?”
“Yes,” said Pol, “but not any good ones.” “We aren’t very good ourselves.”
“Have him tell one. Tell me a joke and I’ll tell you who you are.” Pol began, “A certain cyberneticist—” (laughter) “—invented a
prognosticator, a machine that could foretell the future—a great, huge complex a hundred stories tall. For a start he asked the prognosticator the question, ‘What will I be doing in three hours?’ The prognosticator hummed away until morning, and then answered, ‘You’ll be sitting here waiting for me to answer your question.’”
“Ye-es,” someone said.
“What do you mean ‘ye-es’?” Pol said coolly. “You asked for it yourselves.”


“Hey peasants, why are all these cyberjokes so dumb?”
“Not just ‘why’ but to what end, what for? There’s the real question!” “Pilgrim! What’s your name, Pilgrim?”
“Pol,” Pol muttered.
Irina came onto the veranda. She was more beautiful than the girls sitting at the table. She was so beautiful that Pol stopped listening. She smiled, said something, waved to someone, and sat down next to long-nosed Zhora. Zhora immediately bent over to her and asked her something, probably “what for?” Pol exhaled and noticed that his neighbor on the right was crying on his shoulder: “We simply can’t do it—we haven’t learned how. There’s no way Aleksandr can get that through his head. Such things can’t be done in bursts.”
Pol finally recognized his neighbor—it was Vasya, the man with the bored voice, the same Vasya they had gone swimming with at noon.
“Such things can’t be done in bursts. We aren’t even adjusting Nature—we’re smashing her to pieces.”
“Ah… just what is the topic here?” Pol asked cautiously. He had absolutely no idea when and from where Vasya had appeared.
“I was saying,” Vasya repeated patiently, “that a living organism that does not change its genetics outlives its time.”
Pol’s eyes were glued to Irina. Long-nosed Zhora was pouring her champagne. Irina was saying something rapidly, tapping the glass with dark fingers.
Vasya said, “Aha! You’ve fallen in love with Irina! Such a pity.” “With what Irina?” muttered Pol.
“That girl there—Irina Egorovna. She worked for us in general biology.”
Pol felt as if he had fallen on his face. “What do you mean ‘worked’?” “As I was saying, it’s a pity,” Vasya said calmly. “She’s leaving in a few
days.”
Pol saw only her profile, lit up by the sun. “For where?” he asked. “The Far East.”
“Pour me some wine, Vasya,” said Pol. Suddenly his throat had become dry.
“Are you going to work here?” asked Vasya. “Aleksandr said you had a good head on your shoulders.”


“A good head,” muttered Pol. “A lofty unfurrowed brow and steely-calm eyes.”
Vasya started to laugh. “Don’t go pine away,” he said. “We must both be all of twenty-five.”
“No,” said Pol, shaking his head in despair. “What is there to hold me here? Of course I’m not staying here… I’ll go to the Far East.”
A heavy hand came to rest on his shoulder, and Kostylin’s powerful bass inquired, “Just who is going to the Far East? Huh?”
“Lin, listen, Lin,” Pol said plaintively. “How come I never have any luck?”
“Irina,” said Vasya, getting up.
Lin sat down in his place and drew over to himself a plate of cold meat. His face looked tired.
Pol looked at him with fear and hope, just as in the old days when their neighbors on the floor would arrange a school-wide manhunt to catch the clever Lieber Polly and teach him not to be quite so clever.
Kostylin wolfed down an enormous piece of meat and said in a bass that overcame the noise on the veranda, “Peasants! The new catalogue of publications in Russian has arrived. If you want it, ask at the club.”
Everyone turned toward him. “What have they got?”
“Is there any Mironov, Aleksandr?” “Yes,” said Kostylin.
“How about The Iron Tower?” “Yes. I already ordered it.” “Pure as Snow?”
“Yes. Look, there are eighty-six titles—I can’t remember everything.” The veranda began to empty quickly. Allan left. Vasya left. Irina left
with long-nosed Zhora. She didn’t know anything. She hadn’t even noticed. And, of course, she didn’t understand. Nor would she remember. She’ll remember Zhora. She’ll remember the two-headed calf. But she won’t remember me.
Kostylin said, “Unhappy love churns a person up. But it’s short-lived, Polly. You stay here. I’ll look after you.”
“Maybe I’ll go to the Far East anyhow,” said Pol.
“What for? You’ll only bother her and get underfoot. I know Irina and I know you. You’re fifty years stupider than her Prince Charming.”


“Still…”
“No,” said Kostylin. “Stay with me. Really, has your old buddy Lin ever led you astray?”
Pol gave in. He patted Kostylin’s immense back affectionately, got up, and went over to the railing. The sun had set, and a warm pellucid dusk had settled over the farm. Somewhere nearby a piano was playing and two voices were singing beautifully in harmony. Eh, thought Pol. He bent over the railing and quietly let out the yelp of a giant crayspider that has just lost its trail.