1. Night on Mars


uddenly the red-brown sand under the crawler treads gave way. Pyotr Alekseevich Novago threw her into reverse. “Jump!” he shouted to Mandel. The crawler shuddered, throwing up clouds of sand and
dust, and started to turn stern up. Novago switched off the engine and scrambled out of the crawler. He landed on all fours, and, without standing up, scurried off to one side. The sand slid and sank underneath him, but Novago managed to reach firm ground. He sat down, tucking his legs under him.
He saw Mandel, who was kneeling at the opposite edge of the crater, and the stern of the crawler, shrouded in steam and sticking up out of the sand on the bottom of the newly formed crater. Theoretically it was impossible for something like this to happen to a Lizard model. Here on Mars, at least. A Lizard was a light, fast machine—a five-seat open platform mounted on four autonomous caterpillar-tracked chassis. But here it was, slowly slipping
into a black pit, at the bottom of which sparkled the treasure of deep-buried water. Steam was gushing up from the water.
“A cavity,” Novago said hoarsely. “This wasn’t our day, it seems.” Mandel, his face covered up to the eyes by his oxygen mask, turned to
Novago. “No, it sure wasn’t,” he agreed.
There was absolutely no wind. Puffs of steam from the crater rose vertically into the violet-black sky sprinkled with bright stars. The sun hung low in the west-a small bright disk over the dunes. Black shadows stretched from the dunes to a reddish valley. It was completely still—the only sound was the rustling of the sand flowing into the crater.
“Well, all right,” Mandel said as he got up. “What’ll we do? We can’t drag it out.” He nodded in the direction of the cavity. “Or can we?”
Novago shook his head. “No, Lazar, we can’t pull it out.”


There was a long, slurping sound, the stern of the crawler disappeared, and on the black surface of the water a few bubbles swelled up and burst.
“You’re probably right—we can’t pull it out,” said Mandel. “So we’ll have to walk, Pyotr. But it’s no big deal—thirty kilometers. We should get there in five hours or so.”
Novago looked at the black water. A delicate pattern of ice was already forming on it.
Mandel glanced at his watch. “It’s eighteen-twenty now. We should be there by midnight.”
“Midnight,” Novago said dubiously. “Right at midnight.”
There are thirty kilometers left, he thought. Of which we’ll have to cover twenty in the dark. Of course we do have infrared glasses, but it’s still a bum deal. Something like this would have to happen… In the crawler we would’ve arrived before dark. Maybe we should go back to the base and get another crawler? But the base is forty kilometers away, and all the crawlers are out, and we’d get to the settlement tomorrow morning, which would be too late. Damn, what a mess this has turned out to be!
“Never mind, Pyotr,” Mandel said, and slapped himself on the thigh, where under his coat a pistol hung in its holster. “Let’s get a move on.”
“Where are the instruments?” Novago asked.
Mandel looked about. “I threw them off,” he said, “Aha! Here they are.” He took a few steps and picked up a small valise. “Here they are,” he repeated, brushing sand off the valise with the fur sleeve of his coat. “Shall we go?”
“Let’s go,” said Novago.
They crossed the valley, scrambled up a dune, and started down again. The going was easy. Even the one-hundred-and-eighty-pound Novago, together with oxygen tanks, heating system, fur clothing, and lead-soled boots, weighed less than ninety pounds here. Small, lean Mandel walked as if he were out for a stroll, casually swinging the valise. The sand was firm, caked together. Walking on it left almost no footprints.
“I’m really going to get it from Ivanenko about the crawler,” Novago said after a long silence.
“What are you talking about?” objected Mandel. “How could you have known that there was a cavity there? And anyhow, we discovered water.”
“The fact is the water discovered us,” Novago said. “And I’ll catch it for the crawler all the same. You know old Ivanenko—’Thank you for the


water, but I’ll never trust you with a crawler again.’”
Mandel laughed. “Never mind, it’ll blow over. It won’t even be all that hard to tow out the crawler—look, what a beauty!”
On the crest of a nearby dune, with its fearsome triangular head turned toward them, sat a mimicrodon—a seven-foot lizard, brick red in imitation of the color of the sand. Mandel threw a pebble at it, but missed. The lizard crouched there with its legs spread, unmoving, like a piece of stone.
“Proud, beautiful, and imperturbable,” said Mandel.
“Irina says that there are a lot of them around the settlements,” said Novago. “She feeds them.”
By unspoken agreement they increased their pace.
The dunes came to an end. Now they were walking over a level salt flat. Their lead soles slapped resoundingly against the congealed sand. Great patches of salt glittered in the rays of the white setting sun. Around the patches, spheres of cactus bristling with long needles showed yellow. There were a lot of these strange, rootless, leafless, stemless plants on the flat.
“Poor Slavin,” said Mandel. “He’s worrying, no doubt.” “Me too,” Novago muttered.
“Well, you and I are doctors,” Mandel said.
“So we’re doctors. You’re a surgeon and I’m an internist. I’ve performed a delivery exactly once in my life, and that was ten years ago in the best clinic in Archangel, with a full professor standing behind my back.”
“Never mind,” said Mandel. “I’ve done several deliveries. Everything will be O.K.”
A prickly sphere appeared at Mandel’s feet. Mandel kicked it skillfully. The ball described a long, gentle arc in the air, then started rolling, bouncing up and down and breaking off needles.
“It’s a kick, and the ball slowly rolls off,” Mandel said. “It’s something else that’s bothering me: how will the child develop under conditions of reduced gravity?”
“That’s the one thing not bothering me,” Novago said firmly. “I’ve already spoken with Ivanenko. We can set up a centrifuge.”
Mandel thought a moment. “It’s an idea,” he said.
As they were skirting the last salt patch, there was a shrill whistle, and a sphere ten paces from Novago rushed high into the sky and, trailing a


whitish tail of moist air behind it, flew over the doctors and fell into the center of the salt patch.
“Damn!” shouted Novago. Mandel laughed.
“What an abomination!” Novago complained. “Every time I go by a salt patch, one of these damn—”
He ran up to the nearest sphere and kicked it clumsily. The sphere clung with its needles to the bottom of his coat.
“Damn!” Novago snapped again. With great difficulty, as he walked, he tore the sphere first off the coat, then off his gloves.
The sphere fell onto the sand. It was supremely indifferent. So it would lie, entirely motionless, sucking in and compressing the rarified Martian air, until suddenly it let it all out at once with a deafening whistle, and shot like a rocket for thirty or forty feet.
Mandel suddenly stopped, looked at the sun, and brought his watch up before his eyes. “Nineteen thirty-five hours,” he muttered. “Half an hour and the sun will set.”
“What did you say, Lazar?” Novago asked. He stopped too and looked at Mandel.
“The bleating of the kid lures the tiger,” Mandel said. “Don’t talk so loudly when it’s almost sunset.”
Novago looked around. The sun was already very low. Behind, in the valley, the shining salt patches had already winked out. The dunes were dark. The sky in the east had grown as black as India ink.
“Right,” said Novago, looking back. “No sense in talking loud. They say it has very good hearing.”
Mandel blinked his frost-covered eyelashes, bent down, and drew his warm pistol from its holster. He drew the bolt back with a click and shoved the pistol into the top of his right boot. Novago got out his pistol too, and inserted it into the top of his left boot.
“You shoot left-handed?” Mandel asked. “Yes,” Novago answered.
“Good,” said Mandel. “They say it helps.”
They looked at each other, but by now it was impossible to make out anything above the masks and below the fur trim of the hoods.
“Let’s go,” said Mandel.


“Let’s go, Lazar. Only now we should walk single file.” “Okay,” Mandel agreed cheerfully. “Dibs on going first.”
And they went on: Mandel first with the valise in his left hand, and Novago five paces behind him. It’s getting dark really fast, Novago thought. Twenty kilometers left. Well, maybe a little less. Twenty kilometers through the desert in total darkness… and any second it could jump us. From behind that dune, for instance. Or from that one, farther on. Novago shivered. We should have left this morning. But how could we know that there was a cavity on the route? Amazingly bad luck. But still, we should have left this morning. Or even yesterday, with the rover taking the diapers and equipment to the settlement. Or no, Mandel did an operation yesterday… It’s getting darker and darker. No doubt Mark is already fretting. Running to the tower again and again to see whether the long-awaited doctors are coming. But the long-awaited doctors are slogging through the sand in the desert at night. Irina tries to calm him down, but of course she’s worried herself. It’s their first child, and the first child born on Mars, the first Martian. She’s a very healthy and steady woman. A wonderful woman! But in their place I wouldn’t have had a child. Well, it will all work out. But if only we hadn’t been delayed…
Novago looked steadily to the right, at the gray crest of the dunes. Mandel was also looking to the right. Consequently, at first they didn’t notice the Pathfinders. The Pathfinders were also a pair, and they came up from the left.
“Hey there!” shouted the taller of the two.
The other, short, almost square, slung his carbine over his shoulder and waved.
“Whew!” Novago said with relief. “It’s Opanasenko and Morgan, the Canadian. Hey, comrades!” he shouted joyfully.
“Fancy meeting you here!” said the lanky Humphrey Morgan as he came up. “Good evening, doctor,” he said as he shook Mandel’s hand. “Good evening, doctor,” he repeated as he shook Novago’s.
“Hello, comrades,” boomed Opanasenko. “Fancy meeting you here.” Before Novago could answer, Morgan said unexpectedly, “Thank you—
it’s all healed,” and again stretched out his long arm to Mandel. “What?” asked the perplexed Mandel. “I’m glad, whatever it is.” “Oh, no, he’s still in camp,” said Morgan. “But he’s almost well too.”


“Why are you talking so strangely, Humphrey?” inquired Mandel, confused.
Opanasenko grabbed Morgan by the edge of his hood, drew him close, and shouted in his ear, “You’ve got everything wrong, Humphrey! You lose!”
Turning to the doctors, he explained that an hour before the Canadian had accidentally broken the diaphragms in his headphones, and now couldn’t hear, although he maintained that he could get along fine in the Martian atmosphere without the help of acoustic equipment. “He claims that he knows what people will say to him anyway. We made a bet, and he’s lost. Now he has to clean my carbine five times.”
Morgan laughed and said that the girl Galya at the base had nothing to do with anything. Opanasenko waved his hand hopelessly and asked, “You’re headed for the settlement, the biostation, I assume?”
“Yes,” said Novago. “To the Slavins.”
“Say, that’s right,” said Opanasenko. “They’ll really be wanting to see you. But why are you on foot?”
“What a pain in the neck!” said Morgan guiltily. “I can’t hear a blessed thing.”
Opanasenko again drew him over and shouted, “Hold on, Humphrey! I’ll tell you later!”
“Fine,” Morgan said in English. He walked off a few paces, looked around, and unslung his carbine. The Pathfinders had heavy double-barreled semiautomatics with magazines of twenty-five explosive bullets.
“Our crawler sank on us,” Novago said.
“Where?” Opanasenko quickly asked. “In a cavity?” “Right. On the route, about forty kilometers out.”
“A cavity!” Opanasenko said joyously. “Do you hear, Humphrey? Another cavity!”
Humphrey Morgan stood with his back to them and turned his head within his hood, scanning the dark dunes.
“Okay,” said Opanasenko. “We’ll save that for later. So the crawler sank on you and you decided to go on foot? Are you armed?”
Mandel slapped his leg. “I’ve got this,” he said.
“Ri-ight,” said Opanasenko. “We’ll have to go with you. Humphrey! Damn—he can’t hear.”
“Hold it,” said Mandel. “Why all the fuss?”


“It is around here somewhere,” said Opanasenko. “We’ve seen tracks.” Mandel and Novago exchanged glances.
“Of course you know best, Fedor,” Novago said indecisively, “but I had supposed… After all, we are armed.”
“Madmen,” Opanasenko said with conviction. “You people at the base are, forgive me, simpletons. We warn you, we explain to you, and look what happens. At night. Through the desert. With pistols. What’s the matter—wasn’t Khlebnikov enough?”
Mandel shrugged. “I had thought that under the circumstances—” he began, but Morgan broke in, “Quiet!” and Opanasenko instantly unslung his carbine and took a position next to the Canadian.
Novago quietly let out a breath and slipped the pistol from his boot. The sun was almost gone—a narrow yellow-green stripe shone over the
black serrated silhouettes of the dunes. The whole sky had turned black, and there was a vast multitude of stars. Starlight glinted off the barrels of the carbines, and the doctors could see the barrels slowly moving right and left.
“My mistake—sorry,” Humphrey said, and they immediately started forward.
Opanasenko shouted in Morgan’s ear, “Humphrey, they’re going to Irina Slavina at the biostation! They need an escort!”
“Fine. I’ll go,” said Morgan.
“We’re going together!” shouted Opanasenko. “Fine. We’ll go together.”
The doctors were still holding the pistols in their hands. Morgan turned to them, took a good look, and exclaimed, “Hey, no! Put them away.”
“Yes, please,” said Opanasenko. “Don’t even think of shooting. And put on your glasses.”
The Pathfinders were already wearing infrared glasses. Mandel shamefacedly shoved the pistol into the deep pocket of his coat and transferred the valise to his right hand. Novago hesitated a moment, then put his pistol back into the top of his left boot.
“Let’s go,” said Opanasenko. “We won’t take you by the regular route—we’ll go cross-country, through the excavations. It’s faster.”
Now Opanasenko, with the carbine under his arm, was walking in front and to the right of Mandel. Behind and to the right of Novago paced


Morgan. His carbine hung on a long strap over his shoulder. Opanasenko walked quickly, cutting sharply to the west.
Through the infrared glasses the dunes looked black and white, and the sky empty and gray. It was like a drawing in lead pencil. The desert quickly fell behind, and the drawing showed less and less contrast, as if obscured by a cloud of smoke.
“Why are you so happy about our cavity, Fedor?” asked Mandel. “The water?”
“Well, what do you think?” Opanasenko said without turning around. “Water in the first place, and, second, one cavity we found turned out to be lined with flagstones.”
“Yes,” said Mandel. “Of course.”
“You’ll find a whole crawler in our cavity,” Novago muttered darkly. Opanasenko suddenly made a sharp turn, and skirted round a level
sandy area. At its edge stood a pole with a drooping flag. “Quicksand,” Morgan said from behind. “Very dangerous.” Quicksand was real trouble. A month ago, a special detachment of
volunteer scouts had been organized to locate and mark all the quicksand patches in the vicinity of the base.
“But as I recall, Hasegawa proved that the appearance of those stone slabs could also be explained by natural forces,” said Mandel.
“Yes,” said Opanasenko, “that’s just the point.” “Have you found anything lately?” asked Novago.
“No. They discovered oil in the east, and they found some very interesting fossils. But nothing in our line.”
They walked silently for some time. Then Mandel said thoughtfully, “It could be there’s nothing strange in that. Archaeologists on Earth deal with the remains of cultures that are at most hundreds of thousands of years old. But here they’re tens of millions. On the contrary, it would be strange if—”
“Well, we’re not complaining much,” Opanasenko interrupted. “After all, we got such a fat tidbit right off—two artificial satellites. We didn’t even have to dig. But then,” he added after a pause, “looking is just as interesting as finding.”
“Especially since the area you’ve already gone over is so small,” said Mandel.
He stumbled and almost fell. Morgan said in an undertone, “Doctor Novago, Doctor Mandel, I suspect you’re talking all the time. You


shouldn’t do that right now. Ask Fedor if you don’t believe me.” “Humphrey’s right,” Opanasenko said guiltily. “We’d better keep quiet.” They passed over the ridge of dunes and started down into a valley,
where patches of salt glimmered weakly under the stars.
Here we go again, thought Novago. Those cactuses. He had never chanced to see them at night. They radiated a bright, steady infralight. Spots of light were scattered over the whole valley. Very pretty! thought Novago. Maybe they don’t go off at night. That would be a pleasant surprise. My nerves are on edge as it is: Opanasenko said that it is out here somewhere. Itis out here somewhere… Novago tried to imagine what it would have been like for them now without the escort, without these calm men with their heavy, deadly guns at the ready. A belated chill of fear ran over his skin, as if the outside cold had penetrated his clothing and had touched his bare body. Amid the dunes at night with just those little pistols… He wondered whether Mandel knew how to shoot. He must—he had worked for several years at Arctic stations. But all the same… You didn’t even think to get a rifle at the base, idiot! Novago told himself. We’d be in fine shape now without the Pathfinders. Of course, there was no time to think of rifles. And even now I should think about something else—about what will happen when we get to the biostation. That’s more important. Right now that’s the most important thing period, the most important thing of all.
It always attacks from the right, thought Mandel. Everyone says it attacks only from the right. No one knows why. And no one knows why it attacks at all. It’s as though for the past million years it had done nothing except to attack from the right those people who were careless enough to set off from the base on foot at night. You can understand why it’s the ones away from the base. You can imagine why it’s at night. But why people, and why from the right? Could there really have been Martian bipeds who were more vulnerable on the right than on the left? Then where are they? In five years of colonization on Mars we haven’t encountered one animal here bigger than a mimicrodon. At least until it appeared, two months ago. Eight attacks in two months. And no one here has got a good look at it—it attacks only at night. I wonder what it is. Khlebnikov had his right lung ripped out—they had to give him an artificial lung and two ribs. Judging by the wound, it has an unusually complex mouth mechanism. At least eight maxillae with incisor blades sharp as razors. Khlebnikov remembers


only a long shining body with straight hair. It jumped him from behind a dune maybe thirty paces away. Mandel glanced quickly to both sides. There the two of us would be, walking along. I wonder, does Novago know how to shoot? Probably—for a long time he worked with the geologists in the taiga. He had a good idea there about the centrifuge. Seven or eight hours a day of normal weight should be quite enough for the little guy. Though come to think of it, why should it be a boy? What if it’s a girl? All the better—girls can stand variations from the norm better.
They had left the valley and the salt patches behind. To the right stretched long narrow trenches, and pyramidlike piles of sand. In one of the trenches stood an excavator, its bucket drooping despondently.
We should get the excavator out of here, Opanasenko thought. What is it standing around here for? Soon the storm season starts. Maybe I’ll take it myself on the way back. Too bad it’s so slow—less than a kilometer an hour on the dunes. Otherwise it would be just the thing. My legs ache. Morgan and I have covered around fifty kilometers today. They’ll be worried at the camp. Well, we’ll send a radiogram from the biostation. There must really be an uproar at the biostation by now! Poor Slavin. But still, it’s great. There’ll be a kid on Mars! So someday there’ll be people who will say, “I was born on Mars.” If only we’re not too late. Opanasenko started walking faster. And these doctors! Doctors think rules are made for other people. Good thing we met them. It’s clear that at the base they have no idea of what the desert is like at night. It would be a good idea to organize a patrol, or even better, a full-scale hunt. Use every crawler and rover the base has.
Humphrey Morgan, immersed in silence, walked with his hands resting on his carbine. He looked steadily to the right. He thought about how at the camp everyone must be asleep already except for the night watch, who would be worrying about his and Opanasenko’s absence; about how tomorrow they would have to transfer a group to Quadrant E-11; about how he would now have to clean Fedor’s gun five evenings in a row; about how he would have to get his headphones fixed. Then he thought that the doctors were men with courage, and that Irina Slavina also had courage. Then he remembered Galya, the radio operator at the base. Whenever they met, he thought regretfully, she always asked him about Hasegawa. The Japanese was an okay guy, but lately he had been showing up a lot at the base too. Of course, there was no denying that Hasegawa was smart. He


was the first one to come up with the idea that hunting for the “flying leech” (sora-tobu hiru) could have a direct relation to the Pathfinders’ mission, because they might put humans onto the trail of Martian bipeds… Oh, those bipeds! Building two gigantic satellites and then not leaving anything else behind!
Opanasenko stopped suddenly and raised his arm. Everyone halted, and Humphrey Morgan threw up his carbine and turned sharply to the right.
“What’s happening?” Novago asked, trying to speak calmly.
He very much wanted to get out his pistol, but he felt too embarrassed. “It is here,” Opanasenko said softly. He waved to Morgan.
Morgan came running up, and they bent down, examining the sand. Through the firm sand ran a broad shallow rut, as if a bag with something heavy in it had been dragged over the sand. The rut began five paces to the right and ended fifteen paces to the left.
“That’s it,” said Opanasenko. “It has tracked us down and is stalking us.”
He stepped across the rut, and they moved on. Novago noticed that Mandel had again transferred his valise to his left hand, and had stuck the right into his coat pocket. Novago smiled, but he felt uneasy. He had tasted fear.
“Well,” Mandel said in an unnaturally cheerful voice, “since it‘s already tracked us down, let’s start talking.”
“All right,” said Opanasenko. “And when it springs, fall face down.” “What for?” asked Mandel, offended.
“It doesn’t touch anyone who’s lying on the ground,” Opanasenko explained.
“Oh, yes, right.”
“There’s only one minor detail,” muttered Novago. “Knowing when it’ll spring.”
“You’ll notice,” said Opanasenko. “We’ll start firing.”
“I wonder,” said Mandel. “Does it attack mimicrodons? You know, when they stand straight up? On the tail and hind legs… Hey!” he exclaimed. “Maybe it takes us for mimicrodons?”
“There’s no point in tracking and attacking mimicrodons only from the right,” Opanasenko said with some irritation. “You can just walk up and eat them—head first or tail first, as you please.”


Fifteen minutes later they again crossed a rut and after another ten minutes, still another. Mandel grew silent. Now he would not take his right hand out of his pocket.
“It will spring in five minutes or so,” Opanasenko said in a strained voice. “Now it’s to the right of us.”
“I wonder,” Mandel said quietly. “If we walked backward would it still spring from the right?”
“Be quiet, Lazar,” Novago said through his teeth.
It sprang after three minutes. Morgan shot first. Novago’s ears rang. He saw the double flash of the shots; the traces, straight as an arrow, of the two streams of fire; and the white stars of the explosions on the crest of the dune. A second later Opanasenko opened fire. Pow-pow, pow-pow-pow! thundered the carbine shots, and he could hear the bullets tear into the sand with a muffled whump. For an instant it seemed to Novago that he could see a snarling muzzle and bulging eyes, but the stars of explosions and the streams of fire had already moved far to one side, and he realized that he had been mistaken. Something long and gray rushed low over the dunes, crossing the fading threads of gunfire, and only then did Novago throw himself face down on the sand.
Crack! Crack! Crack! Mandel was up on one knee and, holding the pistol in his outstretched hand, was methodically ravaging an area somewhere between Morgan’s and Opanasenko’s lines of fire. Pow-pow-pow! Pow-pow-pow! thundered the carbines. Now the Pathfinders were firing by turns. Novago saw the tall Morgan scramble over the dune on all fours and fall, saw his shoulders tremble with the shots. Opanasenko fired kneeling, and time after time white flashes lit up his huge black glasses and the black muzzle of his oxygen mask.
Then silence returned.
“We beat it off,” said Opanasenko, getting up and brushing sand from his knees. “That’s how it always is—if you open fire in time, it jumps to the side and clears out.”
“I hit it once,” Humphrey Morgan said loudly. They could hear the metallic ring as he pulled out an empty clip.
“You got a good look at it?” asked Opanasenko. “Oh, right, he can’t hear.”
Novago, grunting, got up and looked at Mandel. Mandel had turned up the bottom of his coat and was cramming his pistol into its holster. Novago


began, “You know, Lazar…”
Mandel coughed guiltily. “I think I missed,” he said. “It moves with exceptional speed.”
“I’m very glad you missed,” Novago said crossly. “Think of who you might have hit!”
“But did you see it, Pyotr?” Mandel asked. He rubbed his fur-gloved hands nervously. “Did you get a good look at it?”
“Gray and long like a hungry pike.”
“It has no extremities!” Mandel said excitedly. “I saw quite distinctly that it has no extremities! I don’t think it even has eyes!”
The Pathfinders walked over to the doctors.
“In all this commotion,” said Opanasenko, “it would be very easy to conclude it has none. It’s much harder to tell that it does have them.” He laughed. “Well, all right, comrades. The main thing is that we beat off the attack.”
“I’m going to look for the carcass,” Morgan said unexpectedly. “I hit it once.”
“Oh, no, you’re not,” said Novago quickly.
“No,” said Opanasenko. He drew Morgan over and shouted, “No, Humphrey! No time! We’ll look together tomorrow on the way back!”
Mandel looked at his watch. “Ugh!” he said. “It’s already ten-fifteen. How much farther, Fedor?”
“Ten kilometers, no more. We’ll be there by midnight.”
“Wonderful,” said Mandel. “But where’s my valise?” He turned around. “Ah, here it is.”
“We’ll walk the same way as before,” said Opanasenko. “You people to the left. It could be that it isn’t alone here.”
“There’s nothing to be afraid of now,” Novago muttered. “Lazar’s clip is empty.”
They set out as before. Novago was five paces behind Mandel. In front and to the right was Opanasenko, his carbine under his arm, and behind and to the right walked Morgan with his carbine hanging from his shoulder.
Opanasenko walked quickly. It was impossible to go on this way, he thought. Whether Morgan had killed that one monster or not, the day after tomorrow they would have to go to the base and organize a hunt. Using all the crawlers and rovers, with rifles, dynamite, and rockets. An argument to


use with the unconvinced Ivanenko popped into his head, and he smiled. He would say to Ivanenko, “We have children on Mars now, so it’s time to rid the planet of these monsters.”
What a night! thought Novago. It’s no worse than the times I got lost in the taiga. But the most important part hasn’t even begun yet, and it won’t finish before five in the morning, Tomorrow at five, or, say, six o’clock the little guy will already be yelling over the whole planet. If only Mandel doesn’t let us down. No, Mandel won’t do that. Mark Slavin the proud papa can rest easy. In a few months all of us at the base will be taking the little guy in our arms and inquiring with monotonous regularity, “Well, who is this little fellow here, hey? Is it an itty bitty baby?” Only we’ve got to think out that business about the centrifuge very carefully. We’ll have to get them to send us a good pediatrician from Earth, The little guy has to have a pediatrician. Too bad the next ships won’t arrive for another year.
Novago never doubted that the child would be a little guy, and not a little girl. He liked boy babies. He would carry it in his arms, inquiring from time to time, “Is it an itty bitty baby?”