4. The Conspirators
T 


he four inhabitants of Room 18 were widely renowned within the confines of the Anyudin School, and this was only natural. Such talents as consummate skill in the imitation of the howl of the giant
crayspider of the planet Pandora, the ability to discourse freely upon ten methods of fuel economy in interstellar travel, and the capacity to execute eleven knee-bends in a row on one leg could not go unnoticed, and not one of these talents was foreign to the inhabitants of Room 18.
The history of Room 18 begins at a point in time when the companions were only three in number and still lacked both their own room and their own teacher. Even in those days Genka Komov, better known as the Captain, exercised unlimited authority over Pol Gnedykh and Aleksandr Kostylin. Pol Gnedykh, familiarly known as Polly or Lieber Polly, was famous as an individual of great cleverness of mind, an individual capable of anything. Aleksandr Kostylin was of unquestionable good nature, and covered himself with glory in battles associated with the application not so much of intelligence as of physical force. He could not endure being called Kostyl for short (and understandably so, for “kostyl” means “crutch”), but he willingly answered to the nickname of Lin. Captain Genka, who had mastered to perfection the popular-science book The Road to Space, who knew many various useful things, and who was, to all appearances, easily capable of repairing a photon reflector without so much as changing the spacecraft’s course, indefatigably led Lin and Polly toward reknown. Thus, for example, wide celebrity resulted from the tests of a new type of rocket fuel that were conducted under his direction in the school park. A fountain of dense smoke flew up higher than the tallest trees, while the crash of the explosion could be heard by all who were on the school grounds at the right moment. It was an unforgettable feat, and long afterward Lin still sported a long scar on his back, and went shirtless whenever possible in order that this scar should be exposed to the gaze of envious eyes. This too was the threesome that revived the pastime of ancient African tribes by swinging from trees on long ropes simulating lianas—simulating them inadequately, as experience demonstrated. Moreover, it was they who introduced the practice of welding together the plastic of which clothing is made, and they repeatedly utilized this ability to temper the unbearable


pride of the older comrades who were permitted to go swimming with face masks and even aqualungs. However, while all these feats covered the threesome with glory, they did not bring the desired satisfaction, and so the Captain decided to participate in the Young Cosmonauts’ Club, which held forth the brilliant prospect of riding the acceleration centrifuge and perhaps even of winning one’s way at last to the mysterious cosmonautical simulator.
It was with great amazement that the Captain discovered in the club one Mikhail Sidorov, known for various reasons also as Athos. To the Captain, Athos initially appeared to be an arrogant and empty-headed individual, but the first serious conversation with him demonstrated that in his personal qualities he undoubtedly surpassed one Walter Saronian, who was at that time on reasonably affable terms with the threesome, and who occupied the fourth bunk in the just-assigned Room 18.
The historic conversation proceeded in approximately this wise: “What do you think about nuclear drive?” Genka inquired. “Old hat,” quoth Athos shortly.
“I agree,” the Captain said, and he looked at Athos with interest. “And photon-annihilation drive?”
“So-so,” said Athos, shaking his head sadly.
Genka then put to him the premier question: which system seemed more promising, the gravigen or the gravshield?
“I acknowledge only the D-principle,” Athos declared haughtily. “Hmm,” said Genka. “Okay, let’s go to Eighteen—I’ll introduce you to
the crew.”
“You mean your crummy roommates?” Athos-Sidorov winced, but he went.
A week later, unable to endure intimidation and open violence, and with the teacher’s permission, Walter Saronian fled Room 18; Athos established himself in his place. After that the D-principle and the idea of intergalactic travel reigned in the minds and hearts of Room 18 firmly and to all appearances for good. Thus was formed the crew of the superstarship Galaktion: Genka, captain; Athos-Sidorov, navigator and cyberneticist; Lieber Polly, computerman; Sashka Lin, engineer and hunter. The crew moved forward with bright hopes and extremely specific plans. The master blueprints of the superstarship Galaktion were drawn up; regulations were worked out; and a top-secret sign (a special way of holding the fingers of


the right hand) by which the crew members might recognize one another was put into effect. The threat of imminent invasion hung over the galaxies Andromeda, Messier 33, and others. So went the year.
Lin, engineer and hunter, delivered the first blow. With his characteristic thoughtlessness, he had asked his father (on leave from an orbital weightless casting factory) how old you had to be to be a spaceman. The answer was so horrifying that Room 18 refused to believe him. The resourceful Polly induced his kid brother to ask the same question of one of the teachers. The answer was identical. The conquest of galaxies must be put off for an essentially infinite period—about ten years. A short era of disarray ensued, for the news brought to naught the carefully elaborated Operation Flowering Lilac, according to which the full complement of Room 18 would stow away on an interplanetary tanker bound for Pluto. The Captain had counted on revealing himself a week after takeoff and thus automatically merging his crew with that of the tanker.
The next blow was less unexpected, but much heavier for all of that. During this era of confusion the crew of the Galaktion somehow all at once became conscious of the fact—which they had been taught much earlier—that, strange as it might seem, the most honored professionals in the world were not spacemen, not undersea workers, and not even those mysterious subduers of monsters, the zoopsychologists, but doctors and teachers. In particular, it turned out that the World Council was sixty percent composed of teachers and doctors. That there were never enough teachers, while the world was rolling in spacemen. That without doctors, deep-sea workers would be in real trouble, but not vice versa. These devastating facts, as well as many others of the same ilk, were brought home to the consciousness of the crew in a horrifyingly prosaic fashion: on the most ordinary televised economics lesson; and, most frightful of all, the allegations were not disputed in the least degree by their teacher.
The third and final blow brought on genuine doubts. Engineer Lin was apprehended by the Captain in the act of reading Childhood Catarrhal Diseases, and in response to a sharp attack he insolently declared that in future he planned on bringing some concrete benefit to people, not merely the dubious data resultant from a life spent in outer space. The Captain and the navigator were obliged to bring to bear the most extreme measures of persuasion, under the pressure of which the recreant acknowledged that he would never make a children’s doctor anyhow, while in the capacity of


ship’s engineer or, in a pinch, of hunter, he had a chance of winning himself eternal glory. Lieber Polly sat in the corner and kept silent for the duration of the inquiry, but from that time on he made it a rule, when under the least pressure, to blackmail the crew with venomous but incoherent threats such as, “I’ll go be a laryngologist” or “Ask Teacher who’s right.” Lin, on hearing these challenges, breathed heavily with envy. Doubt was dividing the crew of the Galaktion. Doubt assailed the soul even of the Captain.
Help arrived from the Outside World. A group of scientists who had been working on Venus completed, and proposed for the consideration of the World Council, a practical plan to precipitate out the atmospheric cover of Venus, with the aim of the eventual colonization of the planet. The World Council examined the plan and approved it. Now the turn had come of the wastes of Venus—the great fearsome planet was to be made into a second Earth. The adult world set to work. They built new machines and accumulated energy; the population of Venus skyrocketed. And in Room 18 of the Anyudin School, the captain of the Galaktion, under the curious gaze of his crew, worked feverishly on the plan of Operation October, which promised an unprecedented sweep of ideas, and a way out of the current serious crisis.
The plan was finished three hours after the publication of the World Council’s appeal, and was presented for the crew’s inspection. The October plan was striking in its brevity and in its information density:
1. Within six weeks, master the industrial and technological specifications of standard atmospherogenic assemblies.
2. Upon expiry of the above-mentioned period, early in the morning—so as not to disturb the housefather—run away from school and proceed to the Anyudin rocket station, and in the inevitable confusion attendant upon a landing, sneak into the cargo hold of some vessel on a near-Earth run and hide until touchdown;
3. Then see.
The plan was greeted with exclamations of “Zow-zow-zow!” and approved, with three votes for and one abstention. The abstention was the noble Athos-Sidorov. Gazing at the far horizon, he spoke with unusual scorn of “crummy atmosphere plants” and of “wild goose chases,” and averred that only the feelings of comradeship and mutual assistance prevented him from subjecting the plan to sharp criticism. However, he


was prepared to withhold all objections, and he even undertook to think out certain aspects of their departure, provided than no one should look upon this as consent to the abandonment of the D-principle for the sake of a bunch of cruddy-smelling precipitators. The Captain made no comment but gave the order to set to work. The crew set to work.
In Room 18 of the Anyudin School, a geography lesson was in progress. On the screen of the teaching stereovision, a scorching cloud over Paricutin blazed with lightning, hissing lapilli flashed past, and the red tongue of a lava stream, like an arrowhead, thrust out of the crater. The topic was the science of volcanology, volcanoes in general and unsubdued volcanoes in particular. The tidy domes of the Chipo-Chipo volcanological station showed white through the gray magma that was piling up and that would harden only God knew when. In front of the stereovision sat Lin, his eyes glued to the screen and feverishly biting the nails of his right and left hands by turns. He was running late. He had spent the morning and half the afternoon on the playground, verifying a proposition expressed by his teacher the day before: that the ratio of the maximum height of a jump to the maximum length of a jump is approximately one to four. Lin had high-jumped and broad-jumped until he started seeing spots before his eyes. Then he obliged some little kids to concern themselves with the matter, and he tired them out completely, but the resultant data indicated that the teacher’s proposition was close to the truth. Now Lin was making up for what he had missed, and was watching the lessons the rest of the crew had already learned that morning.
Captain Genka, at his desk by the transparent outside wall of the room, was carefully copying the diagram for a medium-power two-phase oxygen installation. Lieber Polly was lying on his bed (an activity that was not encouraged during the daytime), pretending to read a fat book in a cheerless jacket—Introduction to the Operation of Atmospherogenic Assemblies. Navigator Athos-Sidorov stood by his desk and thought. This was his favorite pastime. Simultaneously he observed with contemptuous interest the instinctive reactions of Lin, who was enthralled by geography.
Beyond the transparent wall, under a kindly sun, the sand showed yellow and the slender pines rustled. The diving tower, with its long springboards, jutted over the lake.
The instructor’s voice began to tell how the volcano Stromboli had been extinguished, and Lin forgot himself completely. Now he was biting his


nails on both hands at the same time, and the noble nerves of Athos could stand no more. “Lin,” he said, “stop that gnawing!”
Without turning around, Lin shrugged in vexation.
“He’s hungry!” declared Pol, coming to life. He sat up on the bed in order to elaborate upon this theme, but here the Captain slowly turned his large-browed head and glared at him.
“What are you looking at me for?” asked Pol. “I’m reading, I’m reading. ‘The output of the AGK-7 is sixteen cubic meters of ozonized oxygen per hour. The stra-ti-fi-ca-tion method permits—’”
“Read to yourself!” Athos advised.
“Well, I don’t think he’s bothering you,” the Captain said in an iron voice.
“You think he isn’t, and I think he is,” said Athos-Sidorov.
Their glances met. Pol watched the development of the incident with enjoyment. He was sick to the nth degree of the Introduction to.
“Have it your way,” said the Captain. “But I’m not figuring on doing everyone’s work myself. And you’re not doing anything, Athos. You’re as much use as a fifth wheel.”
The navigator smiled scornfully and did not deem it necessary to answer. At that moment the screen went out, and Lin turned around with a creak of his chair.
“Guys!” he said. “Zow! Guys! Let’s go there.” “Let’s go!” Pol shouted, and jumped up. “Where is there?” the Captain asked ominously. “To Paricutin! To Mount Pelée! To—”
“Hold it!” yelled the Captain. “You’re a bunch of lousy traitors! I’m sick and tired of messing around with you! I’m going by myself. You can take off for wherever you feel like. Is that clear?”
“Phooey!” said Athos elegantly.
“Phooey yourself, you understand? You approved the plan, you shouted ‘zow-zow,’ but what are you doing now? Well, I’m just plain sick and tired of messing around with you. I’ll make a deal with Natasha or with that idiot Walter, you hear? You can go fly a kite. I’ve had it with you, and that’s final!”
The Captain turned his back and wrathfully resumed copying the blueprint. A heavy silence ensued. Polly quietly lay back down and resumed studying the Introduction to furiously. Athos compressed his lips,


and the ponderous Lin got up and started pacing the room with his hands in his pockets. “Genka,” he said indecisively. “Captain, you-cut-this out. What do you want to—”
“You take off for your Mount Pelée,” the Captain muttered. “For your Paricutin. We’ll manage.”
“Captain… what are you saying? You can’t tell Walter, Genka!” “Just watch me. I’ll tell him all right. He may be an idiot, but he’s no
traitor.”
Lin increased his pace to a run without taking his hands out of his pockets. “What would you go and do that for, Captain? Look, Polly is already grinding.”
“‘Polly, Polly’! Polly is full of hot air. And I’ve just plain had it with Athos. Think of it—navigator of the Galaktion! The blow-hard!”
Lin turned to Athos. “You’re right. Athos, something… it’s not right, you know. We’re all trying.”
Athos studied the forested horizon. “What are you all jabbering for?” he inquired politely. “If I said I’d go, I’ll go. I don’t think I’ve ever lied to anyone yet. And I’ve never let anyone down, either.”
“Cut it out,” Lin said fiercely. “The Captain’s right. You’re just loafing, being a pig.”
Athos turned and narrowed his eyes. “So tell me, o Great Worker,” he said, “why is a Diehard inferior to an AGK-7 under conditions of nitrogen surplus?”
“Huh?” Lin said distractedly, and looked at the Captain. The Captain barely raised his head.
“What are the nine steps in operating an Eisenbaum?” asked Athos. “Who invented oxytane? You don’t know, you grind! Or in what year? You don’t know that either?”
That was Athos—a great man despite his numerous failings. A reverent silence settled over the room, except for Pol Gnedykh’s angry leafing of the pages of the Introduction.
“Who cares who invented what?” Lin muttered uncertainly, and stared helplessly at the Captain.
The Captain got up, went over to Athos, and poked him in the stomach with his fist. “Good man, Athos,” he declared. “I was a fool to think you were loafing.”


“Loafing!” Athos said, and poked the Captain in the side. He had accepted the apology.
“Zow! Guys!” proclaimed the Captain. “Set your course by Athos. Feeders on cycle, spacers! Stand by for Legen accelerations. Watch the reflector. Dust flow to the left! Zow!”
“Zow-zow-zow!” roared the crew of the Galaktion.
The Captain turned to Lin. “Engineer Lin,” he said, “do you have any questions on geography?”
“Nope,” the engineer reported in turn, “What else do we have today?” “Algebra and work,” said Athos.
“Ri-ight! So let’s start with a fight. The first pair’ll be Athos versus Lin. Polly, go sit down. Your legs are tired.”
Athos started getting ready for the fight. “Don’t forget to hide the materials,” he said, “They’re scattered all over—Teacher’ll see them.”
“Okay. We’re leaving tomorrow anyhow.”
Pol sat down on the bed and laid aside his book. “It doesn’t say here who invented oxytane.”
“Albert Jenkins,” the Captain said without having to think. “In seventy-two.”
Teacher Tenin arrived at Room 18, as always, at 4:00 p.m. There was no one in the room, but water was flowing copiously in the shower, and he could hear snorting, slapping, and exultant cries of “zow-zow-zow!” The crew of the Galaktion was washing up after their exertions in the workshops.
The teacher paced the room. Much here was familiar and usual. Lin, as always, had scattered his clothes over the whole room. One of his slippers lay on Athos’s desk, undoubtedly representing a yacht. The mast was made out of a pencil; the sail, of a sock. This, of course, was Pol’s work. In this regard Lin would mutter angrily, “You think that’s pretty smart, huh, Polly?” The transparency system for the walls and ceiling was out of order —Athos had done that. The controls were by the head of his bed, and as he went to sleep, he would play with them. He would lie there pressing keys, and at one moment the room would become quite dark, and in the next the night sky and moon over the park would appear. Usually the controls were broken, if no one had stopped Athos in time. Athos today was doomed to fix the transparency system.


Lin’s desk was chaos. Lin’s desk was always chaos, and there was nothing to be done about it. This was simply one of those cases where the teacher’s contrivances and the entire powerful apparatus of child psychology were helpless.
As a rule, everything new in the room was linked with the Captain. Today there were diagrams on his desk that had not been there before. It was something new, and consequently something that required some thinking. Teacher Tenin very much liked new things. He sat down at the Captain’s desk and began to look over the diagrams.
From the shower room came: “Add a little more cold, Polly!”
“Don’t! It’s cold already! I’m freezing!” “Hold onto him, Lin. It’ll toughen him up.” “Athos, hand me the scraper.”
“Where’s the soap, guys?”
Someone fell onto the floor with a crash. A yelp: “What idiot threw the soap under my feet?”
Laughter, cries of “Zow!”
“Very clever! Boy, will I get you!” “Back! Pull in your manipulators, you!”
The teacher looked the diagrams over and replaced them. The plot thickens, he thought. Now an oxygen concentrator. The boys are really taken up with Venus. He got up and looked under Pol’s pillow. There lay the Introduction to. It had been thoroughly leafed through. The teacher flipped thoughtfully through the pages and put the book back. Even Pol, he thought. Curious.
Then he saw that the boxing gloves that had been lying on Lin’s desk day in and day out, regularly and unvaryingly for the last two years, were missing. Over the Captain’s bed, the photograph of Gorbovsky in a vacuum suit was gone, and Pol’s desktop was empty.
Teacher Tenin understood everything. He realized that they wanted to run away, and he knew where they wanted to run to. He even knew when they wanted to go. The photograph was missing, and therefore it was in the Captain’s knapsack. Therefore the knapsack was already packed. Therefore they were leaving tomorrow morning, early. The Captain always liked to do a thorough job, and not put off until tomorrow what he could do today. (On the other hand, Pol’s knapsack couldn’t be ready yet—Pol


preferred to do everything the day after tomorrow.) So they were going tomorrow, out through the window so as not to disturb the housefather. They had a great dislike of disturbing housefathers. And who did not?
The teacher glanced under a bed. The Captain’s knapsack was made up with enviable neatness. Pol’s lay under his bed. Pol’s favorite shirt—red stripes and no collar—stuck out from the knapsack. In the cabinet reposed a ladder skillfully woven from sheets, undoubtedly Athos’s creation.
So… that meant there was some thinking to be done. Teacher Tenin grew gloomy and cheerful simultaneously.
Pol, wearing only shorts, came tearing out of the shower room, saw the teacher, and turned a cartwheel.
“Not bad, Pol!” the teacher exclaimed. “Only keep your legs straight.” “Zow!” Pol yelped, and cartwheeled the other way. “Teacher, spacemen!
Teacher’s here!”
They always forgot to say hello.
The crew of the Galaktion darted into the room and got stuck in the doorway. Teacher Tenin looked at them and thought… nothing. He loved them very much. He always loved them. All of them. All those he brought up and launched into the wide world. There were many of them, and these were the best of all. Because they were now. They were standing at attention and looking at him just the way he liked. Almost.
“K-T-T-U-S-T-X-D,” signaled the teacher. This meant, “Calling crew of Galaktion. Have good visual contact. Is there dust on course?”
“T-T-Q-U-Z-C,” the crew answered discordantly. They also had good visual contact, and there was almost no dust on the course.
“Suit up!” the teacher commanded, and stared at his chronometer. Without saying anything more, the crew rushed to suit up.
“Where’s my other sock?” Lin yelled, and then he saw the yacht. “You think that’s clever, Polly?” he muttered.
The suiting-up lasted thirty-nine and some tenths seconds,
Lin finishing last. “You pig, Polly,” he grumbled. “Wise guy!”
Then everyone sat down at random, and the teacher said, “Literature, geography, algebra, and work. Right?”
“And a little phys ed too,” added Athos.
“Undoubtedly,” said the teacher. “That’s clear from your swollen nose. And speaking of phys ed, Pol is still bending his legs. Alexandr, you show him how.”


“Okay,” Lin said with satisfaction. “But he’s a little slow, Teacher.” Pol answered quickly, “Better a somewhat sluggish knee / Than a head
full of stupidity.”
“C plus.” The teacher shook his head. “Not too elegant, but the idea is clear. In thirty years maybe you’ll learn to be witty, Pol, but when it happens don’t abuse your power.”
“I’ll try not to,” Pol said modestly.
C plus wasn’t so bad, but Lin sat there red and sulky. By evening he would have thought up a rejoinder.
“Let’s talk about literature,” Teacher Tenin proposed. “Captain Komov, how is your composition feeling today?”
“I wrote about Gorbovsky,” the Captain said, and fished in his desk. “A fine topic!” said the teacher. “I hope you’ve been equal to it.” “He’s not equal to anything,” Athos declared. “He thinks that the
important thing about Gorbovsky is the know-how.” “And what do you think?”
“I think that the main thing about Gorbovsky is the daring, the courage.” “I would suppose you’re wrong, Navigator,” said the teacher. “There are
very many daring people. And among spacemen you won’t find any cowards. The cowards simply die out. But the Assaultmen, especially ones like Gorbovsky, are unique. I ask you to believe me because I know, and you don’t, not yet. But you’ll find out, Navigator. And what did you write?”
“I wrote about Doctor Mboga,” said Athos. “Where did you find out about him?”
“I gave him a book about flying leeches,” Pol explained. “Wonderful, boys! Have you all read the book?”
“Yes,” said Lin. “Who didn’t like it?”
“We all liked it,” Pol said with pride. “I dug it out of the library.”
He of course had forgotten that the teacher had recommended that book to him. He always forgot such details—he very much liked to “discover” books. And he liked everyone to know about this. He liked publicity.
“Good for you, Pol!” said the teacher. “And you, of course, wrote about Doctor Mboga too?”
“I wrote a poem!”
“Oho, Pol! And aren’t you afraid?”


“What is there to be afraid of?” Pol said blithely. “I read it to Athos. The only things he complained about were trivia. And just a little bit.”
The teacher looked doubtfully at Athos. “Hmm. As far as I know Navigator Sidorov, he is rarely distracted by trivia. Well see, we’ll see. And you, Alexandr?”
Lin silently thrust a thick composition book at the teacher. A monstrous smudge spread over the cover. “Zvantsev,” he explained. “The oceanographer.”
“Who is that?” Pol asked jealously.
Lin looked at him with shocked contempt and remained silent. Pol was mortified. It was unbearable. It was awful. He had never so much as heard of Zvantsev the oceanographer.
“Well, great,” the teacher said, and gathered up the composition books. “I’ll read them and think about them. We’ll talk about them tomorrow.”
He immediately regretted saying that. The Captain was so visibly discomfited by the word “tomorrow.” To lie, to dissemble, ran very much against the grain of the boy. There was no need to torture them—he would have to be more careful in his choice of words. After all, they were not planning anything bad. They were not even in any danger—they would get no farther than Anyudin. But they would have to come back, and that would really hurt. The whole school would laugh at them. Kids were sometimes malicious, especially in cases like this, where their comrades imagined that they could do something that others couldn’t. He thought of the great scoffers in Rooms 20 and 72, and about the jolly smallfry who would jump with a whoop upon the captive crew of the Galaktion and tear them limb from limb.
“Speaking of algebra,” he said. (The crew smiled. They very much liked that “speaking of.” It seemed to them so enthrallingly illogical.) “In my day one very quaint instructor gave the lectures on the history of mathematics. He would stand by the board”—the teacher started to demonstrate—”and begin, ‘Even the ancient Greeks knew that (a+b)2 equals a2 plus 2ab plus—’” The teacher looked at his imaginary notes. “‘Plus… uhhh… b2.’”
The crew broke out into laughter. The seasoned spacemen looked at Teacher. They were in raptures. They thought this man was great and simple, like the world.


“But now look at what curious things sometimes happen with (a+b)2,” the teacher said, and sat down. Everyone crowded around him.
There began that without which the crew could no longer live and the teacher would not want to—the adventures of numbers in space and time. A mistake in a coefficient threw a ship off course and plunged it into a black abyss from which there would be no return for the man who had put a plus instead of a minus before the radical; a cumbersome, horrible-looking polynomial broke up into astonishingly simple factors, and Lin yelped in distress, “Where were my eyes? How simple!”; there resounded the strange, solemn-funny stanzas of Cardano, who had described in verse his method of solving cubic equations; the incredibly mysterious story of Fermat’s Last Theorem rose up from the depths of history…
Then the teacher said, “Fine, boys. Now you can see: if you can reduce all of your problems in life to polynomials, they’ll be solved. At least approximately.”
“I wish I could reduce them to polynomials,” burst out Pol, who had suddenly remembered that tomorrow he wouldn’t be here, that he had to leave Teacher, perhaps forever.
“I read you, Comrade Computerman,” the teacher said affectionately. “The most difficult part is putting the question properly. Six centuries of mathematical development will do the rest for you. And sometimes you can get along even without the mathematics.” He was silent for a moment. “Well, boys, shall we have a four-one fight?”
“Zow!” the crew exploded, and dashed out of the room, because for the game four-one you needed room, and soft ground underfoot. Four-one was an exacting game, demanding great intelligence and an excellent knowledge of the ancient holds of the sambo system of combat. The crew worked up a sweat, and Teacher threw off his jacket and collected himself a few scratches. Then they all sat under a pine on the sand and rested.
“On Pandora a scratch like that would call for an emergency alarm,” the teacher informed them, looking at his palm. “They’d put me in isolation in the med section, and would drown me in virophages.”
“But what if a crayspider bit off your hand?” Pol asked with sweet horror.
The teacher looked at him. “A crayspider doesn’t bite like that,” he said. “It couldn’t get a hand into its mouth. Anyway, now Professor Karpenko is


working on an interesting little thing which makes virophages look like kid games. Have you heard about bioblockading?”
“Tell us!” The crew were all ears.
Teacher started to tell them about bioblockading. The crew listened with such fascination that Tenin felt sorry that the world was so enormous, and that he couldn’t tell them right now about everything known and unknown. They listened without stirring, hanging on his every word. And everything was very fine, but he knew that the ladder made from sheets was waiting in the cabinet, and he knew that the Captain—at least the Captain!—knew this too. How to stop them? Tenin thought. How? There were many ways, but none of them were any good, because he had not only to stop them, but to make them understand why they must stop themselves. There was also one good way. One, at least. But for that he would need a night, and a few books on the regeneration of atmospheres, and the complete plan of the Venus project, and two tablets of sporamine in order to last it out. The boys couldn’t leave that night. And not that evening either—the Captain was intelligent and saw a good deal. He saw that Teacher was onto something, and maybe onto everything. So I’ll do without night, thought the teacher. But give me just four or five hours. I’ve got to hold them back, keep them busy, for that long. How?
“Speaking of love of neighbor,” he said—and the crew once more rejoiced in that ‘speaking of’—”what do you call a person who picks on those weaker than himself?”
“A parasite,” Lin said quickly. He could not express himself more strongly.
“The three worst things are a coward, a liar, and a bully,” recited Athos. “Why do you ask, Teacher? We never have been, and we never will be.”
“I know. But in the school it happens… sometimes.” “Who?” Pol jumped up. “Tell us, who?”
The teacher hesitated. Actually, what he planned to do was foolish. To involve the boys in such a matter meant risking a good deal. They were hot-headed and could ruin everything. And Teacher Schein would be justified in saying something not very pleasant regarding Teacher Tenin. But he had to stop them and…
“Walter Saronian,” the teacher said slowly. “But this is hearsay, boys. Everything has to be carefully verified.” He looked at them. Poor Walter!


Knots of tension moved across the Captain’s cheeks. Lin was terrible to behold.
“We’ll check it out,” Pol said, his eyes narrowing meanly. “We’ll be very careful.”
Athos exchanged glances with the Captain. Poor Walter!
“Let’s talk about volcanoes,” proposed the teacher. And he thought, It will be a little hard to talk about volcanoes. But I think I’ve hit on the natural thing to hold them back until dark. Poor Walter! Yes, they’ll verify everything very carefully, because the Captain doesn’t like to make mistakes. Then they’ll go looking for Walter. All that will take a lot of time. It’s hard to find a twelve-year-old after supper in a park that occupies four hundred hectares. They won’t leave until late evening. I’ve won my five hours, and… oh, my poor head! How are you going to cram in four books and a six-hundred-page plan?
And Teacher Tenin started telling them how in eighty-two he had happened to take part in the extinguishing of the volcano Stromboli.
They caught up with Walter Saronian in the park, by the pond. This was in one of the park’s most remote corners, where not every smallfry would venture, and therefore only a few knew about the pond’s existence. It was spring-fed, with dark deep water in which, fins moving, large yellow fish rested between the long green water-lily stems stretching up from the bottom. The local hunters called the fish bliamb, and shot them with homemade underwater rifles.
Walter Saronian was stark naked except for a face mask. In his hands was an air pistol that shot jagged-edged darts, and on his feet were red and blue swim fins. He stood in a haughty pose, drying off, with his mask pushed up on his forehead.
“We’ll get him wet for a start,” whispered Pol.
The Captain nodded. Polly rustled the bushes and gave a quiet, low-pitched cough. Walter did exactly what any of them would have done in his place. He pulled the mask over his face and, wasting no time, dove without the least splash into the water. Slow ripples swept over the dark surface, and the water-lily leaves placidly rose and sunk a few times.
“Pretty well done,” Lin remarked, and all four emerged from the bushes and stood on the bank, looking into the dark water.
“He dives better than I do,” said the objective Pol, “but I wouldn’t want to trade places with him now.”


They sat down on the bank. The waves dispersed, and the water-lily leaves grew still. The low sun shone through the pines. It was a bit close, and quiet.
“Who’s going to do the talking?” inquired Athos. “I am,” Lin eagerly suggested.
“Let me,” said Pol. “You can follow it up.”
The gloomy Captain nodded. He did not like any of this. Night was approaching, and nothing was ready yet. They wouldn’t manage to get away today, that was for sure. Then he remembered Teacher’s kind eyes, and all desire to leave evaporated. Teacher had once told him, “All the worst in a human being begins with a lie.”
“There he is!” Lin said in a low tone. “Swimming.”
They sat in a semicircle by the water and waited. Walter swam beautifully and easily—he no longer had the pistol.
“Hi, Eighteen,” he said as he was climbing out of the water. “You really snuck up on me.” He stopped knee-deep in the water and started to dry himself with his hands.
Pol went first. “Happy sixteenth birthday,” he said warmly.
Walter took off his mask and opened his eyes wide. “What?” he said. “Happy sixteenth birthday, old buddy,” Pol said still more affectionately. “Somehow I don’t quite understand you, Polly.” Walter smiled
uncomfortably. “You always say such clever things,”
“Right,” agreed the objective Pol. “I’m smarter than you. Besides, I read a whole lot more. And so?”
“And so what?”
“You didn’t say thank you,” Athos explained, taking up the lead. “We came to say happy birthday.”
“What is this, guys?” Walter shifted his gaze from one to another, trying to make out what they wanted. His conscience was not clear, and he began to be wary. “What birthday? My birthday was a month ago, and I turned twelve, not sixteen.”
“What?” Polly was very much surprised. “Then I don’t understand what this face mask is doing here.”
“And the fins,” said Athos.
“And the pistol you hid on the other bank,” said Lin, joining in again. “Twelve-year-olds can’t swim underwater by themselves,” the Captain
said angrily.


“Well, well!” Walter swelled up with contempt. “So you’re going to tell my teacher?”
“What a nasty little boy!” exclaimed Pol, turning toward the Captain. The Captain did not deny it. “He means that he would rat if he caught me like that. Eh? So he’s not just a rulebreaker, he’s a—”
“Rules, rules,” muttered Walter. “Haven’t you ever gone hunting under water? Just think, I shot a bunch of bliamb.”
“Yes, we’ve gone hunting,” said Athos. “But always the four of us. Never alone. And we always tell Teacher about it. And he trusts us.”
“You lie to your teacher,” said Pol. “That means you could lie to anyone, Walter. But I like the way you’re trying to make excuses.”
The Captain narrowed his eyes. The good old formula—it cut him to pieces now: “Lie to teacher, lie to anyone.” It was stupid getting involved this way with Walter. Perfectly stupid. We have no right…
Walter was very uncomfortable. He said plaintively, “Let me get dressed, guys. It’s cold. And… it’s none of your business. It’s my business, and my teacher’s. Isn’t that right, Captain?”
The Captain parted his lips. “He’s right, Polly. And he’s already softened up-he’s making up excuses.”
Pol pompously agreed: “Oh, yes, he’s ready. His conscience is flickering. This was a psychological study, Walter. I really like studies in psychology.”
“You and your bunch can clear out!” Walter muttered, and tried to get to his clothes.
“Quiet!” said Athos. “Don’t be in such a hurry. That was the pre-am-ble. And now the amble begins.”
“Let me,” said the mighty Lin, standing up.
“No, no, Lin,” said Pol. “Don’t. It’s vulgar. He won’t understand.” “He’ll understand,” Lin promised. “He’ll understand me all right.” Walter jumped nimbly into the water. “Four against one!” he shouted.
“Conscience? Screw you!”
Pol jumped up and down with rage. “Four against one!” he yelled. “That smallfry Valka was four times weaker than you. No, five times, six times! But you knocked the daylights out of him, you lousy pig! You could’ve found Lin or the Captain if your paws were itching!”
Walter was pale. He had fastened his face mask, but he had not pulled it down, and now he was looking around distractedly, seeking a way out. He


was cold. And he understood.
“Shame on you, Walter!” said the majestic Athos. “I think you’re a coward. Shame on you. Come on out. You can fight us one at a time.”
Walter hesitated, then came out. He knew what it was to fight Room 18, but still he came out and took up a stance. He felt that he had to settle up, and he realized that this was the best way to do it. Athos pulled his shirt over his head unhurriedly.
“Hold it!” yelled Pol. “It’ll leave bruises! And we have something else to do!”
“Let me do it,” requested the mighty Lin. “I’ll be quick.”
“No!” Pol quickly started undressing. “Walter! Do you know what the worst thing in the world is? I’ll remind you—to be a coward, a liar, or a bully. You’re not a coward, thank God, but you’ve forgotten the rest of it. And I want you to remember for a long time. I’m coming in, Walter. Repeat the magic words.”
He gathered up Walter’s clothes, which were lying in the bushes, and jumped into the water.
Walter watched him helplessly, and Athos started bounding exultantly along the shore. “Polly!” he shouted. “Polly, you’re a genius! Walter, how come you’re not saying anything? Say it, say it, gorilla: a liar, a coward, or a bully.”
The Captain gloomily kept track of Polly, who was dog-paddling, making a tremendous noise, and leaving a foamy trail behind him. Yes, Polly was as clever as ever. The opposite shore was overgrown with stinging nettles, and Walter could search there naked for his pants and such. In the dark, for the sun was setting. That’s just what he needs. But who’s going to punish us? We’re no angels ourselves—we’re liars. That’s not much better than being a bully.
Polly came back. Gasping and spitting, he climbed onto the bank and immediately said, “There you are, Walter. Go and get dressed, gorilla. I don’t swim as well as you, and I don’t dive as well, but I wouldn’t like to trade places with you now!”
Walter did not look at him. He silently pulled the mask over his face and got into the warm, steaming water. Before him was the bank with the stinging nettles.
“Remember!” Pol shouted after him. “A coward, a liar, or a bully. A bully, Walter! There’s nothing worse than that. The nettles’ll help out your


bad memory.”
“Right,” said Athos. “Get dressed, Lieber Polly. You’ll catch cold.” They could hear Walter on the opposite shore, hissing with pain through
his teeth as he pushed through the thickets.
When they got back home to Room 18, it was already late evening—after Walter’s chastisement, Lin had proposed that they play Pandora to relax, and Pandora was played with great gusto. Athos, Lin, and the Captain were hunters, and Polly the giant crayspider, while the park was the Pandoran jungle—impenetrable, marshy, and terrifying. The moon, which showed up at just the right time, played EN 9, one of Pandora’s suns. They played until the giant crayspider, leaping from a tree onto Lin the hunter, tore his superdurable tetraconethylene pants down their entire length. Then they had to go home. They did not want to disturb the housefather, and the Captain was about to propose that they go in through the garbage chute (a magnificent idea that flashed like lightning through his gloomy ruminations), but then decided to take advantage of a humble workshop window.
They came into Room 18 noisily, discussing on the run the dazzling prospects opening up in connection with the idea of the garbage chute, and then they saw Teacher sitting at Athos’s desk with a book in his hands.
“I ripped my pants,” Pol said in confusion. Naturally he forgot to say good evening.
“Really!” exclaimed the teacher. “Tetraconethylene?” “Uh-huh.” Pol basked in his glory.
Lin grew green with envy.
“But boys,” said the teacher, “I don’t know how to mend them!” The crew began to yell with triumph. They all knew how. They all
thirsted to demonstrate, to talk and to do the repair.
“Go ahead,” the teacher agreed. “But Navigator Sidorov will fix not the pants, but the transparancy system. Fate is cruel to him.”
“Great galaxies!” said Athos. He could hardly reconcile himself to it. Everyone got busy, including the Captain. For some reason he felt
happy. We won’t leave tomorrow, he thought. We’ll stay a little longer and make plans. The idea of running away no longer seemed so attractive to him, but he could not very well let six weeks of study go for nothing.
“There are remarkable and interesting problems,” Teacher told them, deftly wielding the high-frequency nozzle. “There are problems as great as


the world. But there are also problems that are small but extremely interesting. A few days back I was reading an old, old book—very interesting. One thing it said was that up to that time the problem of ignis fatuus had never been solved—you know, the will-o’-the-wisp, in swamps? It was clear that it was some sort of chemiluminescent substance, but what? Phosphorus trisulphide, for example? I linked up with the Informatoreum, and what do you think? That riddle isn’t solved even today!”
“Why not?”
“The fact is that it’s very hard to catch this ignis fatuus. Like Truth, it flickers in the distance and refuses to be apprehended. Lepelier tried to construct a cybernetic system to hunt it down, but nothing came of it.”
Teacher Tenin’s head ached unbearably. He felt awful. In the past four hours he had read and mastered four books on atmosphere regeneration, and had memorized the Venus plan. He had been forced to resort to the hypnoteacher for this, and after the hypnoteacher it was absolutely essential to lie down and sleep it off. But he couldn’t. Perhaps he should not have overloaded his brain that way, but the teacher did not want to take chances. He had to know ten times more about Venus and about the project than the four of them put together. Otherwise his plan wasn’t worth wasting time on.
Waiting for the moment to turn to the attack, he told them about the search for ignis fatuus, and he saw their childish eyes open wide, and saw the flame of great imagination writhe and flare in them, and as always it felt surprisingly gladdening and good to see this, even though his head was splitting into pieces.
But the boys were already sloshing through a marsh, wearing real, entrancing swamp boots, and around them were night, darkness, fog, and mysterious thickets; and from the depths of the swamp rushed clouds of repulsive exhalations, and it was very dangerous and frightening, but you mustn’t be afraid. In front flickered the bluish tongues of ignis fatuus, whose secret—as was now clear—it was vital to discover, and on the chest of each of the hunters hung a miniaturized control for the trusty agile cybers who were stumbling through the quagmire. And these cybers had to be invented quickly, immediately, or else the last swamps would be drained and everyone would be left looking like fools.


By the time that the pants and the transparency system had been put into shape, no one cared any more about either. Pol was musing on a poem to be called “Will o’ the Wisp,” and while pulling on his pants he uttered the first line to flow out of him: “Mark! In the dark—The swampfire’s glimmering spark!” The Captain and Athos, independently of each other, cogitated upon the design of a swamp cyber suitable for rapid locomotion through marshy regions, and reacting to chemiluminescence. Lin simply sat with his mouth open and thought, Where were my eyes? How about that! He firmly resolved to devote the rest of his life to swamps.
The teacher thought, It’s time. Just so I don’t force them to lie or dissemble. Forward, Tenin! And he began, “Speaking of diagrams, Captain Komov, what is this misshapen thing?” He tapped the diagram of the extractor with his finger. “You distress me, lad. The idea is good, but the execution is highly unsuccessful.”
The Captain flared up and rushed into battle.
At midnight Teacher Tenin came out into the park and stopped by his pterocar. The enormous flat block of the school lay before him. All the windows on the first floor were dark, but above, some lights were still on. There was light in Room 20, where the five noted scoffers must be having a discussion with their teacher Sergei Tomakov, a former doctor. There was light in Room 107, where shadows were moving and it was clear that somebody was hitting somebody else over the head with a pillow, and intended to go on hitting him until the inaudible and invisible stream of infrarays forced even the most restless to go to sleep, which would happen in two minutes. There was light in many of the rooms of the oldest pupils —they were working on problems a little more important than ignis fatuus or how to put back together a torn pair of tetraconethylene pants. And there was light in Room 18.
The teacher got into the pterocar and began to watch the familiar window. His head raged on. He wanted to lie down and close his eyes, and put something cold and heavy on his forehead. Well, my boys, he thought. Have I really stopped you? Oh, how hard it is, what a burden. And I’m not always sure whether I’m right, but in the end I’ve always turned out to be. And how remarkable that is, and how wonderful, and I couldn’t live without it.
The light in Room 18 went out. So he could go to sleep. He felt sleepy, but also sorry. I probably didn’t tell them everything I could have and


should have. No, I did too. I wish it were morning! I feel bored without them, and lonely. Crummy little kids! Teacher Tenin smiled and turned on the engine. He wished it were morning.
In Room 18, courageously fighting off sleep, the Captain was delivering a speech. The crew kept silent.
“Disgraceful! Showed up everyone! You lousy spongers! You miserable collection of slowboats and ignoramuses! What have you been doing for forty days? You, Lin? Shame on you! Not one intelligent answer.”
Athos, playing with the transparency controls, muttered, “Cut the nagging, Captain! You’re one to talk—out of five questions you missed four. And on the fifth—”
“What do you mean, out of five—” “Don’t argue, Captain, I counted.”
If Athos said he had counted, that was it. Good grief, how disgraceful! The Captain screwed his eyes up to the point where he saw spots before his eyes. Operation October had failed. Had collapsed disgracefully. You couldn’t storm Venus with this bunch of ignoramuses. No one had understood anything or learned anything. How much there was to cram about atmospheric assemblies, damn it all! We’re not ready to go anywhere. The great colonists from Room 18—ha!
But Walter had really gotten his. Should they hand out some more? No, that was enough. And enough of all this nonsense in general. It was time to think about ignis fatuus.
… The Captain was sloshing through the swamp, together with Athos and Lin and Polly, who was wearing tattered pants. Amid the hazy exhalations flashed the quick-moving cybers, which they still had to invent.