13. The Mystery of the Hind Leg
I 


“ didn’t like your first book,” said Parncalas. “There is nothing in it to stir the imagination of the serious person.”
They were sitting in lounge chairs under a faded hot awning on the veranda of Cold Creek Post—Jean Parncalas, biotechnician of the Gibson Reserve, and Evgeny Slavin, correspondent for the European Information Center. On the low table between the lounge chairs stood a sweating five-liter siphon bottle. Cold Creek Post was on the top of a hill, and an excellent view of the hot, blue-green savanna of western Australia opened up from the veranda.
“A book should always rouse the imagination,” Parncalas continued. “Otherwise it is not a real book, but merely a rotten textbook. In essence, we could put it thus: the purpose of a book is to arouse the imagination of the reader. True, your first book was intended to fulfill another, no less important function as well, namely to bring to us the viewpoint of a man of your heroic era. I expected a great deal from that book, but alas, it is obvious that in the course of the work you lost that very point of view. You are too impressionable, Evgeny mon ami!”
“It’s simpler than that, Jean,” Evgeny said lazily. “Much simpler, mon ami. I had a great horror of appearing before the human race as a sort of Campanella in reverse. But anyhow, you’re quite correct. It was a mediocre book.”
He leaned over in the lounge chair and filled a tall narrow glass with foaming coconut milk from the siphon bottle. The glass instantly started sweating.
“Yes,” said Parncalas, “you had a great horror of being Campanella in reverse. You were in too much of a hurry to change your psychology, Evgeny. You wanted very much to stop being an alien here. And that was wrong. You should have remained an alien a little longer: you could have seen much that we do not notice. And isn’t that the most important task of any writer—to notice things that others do not see? That is, rousing the imagination and making people think?”
“Perhaps.”
They fell silent. Profound quiet reigned all around, the drowsy quiet of the savanna at noon. Cicadas chirred, vying with one another. A slight


breeze rose up, rustling the grass. Piercing sounds arrived from far off-the cries of emus. Evgeny suddenly sat up and craned his neck. “What’s that?” he asked.
Past the post, darting through the high grass, rushed a strange machine —a long vertical pole, evidently on wheels, with a sparkling revolving disk on the end. The machine looked extremely ridiculous. Bobbing and swinging, it went off toward the south.
Parncalas raised his head and looked. “Ah,” he said. “I forgot to tell you. That’s one of the monsters.”
“What monsters?”
“No one knows,” Parncalas said calmly.
Evgeny jumped up and ran over to the railing. The tall, ridiculous pole was quickly receding, swaying from side to side, and in a minute it had disappeared from view. He turned to Parncalas.
“What do you mean nobody knows?” he asked.
Parncalas drank his coconut milk. “No one knows,” he repeated, wiping his mouth. “It’s a very amusing story—you’ll like it. They first appeared two weeks ago—these poles on one wheel and the crawling disks. You often see them in the savanna between Cold Creek and Rollins, and the day before yesterday one pole got as far as the main street of Gibson. My emus trampled one disk. I saw it—a big scrapheap of bad plastic and the remains of a radio installation on perfectly disgusting-looking ceramic. Like a schoolchild’s model. We got in touch with the people at Gibson, but no one there knew anything. And, it became clear, no one anywhere knows anything.”
Parncalas again raised the glass to his lips.
“You’re discussing this surprisingly calmly, Jean mon ami,” Evgeny said impatiently. Pictures, were forming in his imagination, one more fantastic than the next.
Parncalas smiled. “Sit down, Evgeny. There is no reason to be alarmed. The monsters haven’t hurt anyone—even the emus and kangaroos aren’t afraid of them—and anyhow, you didn’t let me finish: the comrades in Jakoi are already investigating. They—Where are you going?”
Evgeny was hastily making ready. Into his pockets he stuffed dictaphone cartridges, microbook cases, and his tattered notebooks. “Jakoi—that’s the Australian cybernetic center, right?” he said. “They’ve built some interesting computer there, haven’t they?”


“Yes, the CODD computer,” Parncalas said in an offended tone. He was very disappointed that Slavin was leaving so soon. It was pleasant to converse with the correspondent-he very much liked listening.
“Why CODD?”
“Collector of Dispersed Data. A mechanical archaeologist, I’ve heard.” Evgeny stopped. “So these monsters could be from there?”
“I already told you—no one knows,” Parncalas said crossly. “No one knows anything. Not in Jakoi, not in Gibson, not in the whole world… At least stay for supper, Evgeny.”
“No, thank you—I’m in a big hurry. Well, mon cher Jean, thank you for the hospitality. We’ll see each other again.” Evgeny drained his glass in one gulp, nodded cheerfully, and, jumping over the railing, ran down the hill to his pterocar.
The scientific settlement of Jakoi stood in the shade of monstrous black acacias with crowns forty or fifty yards in diameter. A little way off, on the shore of a deep lake with clear, dark blue water, the ruins of some ancient settler’s farm gleamed white. The rectangle of the landing pad stood out clearly between the settlement and the ruins. There were no vehicles on the pad, and no people either.
But the pterocar did not need a landing pad, and Evgeny flew around the acacias looking for a place closer to the settlement. A third of a mile from the settlement he suddenly noticed unusual activity. At first it seemed to him that there was a game of rugby on. A heap of intertwined black and white human bodies rolled and heaved in the grass. Up from the heap echoed heated cries. Wonderful! thought Evgeny. Well played! At that instant the pile broke up, exposing something round, black, and shiny, and one of the players spun like a top off to one side, and fell. He remained lying, contorted, holding his arms to his stomach. Or no, thought Evgeny, it’s no game after all Another three people darted out from under the acacia branches, throwing off their jackets on the run. Evgeny quickly headed for a landing.
As he jumped out of the pterocar, the man who had been twisted up with pain was already sitting up. Holding his stomach as before, he was shouting loudly, “Watch the hind leg! Hey! Watch the hind leg!”
Evgeny ran past him at a trot. Out of the heap of swarming bodies came shouts in Russian and English:
“Get the legs down! Push the legs to the ground!”


“The antennas! Don’t break the antennas!” “Help, guys! It’s digging in!”
“Hold onto it, damn it!”
“Hey, Percy, let go of my head!” “It’s digging in!”
Into Evgeny’s head flashed the thought, They he caught some sort of lizard, but here he caught sight of the hind leg. It was black, shiny, with sharp notches, like the leg of an enormous beetle, and it was clawing its way over the ground, leaving deep furrows behind it. There were also many other legs there-black, brown, and white, and also fidgeting, jerking, and dragging—but all these were ordinary human legs. Spellbound, Evgeny watched the hind leg for several seconds. Time after time it contracted, digging deep into the earth, and then with effort it straightened out again, and each time the shouting crowd moved another five feet or so.
“Ha!” Evgeny shouted in a blood-curdling voice, and, with both hands, he seized the hind leg by a joint and pulled it toward him.
A distinct crunch rang out. The leg tore off with unexpected ease, and Evgeny fell backward.
“Don’t you dare break it!” thundered a wrathful voice. “Get that idiot out of here!”
Evgeny lay there for a while, holding the leg in his embrace, and then he slowly got up.
“A little more! Just a little bit, Joe!” boomed the same voice. “Let go of my arm… Ha! Ha!… Now we’ve got you, my pretty!”
Something gave forth a plaintive ringing sound, and then silence set in. The heap of bodies froze, and only a heavy, intermittent breathing could be heard. Then everyone at once started talking and laughing, getting up, wiping their sweaty faces. A large, motionless black mound remained in the torn-up grass.
Someone said in a disillusioned voice, “The same thing again!” “A tortoise! A septipede!”
“You’ve really got yourself dug in, you bad girl!” “A little more and it would’ve gotten clean away.” “Yes, it gave us a hard time.”
“Where’s the hind leg?”
All glances turned to Evgeny. He said boldly, “The hind leg is here. It tore off. I never thought it would come off so easily.”


They surrounded him, examining him with curiosity. An enormous half-naked fellow, with a shock of tousled red hair on his head, and with a ruddy orange beard, extended a powerful, scratched hand. “Give it here, will you?”
In the other hand this brawny lad carried a fragment of shiny wire. Evgeny happily handed over the leg. “I’m Evgeny Slavin,” he said. “Correspondent for the European Information Center. I flew out because they told me things were interesting here.”
The redhead flexed the black toggle lever of a leg several times, with a thoughtful expression. The leg gave a cheep. “I’m Pavel Rudak, deputy director of the CODD project,” said the lad. “And these”—he poked the lever in the direction of the others—”these are other servants of the Great CODD. You can meet them later, after they’ve taken the tortoise away.”
“Is it worth the bother?” asked a small curly-headed Australian aborigine. “We already have two just like it. Let it sit here.”
“The other two are similar, but not exactly the same, Tappi,” said Rudak. “The hind leg on this one has only one joint.”
“Is that so?” Tappi grabbed the hind leg from Rudak and flexed it several times too. “Yes, you’re right. Too bad it’s broken off.”
“I didn’t know,” said Evgeny.
But no one was listening to him any longer. Everyone had gathered around Tappi, and then they moved in a group to the black mound in the grass, and bent over it. Rudak and Evgeny were left by themselves.
“What’s this about a septipede?” asked Zhenya.
“It’s one of the monsters of the Great CODD,” Rudak answered.
“Ah,” said Evgeny, disappointed. “So they are your monsters after all.” “It’s not so simple, Comrade Slavin, not so simple. I didn’t say they
were our monsters, I said they were the monsters of the Great CODD.” He bent over, felt around in the grass, and picked up several pebbles. “And we go hunting for them. Within the last ten days, all we’ve done is go hunting. Anyway, it must be said that you’ve made a most timely appearance, Comrade Correspondent.” He began very accurately dropping the pebbles on the unhappy tortoise, which was being dragged back to the settlement. The pebbles banged resonantly against its hard armor.
“Paul Rudak!” shouted one of the draggers, “Our burden is heavy! Where are thy strong arms?”


“O thoughtless ones!” exclaimed Rudak. “My strong arms are carrying the hind leg! Tappi, where did you put it?”
“In the grass! Look in the grass, Paul!”
“Let me carry the hind leg,” said Evgeny. “I broke it off, so I should be the one to carry it.”
“Go ahead,” Rudak conceded cheerfully. “I’ll help the others.”
In two bounds he caught up to the “thoughtless ones,” pushed them aside, crawled under the tortoise, grunted, and lifted it on his back. “Catch me if you can!” he thundered in a strained voice, and he started to run at a gallop toward the settlement.
The thoughtless ones rushed after him, whooping. Evgeny grabbed the hind leg, balanced it across the back of his neck like a yoke, and started jogging after them. The leg was serrated, and fairly heavy.
“I’m taking bets for the hind leg,” proclaimed Pavel Rudak from the doorway of the laboratory. “I’ll even bet my own hind leg that our correspondent is tormented by thirst!”
Evgeny, who was sitting by the laboratory wall, sighed quietly, and fanned himself with somebody’s straw hat. His neck burned. “You win,” he moaned.
“Where are the thoughtless servants? How dare they abandon such an honored guest? It’s an affront to the entire European Information Center!”
“Your thoughtless servants are worshiping the hind leg in the building across the way,” answered Evgeny, getting up. “They asked me to wait here for a little while. They said you would be back in a minute. That was just half an hour ago.”
“Disgraceful!” Rudak said with some embarrassment. “Let’s go, Comrade Slavin. I’ll try to make amends for their crimes. I’ll slake your thirst and throw open unto you the hatches of the coolers.”
“Get to it!”
Rudak took him by the arm and brought him at an angle across the street, to a tidy white cottage. It was clean and cool there. Rudak sat him down at the table, placed in front of him a glass, a decanter, and a bucket of ice, and set about playing host. “There’s no delivery line here,” he boomed. “We do the cooking ourselves. In cyberkitchens.”
“A UKM-207?” asked Evgeny. “No, I have an American system.”


Evgeny did not eat. He drank and watched Rudak eating. Rudak cleaned his plate, emptied his jug, and admonished, “You don’t have to look at me that way. That’s yesterday’s supper, today’s breakfast, and today’s dinner.”
Evgeny stealthily emptied the very last out of the jugs and thought, And today’s supper.
“You’re in luck, correspondent,” Rudak continued. “Things really are interesting around here nowadays. They will be even more interesting tomorrow, when Professor Lomba, the director of the CODD project, gets back.”
“I’ve seen Professor Lomba,” said Evgeny.
Rudak stopped eating and quickly asked, “When?”
“Early this morning, in Gibson. He was consulting an acquaintance of mine. Only I didn’t know he was the director of the CODD project.”
Rudak lowered his eyes and once again set to eating. “What did you think of him?” he inquired after a moment.
“How should I put it…?” said Evgeny. “He seemed gloomy more than anything.”
“Mmm, yes,” drawled Rudak. He pushed the plate away. “This evening will be very interesting.” He sighed. “Well, Comrade Slavin, please ask your questions.”
Evgeny hurriedly loaded the dictaphone. “First of all,” he said, “what is the Great CODD?”
“One moment.” Rudak leaned against the back of his armchair and put his hands behind his head. “First I must ask you something. What sort of education have you had?”
“I graduated from the medical institute, the institute of journalism, and the training courses for a spaceflight surgeon.”
“And all that was a century and a half ago,” Rudak elaborated. “And nothing else?”
“I’ve traveled over the whole Planet as a correspondent, an old newshound. My field of scientific interest is comparative linguistics.”
“So,” said Rudak. “And you haven’t heard anything about Komatsuwara’s seven principles?”
“Nothing.”
“Nor, of course, about the algebra of information fields?” “No.”
“Nor about the fundamental theorem of information dissipation?”


Evgeny kept silent. Rudak thought a moment and said, “All right. The court understands everything. We will do all we can. Just listen very carefully, and if I get carried away, grab me by the hind leg.”
This is what Evgeny understood: The Collector of Dispersed Data was intended primarily for the collection of dispersed data. This, to be sure, was clear enough from the name. “Dispersed data” meant traces of all events and phenomena dispersed in space and time. Komatsuwara’s first principle (the only one he could understand) stated that nothing in nature, and even more in society, ever disappeared without a trace—everything left evidence. The overwhelming majority of these traces were to be found in the form of extremely dispersed data. In the last analysis, they had the form of energy of one sort or another, and the collection problem was much complicated by the fact that over millions of years the original forms underwent repeated changes. In other words, the traces were laid one upon another, mixed up, and often were erased by traces of subsequent events and phenomena. It was theoretically possible to find and restore any trace —the trace left by the collision of a quantum of light with a molecule in the hide of a brontosaurus, or the trace of a brontosaurus tooth on a tree fern. The Great CODD had been built for the searching out, the sorting, and the comparing of these traces, and for their transformation into the original forms of data—for instance, into images.
Evgeny picked up only an extremely murky impression of how the Great CODD worked. First he imagined billions upon billions of cybernetic protozoan microinformants, which would wander in clouds throughout the whole world, climbing to the very stars, collecting dispersed traces of the distant past and dragging them to some immense mechanical memory storehouse. Then his imagination sketched for him a web of wires embracing the whole Planet, stretching between gigantic towers which were scattered in hundreds over islands and continents from pole to pole. In short, he didn’t understand a thing, but did not ask again: he decided that sometime he would listen to the dictaphone tape a few times at leisure, with the corresponding books before his eyes, and then he would understand it all. But then, when Rudak began to discuss the results of his work, Evgeny forgot even about the monsters.
“We have managed to get some very interesting pictures and even entire episodes,” Rudak said. “Of course, the overwhelming majority of materials are waste—hundreds and thousands of frames superimposed one upon


another, and the data filter simply breaks down when it attempts to separate them. But still we’ve been able to see something. We have witnessed the flash of a supernova near the sun one hundred million years ago. We have seen the struggles of dinosaurs and episodes of the Battle of Poitiers, the starships of alien visitors to Earth, and something else strange, incomprehensible, to which we so far have nothing corresponding or even analogous.”
“Would it be possible to have a look?” Evgeny asked with a quiver. “Of course. But let’s return to this afternoon’s topic.”
The Great CODD was not only a collector of dispersed data. It was an unusually complicated and highly independent logical-analytical computer. Its levels held, besides billions of memory cells and logic elements, besides every possible information transformer and filter, its own workships, which it controlled itself. It could even build onto itself, creating new elements and models, and developing its own data. This opened up wide possibilities for its use beyond its primary purpose. At present, for example, it was carrying out all calculations for the Australian economic sphere, was being used to solve many problems in general cybernetics, and was performing functions of precise diagnostics, having for this purpose branches in all the major cities of the Planet and on some off-planet bases. Besides all this, the Great CODD undertook “fortune telling.”
The Congolese Auguste Lomba, the present director for the CODD project and one-time student of Komatsuwara, had programmed several problems related to the prediction of the behavior of a living organism. CODD had coped with problems of invertebrate behavior determination fairly easily, and two years before, Lomba had programmed and fed to the machine a problem of extraordinary complexity.
“The problem received the title of ‘Buridan’s sheep.’ The biological code was taken from a young merino sheep, by the Casparo-Karpov method, at a moment when the sheep was between two feeding troughs full of mixed fodder. This code, along with additional data about sheep in general, was fed into CODD. The machine was required: a) to predict which trough the merino would choose, and b) to give the psychophysiological basis for this choice.”
“But what about free will?” Evgeny asked.


“That’s exactly what we want to find out about,” answered Rudak. “Perhaps it just doesn’t exist.” He was silent for a bit. “In the control experiment the sheep chose the right trough. Actually, the problem came down to the question of why. For two years the machine just thought. Then it began building models. Effector machines often solve problems through models. Like the time CODD solved a problem about earthworms—it built such a superb model that we swiped CODD’s idea and started building subterrenes. Amazing devices.”
Rudak fell into thought. Evgeny started fidgeting impatiently in his chair.
“Are you uncomfortable?” inquired Rudak. “Not at all, it’s just that it was quite fascinating.”
“Ah, you found it fascinating too? Now then, how can I put it without breaking the spell?”
He’s covering something up, Evgeny thought. He said, “I must have seen one of those models you’re talking about. A sort of pole with a mirror. Only it could hardly be a model of a sheep. Not even one of Buridan’s.”
“That’s the point,” Rudak said with a sigh. “No one believes that it’s a model of a sheep. Papa Lomba, for instance, wouldn’t believe it. He gathered all the materials on the programming and went off to the center to verify them.” Rudak sighed again. “He’s due back this evening.”
“And what exactly is the problem?” asked Evgeny.
“The problem is that CODD is making poles on wheels and seven-legged beetles. And sometimes those sort of flat disks that don’t have legs, don’t have arms, but do have gyroscopes. And no one can see what that has to do with sheep.”
“And actually,” Evgeny said pensively, “why should a sheep have that many legs?”
Rudak looked at him suspiciously. “Precisely—why?” he said with unnatural enthusiasm.
They looked at each other silently for some time. He’s covering something up. Oh, that beard is a slippery one! Evgeny thought.
Gracefully, and without the help of his arms, Rudak stood up using only one leg. “And now let’s go, Comrade Slavin, and I’ll introduce you to the manager of the film library.”


“One more question,” Evgeny said while reloading the dictaphone. “Where is your Great CODD located?”
“You’re sitting on it. It’s underground, twenty-eight levels, six hectares. The brain, the workshops, the energy generators, everything. And now stand up and let’s go.”
CODD’s film library was at the other end of the settlement, in a low studio. On the roof of the building gleamed the gridded panels of a stereocinerama projector. Immediately beyond the studio began the savanna.
The studio smelled of ozone and sour milk. The manager of the film library sat at a table and studied through a binocular microscope a splendid photo of the hind-leg joint. The librarian was a pretty Tahitian woman of about twenty-five.
“Hello, girl,” Rudak rumbled tenderly.
The librarian tore herself away from the microscope, and a smile blossomed. “Hello, Paul,” she said.
“This is Comrade Slavin, correspondent for the European Center,” said Rudak. “Treat him with respect. Show him frames two-sixty-seven, three-fifteen, and seven-five-one-two.”
“If it wouldn’t be too much trouble, of course,” Evgeny put in gallantly. The librarian looked very much like Sheila. “With pleasure,” said the
librarian. “But is Comrade Slavin mentally prepared?” “Uh… how about it, Comrade Slavin, are you prepared?” “Completely,” Evgeny answered with certainty.
“Then I’ll leave you,” said Rudak. “The monsters await me.” He turned the doorknob and left. They could hear him shouting to the whole settlement, “Akitada! Did the equipment come?” The answer was not audible.
The librarian sighed and said, “Take a folding chair, Comrade Slavin, and let’s go.”
Evgeny went out, and sat down by the studio wall. The librarian efficiently estimated the height of the sun, calculated something, her lips moving and returned to the studio. “Frame two-sixty-seven,” she announced through the open window.
The sunlight disappeared. Evgeny saw a dark-violet night sky with bright, unfamiliar stars. Low strips of clouds stretched over the horizon, and the dark silhouettes of strange trees, something like palms and


something like giant sprouts of cauliflower, slowly appeared. Reflections of the stars trembled in black water. Then, over the clouds, a white patch began to glow. It burned brighter and brighter; weird shadows crept along the black oily surface, and suddenly from beyond the horizon a blinding white, pulsating luminary exploded and rushed in jerks across the sky, extinguishing the stars. A gray mist began rushing between the trunks of the strange trees, irridescent sparks flashed, and then everything disappeared. Once again the sunlit savanna lay in front of Evgeny.
“After that, there’s solid static,” said the librarian. “What was it?” asked Evgeny. He expected something big. “The rising of a supernova. More than a hundred million years ago. It gave rise to the dinosaurs. Frame three-fifteen coming up. This is our pride and joy. Fifty million years later.”
Once again the savanna disappeared. Evgeny saw a gray water-covered plain. Everywhere the pulpy stalks of some sort of vegetation stuck up out of the water. A long gray animal shuffled over the plain, knee-deep in water. Evgeny could not at first make out where the animal’s head was. A wet cylindrical-shaped trunk plastered with green grass tapered evenly at both ends and merged into a long flexible neck and tail. Then Evgeny examined the tiny flat head with its lipless toadlike mouth. There was something of the chicken about the habits of the monster—with every step it ducked its head into the water, and immediately jerked it up again, quickly grinding some sort of greenery in its teeth.
“Diplodocus,” said the librarian. “Twenty-four meters long.” Then Evgeny caught sight of another monster. It was crawling alongside the first one with a snakelike motion, leaving a stripe of muddied water behind it. At one point it barely turned aside from the pillar-shaped feet of the diplodocus, and for a minute Evgeny saw an enormous, pale, tooth-filled mouth. Something’s going to happen, he thought. It was much more interesting than the flash of a supernova. The diplodocus, evidently, had no suspicion of the presence of its toothy companion, or else it simply did not consider it worthy of any attention. But the other beast, maneuvering adroitly under the diplodocus’s legs, approached closer to its head, then jumped out of the water in a jerk, instantly bit off the head, and dived,
Evgeny closed his mouth, his teeth chattering. The picture was unusually bright and distinct. The diplodocus stopped for a second, raised its decapitated neck high and… walked on, just as evenly dipping the


bleeding stump into the turbid water. Only after several paces did its front legs buckle. The hind legs continued walking, and the enormous tail waved unconcernedly from side to side. The neck shot upward to the sky one last time, and then helplessly flopped down into the water. The front part of the body began to collapse on its side, but the hind part continued to move forward. Then the hind legs collapsed too, and instantly dozens of snarling toothy mouths surfaced in the turbid foaming water and darted forward.
“Wow!” said Evgeny, wiping away sweat. “What a sight!”
“A typical scene of predatory dinosaurs hunting a large diplodocus,” the librarian said in a businesslike tone. “They ate each other all the time. Almost all the data which we receive from that epoch is uninterrupted predation. But how did you like the quality of the image, Comrade Slavin?”
“Excellent quality,” said Evgeny. “Except for some reason it’s always blinking.”
Above the tops of the acacias, a pot-bellied six-engined craft thundered by. The librarian ran out of the studio. “The equipment!” she shouted. “Let’s go, Comrade Slavin—that’s the equipment coming in.”
“But please!” yelped Evgeny. “What about the rest? You promised to show me another one!”
“You don’t want to see it, believe me,” the librarian said with conviction. She hurriedly folded up the chair. “I don’t know what got into Paul’s head. Number seven-five-one-two is the slaughter in Constantinople. Fifteenth century. The image quality is excellent, but it’s such an unpleasant scene. Really, Comrade Slavin, you don’t want to see it. Let’s go watch Paul catch the monsters instead.”
The enormous six-rotored helicopter had landed near the place where Evgeny had left his pterocar, and the unloading of equipment was in full swing. Platforms on high wheels, loaded with dull yellow boxes, rolled out of the opened holds. They took the boxes to the foot of one of the acacias, where in the space between two mighty roots the indefatigable Rudak supervised their assembly. His stentorian voice rang out far across the evening savanna.
The film librarian excused herself and ran off somewhere. Evgeny began walking in uncertain circles around Rudak. Curiosity was getting the better of him. The platforms on high wheels rolled up, unloaded, and departed, and the “servants of CODD”-guys and girls-put the yellow boxes


in place and screwed them together, and soon the contours of an enormous angular construction had taken form under the acacia. Rudak rushed off somewhere into its bowels, humming, whistling, and emitting booming shouts. It was noisy and cheerful.
“Strong and Joy, get busy with the intravisors!”
“Dum-didi-dum-didi-dum-dum! Whoever’s there, hand me the contact thingie.”
“The feeders! Where did the damn feeders get to?” “Ooh-la-la! Farther to the right! That’s good.” “Frost, get me out of this mess!”
Someone innocently poked Evgeny in the side, and he was asked to move out of the way. At last the enormous helicopter was unloaded, and it began to roar, stirring up a wind and shreds of grass, and moved off from under the acacia over to the landing pad. Rudak crawled out from under the assembly on hands and knees, got up, brushed his hands, and said, “Well, we can get started. Stations, everyone.” He jumped up on the platform where a small control panel was set up. The platform creaked. “Pray for us, Great CODD,” yelled Rudak.
“Stanislav hasn’t come back yet!” someone shouted.
“That spells trouble!” Rudak said, and climbed down from the platform. “Does Professor Lomba know about all this?” a slim maiden with a
boyish hair cut asked timidly.
“Professor Lomba will find out,” Rudak said grandly. “But just where is Stanislav?”
The ground in the clearing in front of the acacias bulged and cracked. Evgeny jumped a full yard. It seemed to him that the pale, tooth-filled maw of a dinosaur was poking up from the grass.
“At last!” said Rudak. “I had already started worrying-his oxygen ran out a minute ago. Or two minutes, actually.”
A ringed metallic body half a yard thick drew itself out of the ground slowly and clumsily, like a giant earthworm. It kept crawling and crawling, and it was still unclear how many rings might yet be hidden underground, when its front part started turning rapidly, screwed itself off, and fell into the grass. A damp, scarlet face with a wide-gaping mouth stuck out of the black aperture.
“Aha!” Rudak roared. “Took you long enough, Stanislav!”


The face hung over the edge, spat, and declared in a strong voice, “It’s got a whole damn arsenal down there. Entire armadas of crawling disks. Get me out of this thing.”
The ringed worm kept crawling and crawling out of the ground, and rays of the red setting sun played on its metal sides.
“Let’s get going,” Rudak declared, and again climbed onto the platform. He smoothed his beard out on the left and on the right, made faces at the girls who had crowded below, and with a pianist’s gesture lay his hands on the board. The board blazed with indicator lights.
Then everything in the clearing went quiet. Evgeny, picking up his movie camera, noted worriedly that several people had scrambled into an acacia and were sitting on the branches, while the girls crowded more closely toward the platform. Just in case, Evgeny moved closer himself.
“Strong and Joy, get ready!” Rudak thundered. “Ready!” two voices shouted.
“I’ll start warbling on the main frequency. You sing on the flanks. And let’s have a lot of noise.”
Evgeny expected everyone to begin singing and drumming, but it got even quieter. A minute went by.
“Turn up the voltage,” Rudak ordered softly.
Another minute went by. The sun set, and the brighter stars appeared in the sky. Somewhere an emu cried sleepily. A girl standing next to Evgeny sighed heavily. Suddenly there was movement up above, on the acacia branch, and someone’s voice, trembling with excitement, shouted, “There they are! There, in the clearing! You’re looking in the wrong direction!”
Evgeny did not understand where he ought to look, nor did he know who “they” might be, or what one might expect of them. He picked up the movie camera and moved back a little more, crowding the girls toward the platform, and suddenly he saw them. At first he thought it was an illusion, that it was simply spots swimming before his tired eyes. The black starlit savanna began to stir. Indistinct gray shadows rose up on it, unspeaking and ominous; the grass rustled, something squeaked, and he could hear a solid tapping, jingling, crackling. In an instant the quiet was filled with deep indistinct rustlings.
“Light!” bellowed Rudak. “The enemy cometh!”
A joyful howl rang out from the acacia. Dry leaves and twigs rained down. In the same instant a blinding light flashed over the clearing.


Over the savanna marched the army of the Great CODD. Marched to surrender. Evgeny had never seen such a parade of mechanical monsters in his life. Obviously the servants of the Great CODD were seeing them for the first time too. Homeric laughter shook the acacia. The designers, those experienced warriors in the cause of mechanical perfection, were enraged. They toppled from the branch in bunches, and dashed into the clearing.
“No, look. You just look!”
“The seventeenth century! Watt’s linkage!”
“Where’s Robinson? Robinson, were you the one who figured that CODD was smarter than you?”
“Let’s hear it for Robinson! Yea, Robinson!”
“Guys, get a load of these wheels! They won’t even make it all the way to us!”
“Guys! Guys! Look! A steam engine!” “Author! Author!”
Horrible scarecrows moved into the clearing. Lopsided steam-tricycles. Dish-like rattling contrivances that sparked and gave off a burning smell. The familiar tortoises, furiously kicking their famous single hind legs. Spider-shaped mechanisms on extremely long wire legs on which, now and then, they lowered themselves to the ground. In back, mournfully wobbling, came the poles on wheels with the wilted mirrors on the tips. All these dragged themselves onward, limping, pushing, knocking, breaking down on the way, and emitting steam and sparks. Evgeny aimed the movie camera like a zombie.
“I’m not a servant any longer!” yelled someone in the acacia. “Me neither!”
“Look at those hind legs!”
The front ranks of mechanical monsters reached the clearing and stopped. The ones in back piled into them and they all collapsed into a heap, tangling up, their outlandish articulations spread wide. Above, the poles on wheels toppled over with a dull thud, breaking in two. One wheel, its springs ringing, rolled up to the platform, circled around, and fell down at Evgeny’s feet. Then Evgeny looked at Rudak. Rudak was standing on the platform, his hands resting against his sides. His beard was waving.
“There we are, guys,” he said. “I give all this to you for pillage and looting. Now we’ll find out how and why they tick—probably.”
The conquerers threw themselves upon the defeated army.


“You can’t really mean the Great CODD built all this to study the behavior of Buridan’s sheep, can you?” Evgeny asked in horror.
“And why not?” said Rudak. “It could very well be. It probably is.” He winked with unusual slyness. “Anyhow, it’s certainly clear that something is out of kilter here.”
Two strapping designers dragged a small metal beetle by its rear leg. Just opposite the platform the leg broke off, and the designers fell into the grass.
“Monsters,” muttered Rudak.
“I already told you it wasn’t fastened on well,” said Evgeny.
A sharp elderly voice roared through the merry noise: “Just what is going on here?”
Silence set in instantly. “Oh, boy,” Rudak said in a whisper, and climbed down from the platform.
It seemed to Evgeny that Rudak had suddenly shriveled.
An old gray-haired black in a white lab coat approached the platform, limping. Evgeny recognized him-it was Professor Lomba. “Where is my Paul?” he asked in an ominously affectionate voice. “Children, who can tell me where my deputy is?”
Rudak remained silent. Lomba walked straight toward him. Rudak stepped backward, knocked his back against the platform, and stopped.
“So, Paul my dear boy, just what’s going on here?” Lomba asked, looming close.
Rudak answered sheepishly, “We seized control from CODD—and rounded up all the monsters into one pile.”
“The monsters, eh?” Lomba said tersely. “An important problem! Where does the seventh leg come from? An important problem, my children! A very important problem!”
Suddenly he grabbed Rudak by the beard and dragged him through the crowd, which opened in his path, to the middle of the clearing. “Look at him, children!” he snouted ceremoniously. “We are astounded! We rack our brains! We fall into despair! We imagine that CODD has outsmarted us!” With each “we” he pulled Rudak’s beard, as if ringing a bell. Rudak’s head swung submissively.
“What happened, teacher?” a girl asked timidly. From her face it was obvious that she felt very sorry for Rudak.


“What happened, my dear little girl?” Lomba at last let go of Rudak. “Old Lomba goes to the center. He drags the best specialists away from their work. And what does he find out? Oh, the shame! What does he find out, you redheaded villain?” He again grabbed Rudak by the beard, and Evgeny hurriedly aimed his camera. “They’re laughing at old Lomba! Old Lomba has become the laughingstock of every last cyberneticist! They’re already telling jokes about old Lomba!” He let go of the beard and stuck a bony fist in Rudak’s broad chest. “I’ll get you! How many legs does an ordinary Australian merino sheep have? Or perhaps you’ve forgotten?”
Evgeny suddenly noticed that upon these words a few young men started moving back with the clear intention of losing themselves in the crowd.
“Don’t let the programmers get away,” Lomba ordered without turning his head.
There was a noise in the crowd, and the young men were pushed into the center of the circle.
“What do these intellectual pirates do?” inquired Lomba, turning sharply towards them. “They indicate in the program that a sheep has seven legs.”
The crowd began to grow noisy.
“They deprive the sheep of a cerebellum.”
Laughter—approving, as it seemed to Evgeny—spread through the crowd.
“Poor, nice, well-meaning CODD!” Lomba raised his arms to the heavens. “It piles absurdity upon absurdity! Could it suppose that its red-bearded hooligan of a master would give it a problem about a five-sided triangle?”
Rudak muttered miserably, “I won’t do it again. Honest I won’t.”
The crowd, laughing, thrashed the programmers on their resonant backs. Evgeny spent the night at Rudak’s. Rudak bedded him down in the
study, then went back to the acacias, brushing his beard carefully. An enormous orange moon, gridded with the gray squares of D-spaceports, looked into the open window. Evgeny looked at it and laughed happily, going over the events of the day in his mind.
He very much liked days like this, ones that did not go by for nothing-days when he had managed to meet new, good or merry or simply nice people. People like thoughtful Parncalas, or magnificent Rudak, or Lomba


the Thunderer. I’ll have to write about this, he thought. Absolutely! About how intelligent young men, at their own risk, inserted a notoriously nonsensical program into an unusually complicated and capable machine, to see how the machine would react. And how it reacted, carefully trying to create a consistent model of a sheep with seven legs and no cerebellum. And how an army of these monster-models marched over the warm black savanna in order to surrender to a red-bearded intellectual pirate. And how the intellectual pirate got pulled by the beard—not for the first time nor, probably, for the last. Because he’s very interested in problems involving five-sided triangles and square spheres… which are detrimental to the dignity of an honest, well-intentioned computer. It could come out all right—a story about intellectual hooliganism.
Evgeny fell asleep and woke up at dawn. Dishes were quietly crashing in the dining room, and a discussion in low tones was under way:
“Now everything’s going smooth as silk—Papa Lomba has calmed down and gotten interested.”
“As well he should! Such neat data on the theory of machine error!” “But still, guys, CODD turned out to be fairly simple-minded. I
expected more inventiveness.”
Someone suddenly laughed and said, “A seven-legged sheep without the least sign of an organ of balance! Poor CODD!”
“Quiet—you’ll wake the correspondent!”
After a long pause, when Evgeny had already begun to drowse, someone suddenly said with regret, “It’s a shame that it’s all over already. It was interesting! O seven-legged sheep! We’ve seen the last of thy mystery and it’s a crying shame.”