8. Cornucopia
E 


vgeny and Sheila were working. Evgeny was sitting at a table, reading Harding’s Philosophy of Speed. The table was piled high with books, microbook tapes, albums, and files of old newspapers.
On the floor, among scattered microbook cases, sat a portable access board for the Informatoreum. Evgeny read quickly, fidgeting with impatience and making frequent notations on a scratch pad. Sheila was sitting in a deep armchair, with her legs crossed, reading Evgeny’s manuscript. The room was bright and nearly quiet—colored shadows flashed by on the stereovision screen, and the tender strains of an ancient South American melody could barely be heard.
“This is an amazing book,” said Evgeny. “I can’t even slow down. How did he do it?”
“Harding?” Sheila said absently. “Yes, Harding is a great craftsman.” “How does he do it? I don’t understand what his secret is.”
“I don’t know, dear,” Sheila said without taking her eyes off the manuscript. “No one knows. He himself doesn’t know.”
“You get an amazing feel of the rhythm of the thought and the rhythm of the words. Who is he?” Evgeny looked at the preface. “Professor of structural linguistics. Aha. That explains it.”
“That explains nothing,” said Sheila. “I’m a structural linguist too.” Evgeny glanced at her, and then immersed himself again in his reading.
The twilight was thickening outside the open window. Tiny lightning-bug sparks flashed in the dark bushes. Late birds called to one another sleepily.
Sheila gathered up the pages. “Wonderful people!” she said loudly. “Such daring!”
“Really?” Evgeny exclaimed happily, turning toward her.
“Did you people really endure all that?” Sheila looked at Evgeny with eyes wide. “You went through all that and still remained human. You didn’t die of fear. You didn’t go crazy from loneliness. Honestly, Evgeny, sometimes I think you really are a hundred years older than I.”
“Precisely,” said Evgeny.
He got up, crossed the room, and sat down by Sheila’s feet. She ran her fingers through his red hair, and he pressed his cheek to her knee.


“You know what was the most frightening part of all?” he said. “After the second ether bridge. When Sergei lifted me out of the acceleration cradle and I started to go to the control room, and he wouldn’t let me.”
“You didn’t write about that,” said Sheila.
“Falin and Pollack were still in the control room,” said Evgeny. “Dead,” he added after a silence.
Sheila stroked his head silently.
“You know,” he said, “in a certain sense ancestors are always richer than descendants. Richer in dreams. The ancestors dream about things that will be mere routine for the descendants. Oh, Sheila, that was a dream—to get to the stars! We had given everything for that dream. But you flit off to the stars the way we flew home to Mother for summer vacation. You people are poor, poor!”
“Each age has its dream,” said Sheila. “Your dream took man to the stars, while ours is returning him to Earth. But it will be a completely different person.”
“I don’t understand,” said Evgeny.
“We ourselves don’t understand it properly yet. It is a dream, after all. Homo omnipotens. Master of every atom in the universe. Nature has too many laws. We discover them and use them, but still they get in our way. You can’t break a law of nature. You can only obey it. And that’s very boring, when you stop to think about it. But Homo omnipotens will just change the laws he doesn’t like. Just up and change them.”
Evgeny said, “In the old days such people were called magicians. And they chiefly inhabited fairy tales.”
“Homo omnipotens will inhabit the universe. The way you and I do this room.”
“No,” said Evgeny. “That I don’t understand. That is somehow beyond me. Probably I’m a very prosaic thinker. Somebody even told me yesterday that I was boring to talk to. And I didn’t take offense. I really don’t understand everything yet.”
“Who was it that said you were boring?” Sheila asked angrily. “Well, somebody. It doesn’t matter—I really wasn’t up to my usual
form. I was in a great hurry to get home.”
Sheila took him by the ears and looked him straight in the eyes. “The person who said that to you,” she muttered, “is a jackass and an ingrate. You should have looked down your nose at him and said, ‘I gave you the


road to the stars, and my father gave you the road to everything you have today.’”
Evgeny grinned. “Well, people forget that. Ingratitude to ancestors is the ordinary thing. Take my great-grandfather. He died in the siege of Leningrad, and I don’t even remember his name.”
“Well, you should,” said Sheila.
“Sheila, my dear, Sheila, my sweet,” Evgeny said lightly, “the reason descendants are forgetful is that ancestors aren’t touchy. Take me for example—the first person ever born on Mars. Who knows about that?” He took her in his arms and started to kiss her. There was a knock at the door and Evgeny said with annoyance, “Wouldn’t you know it!”
“Come in!” called Sheila.
The door opened a bit, and the voice of their neighbor Yurii the waste-disposal engineer asked, “Am I interrupting something?”
“Come in, Yurii, come on in,” said Sheila.
“Well, if I’m interrupting, I’ve already interrupted,” Yurii said, and came in. “Let’s go into the garden,” he requested.
“What is there new to see in the garden?” asked Evgeny, surprised. “Let’s watch stereovision instead.”
“I have a stereovision set of my own at home,” said Yurii. “Come on, Evgeny, tell Sheila and me something about Louis Pasteur.”
“Which disposal station do you work at?” Evgeny asked in turn. “Disposal station? What’s that?”
“Just a disposal station. They bring all sorts of garbage, slop, and process it, and dump it. Into the sewer.”
“Ah!” the waste-disposal engineer cried happily. “I’ve just remembered. Disposal towers. But there haven’t been any disposal towers on the Planet for a long time, Evgeny!”
“Well, I was born a full century and a half after Pasteur,” said Evgeny. “All right, then tell us about Doctor Morganau.”
“Doctor Morganau, as I understand it, was born a year after the takeoff of the Taimyr,” Evgeny replied tiredly.
“In short, let’s go into the garden,” said Yurii. “Sheila, bring him.” They went out into the garden and sat on a bench under an apple tree. It
was quite dark, and the trees in the garden looked black. Sheila shivered a bit from the chill, and Evgeny dashed back into the house for her jacket.


For some time everyone was silent. Then a large apple broke off a branch and hit the ground with a muffled thunk.
“Apples still fall,” said Evgeny. “But somehow I don’t see any Newtons.”
“Polymaths, you mean?” Sheila asked seriously.
“Yes,” said Evgeny, who had only wanted to make a joke.
“In the first place, today we’re all polymaths,” Yurii said with unexpected warmth. “From your antediluvian perspective, of course. Because there is no biologist who does not know mathematics and physics, and a linguist like Sheila, for example, would be in real trouble without psychophysics and the theory of historical procession. But I know what you mean! There are, you say, no Newtons! Show me, you say, an encyclopedic mind! Everyone works in a narrow field, you say. When it comes down to the wire, Sheila is still only a linguist, and I’m still only a waste-disposal specialist, and Okada is still only an oceanographer. Why not, you say, all of them at once, in one person?”
“Help!” shouted Evgeny. “I didn’t want to upset anybody. I was just joking.”
“Well, do you know, Evgeny, about what we call the ‘narrow problem’? You chew it over all your life and there’s still no end in sight. It’s a tangle of the most unexpected complications. Take that same apple, for instance. Why was it that that apple in particular fell? Why at that particular moment? The mechanics of the contact of the apple with the ground. The process of the transference of momentum. The conditions of the fall. A quantum-mechanical picture of the fall. Finally, how, given the existence of the fall, to get some use out of it?”
“The last part is simple,” Evgeny said soothingly. He bent over, groped on the ground, and picked up the apple. “I’ll eat it.”
“It’s still unclear whether that would be the optimum utilization,” Yurii said irritably.
“Then I’ll eat it,” said Sheila, grabbing the apple away from Evgeny. “And anyhow, about use,” Evgeny said. “You, Yurii, like to talk about
optimum use all the time. Meanwhile, unimaginably complicated litter robots, gardener robots, moth-and-caterpillar-eating robots, and ham-and-cheese-sandwich-making robots are running all over the place. That’s crazy. It’s even worse than killing flies with a sledge hammer, as we said in


my day. It’s building single-occupant studio apartments for ants. It’s sybaritism of the first water.”
“Evgeny!” protested Sheila.
Yurii laughed gaily. “It’s not sybaritism at all,” he said. “Quite the opposite. It’s the liberation of thought, it’s comfort, it’s economy. After all, who wants to pick up trash? And even if you did find some such garbage fancier, he’d still work more slowly and less thoroughly than the cybers. And then these robots are by no means as difficult to produce as you think. It’s true that they were a bit hard to invent. They were difficult to perfect. But as soon as they had reached mass production, they were much less trouble to make than… uh… what did they call shoes in your day? Buskins?”
“Shoes,” Evgeny said briefly.
“And the main thing is that nowadays no one makes single-purpose machines. So you’re quite wrong to distinguish between litter robots and gardener robots in the first place. They’re the same gadget.”
“Well, pardon me,” said Evgeny, “but I’ve seen them. Litter robots have these scoop things, and vacuum cleaners. And gardener robots—”
“It’s just a question of changing their manipulator attachments. And even that isn’t the point. The point is that all these robots, and all sorts of everyday machines and appliances in general, are magnificent ozonizers. They eat garbage, dry twigs and leaves, the grease from dirty dishes, and all that stuff serves them as fuel. You’ve got to understand, Evgeny, these aren’t the crude mechanisms of your time. In essence, they’re quasi-organisms. And in the process of their quasi-life they also ozonize and vitaminize the air, and saturate it with light ions. These are good little soldiers in the enormous, glorious army of waste disposal.”
“I surrender,” said Evgeny.
“Modern waste disposal, Evgeny, isn’t disposal towers. We don’t simply annihilate garbage, and we don’t pile up disgusting dumps on the seabed. We turn garbage into fresh air and sunlight.”
“I surrender, I surrender,” said Evgeny. “Long live waste-disposal specialists! Convert me into sunlight.”
Yurii stretched with pleasure. “It’s nice to meet someone who doesn’t know anything. The best recreation of all is to blab on about things everybody knows.”
“Well, I’m sick of being the man people recreate on,” said Evgeny.


Sheila took his hand, and he fell silent. The thin squeal of a radiophone sounded.
“It’s mine,” Yurii whispered, and then said, “Hello.” “Where are you?” inquired an angry voice.
“In the garden with Slavin and Sheila. I’m sitting and recreating.” “Have you thought of anything?”
“No.”
“What a guy! He’s sitting and recreating! I’m going out of my mind, and he’s recreating! Comrade Slavin, Sheila, throw him out!”
“I’m going, I’m going, you don’t have to shout!” said Yurii, getting up. “Get right to a screen. And listen to this: now I’m completely sure that
the benzene processes are not the answer.”
“What did I tell you!” shouted Yurii, and with much crackling he crawled through the bushes toward his own cottage.
Sheila and Evgeny went back inside. “Shall we go have supper?” Evgeny asked. “I’m not hungry.”
“That’s how it always is! You fill up on apples and then you’re not hungry.”
“Don’t growl at me!” said Sheila. Evgeny started hugging her.
“I’m frozen,” she said plaintively.
“That’s because you’re hungry,” Evgeny declared. “I’m a little frozen too, and I don’t at all feel like going to a restaurant. Is it really impossible to organize life so as to have supper at home?”
“Anything is possible,” said Sheila. “But what’s the point of it? Who eats at home?”
“I eat at home.”
“Evgeny, dear,” said Sheila, “would you like for us to move to the city? There’s the delivery line there, and you could eat at home all you wanted.”
“I don’t want to live in the city,” Evgeny said stubbornly. “I want to live out in the open air.”
Sheila looked at him thoughtfully for some time. “Would you like me to drop by the restaurant right now and bring supper home? It will only take a couple of minutes… Or maybe we could go together? Sit for a while and chat a bit with the guys?”


“I want just the two of us,” said Evgeny. Nonetheless he fetched his jacket and started putting it on. “You know, Sheila, I have an idea,” he said suddenly, and stuck his hand into his pocket. “Just listen to this.”
“What?” asked Sheila.
“An advertisement. Somehow it ended up in my pocket. Listen. ‘The Krasnoyarsk Appliance Factory…’ Well, we can skip that. Here. ‘The Universal Kitchen Machine, Model UKM-207, the Krasnoyarsk, is simple to operate and features a cybernetic brain rated for sixteen interchangeable programs. The UKM-207 includes a device for the trimming, peeling, and washing of raw or semiprepared foods, and an automatic dishwasher. The UKM-207 can prepare simultaneously two different three-course dinners, including first courses of various borschts, bouillons, ok-roshki, and other soups.”
“Evgeny!” Sheila laughed. “That’s a machine for restaurants and dining halls.”
“So?”
Sheila tried to explain. “Imagine a new housing development. Or a temporary settlement, a camp. The delivery line is far away. And there’s no link with Home Delivery—supply for the whole place is centralized. So they need a UKM.”
Evgeny was very disappointed. “So they wouldn’t give us one like that?” he asked, downcast.
“Well, they would, of course, but… but, you see, that’s pure sybaritism.” “Sheila, sweetling! Sheila, dearest! May I order a machine like that? It’s
not going to hurt anybody! And then we wouldn’t be forced to go anywhere in the evenings.”
“Have it your way,” Sheila said briefly. “But we’re still having supper in the restaurant today.”
They left—Evgeny following her docilely.
Early in the morning, Evgeny Slavin was awakened by the snorting of a heavy-duty helicopter. He jumped out of bed and ran to the window. He was just in time to see a dark blue helicopter fusilage with HOME DELIVERY printed on it in large white letters. The helicopter passed over the garden and disappeared behind the treetops, which were sparkling with dew and full of the chatter of birds. A large yellow box stood on the garden path by the porch. An emerald-green gardener robot stomped uncertainly around the box on its L-shaped legs.


“I’ll get you, waste-disposer!” yelled Evgeny, and he started climbing through the window. “Sheila! Sheila dear! It’s come!”
The gardener robot dashed off into the bushes. Evgeny ran up to the box and walked all the way around it without touching it.
“It’s here!” he said, deeply moved. “Great lads, Home Delivery. Krasnoyarsk,” he read off the side of the box. “It’s here.”
Sheila came out onto the porch, wrapping her bathrobe round her. “What a wonderful morning!” she said, yawning sweetly. “What are you making so much noise for? You’ll wake up Yurii.”
Evgeny looked toward the garden, where, behind the trees, he could see the white walls of Yurii’s cottage. Something over there suddenly gave a crash, and they heard indistinct exclamations. “He’s awake already,” said Evgeny. “Give me a hand, Sheila, eh?”
Sheila came down from the porch. “What’s that?” she asked. Near the box lay a large paper bag with a colorful label with pictures of various foods.
“That?” Evgeny stared absently at the colorful label. “That must be the raw ingredients and the semiprepared foods.”
Sheila said with a sigh, “Well, okay. Let’s pick up your toy.”
The box was light, and they dragged it inside without difficulty. Only at this point did Evgeny realize that the cottage did not have a kitchen. What do I do now? he thought.
“Well, what are we going to do with it?” asked Sheila.
By dint of superhuman mental effort Evgeny instantly pounced upon the necessary solution. “Into the bathroom with it,” he said lightly. “Where else?”
They put the box in the bathroom, and Evgeny ran back for the bag. When he returned, Sheila was doing her exercises. Evgeny started singing off key, “Monday roast beef, Tuesday string beans…” and tore the side off the box. The Krasnoyarsk, Model UKM-207, looked very inspiring. Much more inspiring than Evgeny had expected.
“Well?” asked Sheila,
“Now we’ll get down to it,” Evgeny said briskly. “I’ll fix you a meal right off.”
“I’d advise you to call for an instructor.”
“Nonsense. I’ll figure this machine out myself. After all, it said ‘simple to operate.’”


The machine, enclosed in a smooth plastic housing, sparkled proudly amid piles of crumpled paper.
“It’s all very simple,” declared Evgeny. “Here are four buttons. It’s perfectly clear that they correspond to the soup course, the main course, the dessert course, and…”
“… the after-dessert course,” Sheila put in helpfully.
“Exactly, the after-dessert course,” Evgeny affirmed. “Tea, for instance. Or cocoa.”
He squatted down and opened a lid that said “Control System.”
“It’s spaghetti inside,” he muttered, “spaghetti. God help us if it ever breaks down.” He stood up. “Now I know what the fourth button is for—slicing bread.”
“An interesting conclusion,” Sheila said thoughtfully. “Did it occur to you that the four buttons might correspond to the four elements of Empedocles? Earth, air, fire, and water.”
Evgeny smiled reluctantly.
“Or the four arithmetic operations,” Sheila added.
“All right,” Evgeny said, and started unloading the bag. “Talk is talk, but I want goulash. You still don’t know how I cook goulash, Sheila. Here’s the meat, here’s the potatoes… right… parsley… onion… I want goulash! Followed by cybernetic dishwashing! So the grease on the dishes turns into air and sunlight!”
Sheila went into the living room and brought back a chair. Evgeny, holding a piece of meat in one hand and four large potatoes in the other, was standing indecisively in front of the machine. Sheila put the chair beside the washbasin, and sat down comfortably.
Addressing no one in particular, Evgeny said, “I would be much obliged if somebody would tell me where the raw food goes in.”
Sheila said, “I saw a cyberkitchen two years ago. It wasn’t at all like this one, but I remember it had a sort of opening for the raw food on the right.”
“I thought so!” Evgeny shouted happily. “There are two openings here. So the one on the right is for raw food, and the one on the left is for cooked dinners.”
“Evgeny, dear,” said Sheila, “you know, we should really go to a restaurant.”
He did not answer. He put the meat and potatoes into the opening on the right, and set off, cord in hand, for the wall socket. “Turn it on,” he said


from a distance. “How?” said Sheila. “Push the button.” “Which one?”
“The second, dear. I’m making goulash.”
“We should go to a restaurant,” Sheila repeated, getting up reluctantly. The machine responded to the push of the button with a muffled roar. A
white light on its front panel went on, and Sheila, looking into the opening at the right, saw that there was nothing there. “It seems to have taken the meat,” she said with surprise. This was more than she had expected.
“There, you see!” said Evgeny proudly. He stood up and admired his machine, listening to it hum and click. Then the white light went out and a red one came on. The machine stopped humming.
“That’s it, Sheila my sweet,” Evgeny said with a wink. He bent down and got the dishes out of the bag. They were light and shiny. He took two, put them in the opening on the left, then stepped back a step and and folded his arms across his chest. He and Sheila were silent for a minute.
Finally Sheila, shifting her eyes in puzzlement from Evgeny to the machine and back, asked, “Just what exactly are you waiting for?”
Uncertainty appeared in Evgeny’s eyes. If the goulash were ready, he realized, it should have appeared in the opening on the left whether or not there were dishes there. He stuck his head into the opening on the left and saw that the dishes were still empty.
“Where’s the goulash?” he asked distractedly.
Sheila did not know where the goulash was. “There are levers of some sort over here,” she said.
On the upper part of the machine there were indeed levers of some sort. Sheila grabbed them with both hands and pulled toward herself. Out of the machine came a white box, and a strange odor spread through the room.
“What’s inside?” asked Evgeny.
“Look for yourself,” Sheila answered. She stood up, holding the box in her hands and, squinting, examined its contents. “Your UKM has converted the meat into air and sunlight. Maybe the instructions were here?”
Evgeny looked into the box and gave a cry. There lay a packet of some sort of thin sheets—red, speckled with white spots. A stench rose up from them. “What’s this?” he asked with irritation, taking the top sheet with


both hands. It fell apart, and the pieces dropped onto the floor, jangling like tin cans.
“Wonderful goulash,” said Sheila. “Tinkling goulash, yet. A fifth element. I wonder what it tastes like.”
Evgeny, turning beet red, stuck a piece of “goulash” in his mouth. “What a daredevil!” Sheila said enviously. “My hero!”
Evgeny silently put down the bag of groceries. Sheila looked to see where to get rid of the mess, and dumped the contents of the machine’s box onto the pile of packing paper. The odor got stronger.
Evgeny got out a loaf of bread. “Which button did you push?” he asked sternly.
“The second from the top,” Sheila answered timidly, and immediately got the feeling that she had pushed the second from the bottom.
“I’m sure you must have pushed the fourth button,” declared Evgeny. He stuck the loaf decisively into the opening on the right. “That’s the bread-slicing button!”
Sheila started to ask how that could explain the strange metamorphoses undergone by the meat and potatoes, but Evgeny shoved her away from the machine and pushed the fourth button. A sort of clank sounded, and they could hear frequent muffled blows.
“You see,” said Evgeny with a sigh of relief, “it’s cutting the bread. I wish I knew just what was going on inside right now.” He imagined what was going on inside right now, and shuddered. “But for some reason the light hasn’t come on,” he said.
The machine knocked and whinnied. The noise continued a fairly long time, and Evgeny started looking to see what to push to make it stop. But then the machine gave a pleasant-sounding ring, and the red light began blinking, while the machine continued to hum and knock. Evgeny looked at his watch and said, “I’d always thought that slicing bread was easier than cooking goulash.”
“Let’s go to a restaurant,” Sheila said timidly.
Evgeny was silent. After three minutes he walked around the machine and then looked inside. He saw absolutely nothing there which could serve as food for thought. Nothing that could serve as food period, for that matter. He straightened up and met his wife’s eyes. In answer to her inquiring glance he shook his head. “Everything’s fine there.” He risked nothing in making that declaration. There were two buttons yet to be


investigated, and also a quantity of possible permutations and combinations of the four.
“Couldn’t you stop it?” he asked Sheila.
Sheila shrugged, and for some time they continued to stand expectantly, watching the machine’s blinking lights—the red one and the white by turns.
Then Sheila stretched out an arm and touched the uppermost button with her finger. There was a ring, and the machine stopped. The room became quiet.
“Good work!” Evgeny exclaimed in spite of himself.
Through the window they could hear grasshoppers chirring and the wind stirring the bushes.
“Where’s the box?” Evgeny asked apprehensively.
Sheila looked around. The box was on the floor by the dishes. “So?” she asked.
“We didn’t put the box back, and now I don’t know where the sliced bread is.”
Evgeny walked around the machine and looked into both openings—the one on the right and the one on the left. There was no bread. He looked with trepidation into the deep black slit in the machine where the box had been. The machine responded to his threatening glare with a red light. He clenched his teeth, narrowed his eyes, and stuck his arm into the slot.
It was hot inside the machine. He felt some sort of smooth surfaces, obviously not the bread. He withdrew his arm and shrugged. “No bread.”
Sheila bent over and looked under the machine. “There’s some sort of hose down here,” she said.
“Hose?” he asked with horror.
“No, no—it’s not the bread. It doesn’t look in the least like bread. It’s a real hose.” She brought a long corrugated tube with a shiny ring on the end out from under the machine. “You haven’t hooked the UKM up to the water, stupid. Think of it-no water! No wonder the goulash came out like that.”
“Uh, yes,” said Evgeny, casting a glance at the remains of the goulash, “There certainly isn’t much water in it. But still, where’s the bread?”
“What does it matter?” said Sheila gaily. “A mere side issue. Bread isn’t the main problem. Observe as I attach the hose to the faucet.”
“Maybe it’s not worth the bother?” Evgeny said warily.


“Nonsense. Research is research. We’ll make stew. There are vegetables in the bag.”
The machine, roused into action by the top button, worked for about a minute this time. “The stew can’t really drop out into the box too, can it?” Evgeny muttered uncertainly, fingering the levers.
“Let’s give it a try,” said Sheila.
The box was filled to the top with odorless pink goop. “Borscht,” Evgeny said sadly. “Ukrainian style. It’s like—”
“I see for myself. Good heavens, the shame of it! I’m embarrassed even to call for an instructor. Maybe Yurii?…”
“Right,” Evgeny said mournfully. “A waste-disposal specialist is just what we need here. I’ll go call him over.” He was desperately hungry.
“Come in!” shouted Yurii’s voice.
Evgeny went in and stopped in the doorway, stricken.
“I hope you haven’t brought your charming spouse along,” said Yurii. “I’m not dressed.”
He was wearing a clumsily ironed shirt. His tanned bare legs stuck out from underneath it. Strange machine parts and pieces of paper were strewn over the floor throughout the room. He was sitting on the floor, holding in his hands a box with rays of light streaming from little openings.
“What’s that?” asked Evgeny.
“A tester,” Yurii answered tiredly. “No, no, all this!”
Yurii looked around. “That’s a UWM-16. Universal Washing Machine with semicybernetic control. Washes, irons, and sews on buttons. Watch it! Don’t step on anything.”
Evgeny looked under his feet and saw a pile of black rags lying in a puddle of water. Steam was rising from the rags.
“Those are my pants,” Yurii explained.
“So your machine isn’t working either?” asked Evgeny. The hope of receiving advice, and dinner, evaporated.
“It’s in perfect shape,” Yurii said angrily. “I dismantled it down to the last screw, and figured out its principle of operation. Here’s the output mechanism. Here’s the analyser. I didn’t dismantle that—it’s working as it is. Here’s the transporting mechanism and the heat-regulating system. Granted I haven’t found the sewing device yet, but the machine is in


perfect shape. I think the trouble is that for some reason it has twelve programming keys, while in the brochure it said four.”
“Four?” asked Evgeny.
“Four,” answered Yurii, absently scratching his knee. “But why did you say ‘your machine’? Do you have a washing machine too? I just got mine an hour ago. Home Delivery.”
“Four!” Evgeny repeated in delight. “Four, not twelve… Tell me, Yurii, have you tried putting meat into it?”