14. Candles Before the Control Board
A 


t midnight it started to rain. The highway got slick and Zvantsev reduced speed. It was unusually dark and bleak—the glow of city lights had disappeared behind the black hills—and it seemed to
Zvantsev as if his car were going through a desert. The white beam of the headlights danced ahead on the rough wet concrete. There were no cars going the other way. Zvantsev had seen the last one before he turned onto the highway leading to the Institute. Half a mile before the gate was a housing development, and Zvantsev saw that despite the late hour almost all the windows were lit up, and the veranda of a large cafe by the road was full of people. It seemed to Zvantsev that they were keeping quiet, waiting for something.
Akiko looked back. “They’re all watching us,” she said. Zvantsev did not answer.
“They must think we’re doctors.” “Probably,” said Zvantsev.
It was the last village with lights. Beyond the gate began damp darkness. “There should be an appliance factory somewhere around here,” said
Zvantsev. “Did you notice it?” “No, sir.”
“You never notice anything.”
“You’re the one driving, sir. If I were driving I would notice everything.”
“Somehow I doubt that,” said Zvantsev. He braked sharply, and the car skidded. It slipped sideways across the screeching concrete. The headlights illuminated a signpost. The sign had no light, and it looked faded: NOVOSIBIRSK INSTITUTE OF BIOLOGICAL CODING—21 KM. A warped plywood board with a clumsily written notice was nailed under the sign: ATTENTION! TURN ON ALL NEUTRALIZERS. REDUCE SPEED. ROADBLOCK AHEAD. And the same thing in French and English. The letters were large, with black blotches. “Uh-huh,” muttered Zvantsev. He bent under the wheel and turned on the neutralizers.
“What kind of roadblock?” asked Akiko.
“I don’t know what kind,” said Zvantsev, “but it’s clear you should have stayed in town.”


“No,” said Akiko.
When the car had started moving again, she asked cautiously, “Do you think they’ll let us through, sir?”
“I don’t think they’ll let you through.” “Then I’ll wait,” Akiko said calmly.
The car glided slowly and noiselessly over the highway. Zvantsev, still looking forward, said, “Still, I wish they would let you through.”
“So do I,” said Akiko. “I want very much to say good-by to him…” Zvantsev silently watched the road.
“We’ve rarely seen each other lately,” Akiko continued. “But I love him very much. I don’t know anyone else like him. I never loved even my father the way I love him. I even cried…”
Yes, she cried, thought Zvantsev. The ocean was blue-black, the sky was dark blue, and his face was blue and swollen when Kondratev and I led him carefully toward the convertiplane. The scorching coral sand crunched underfoot, and it was hard for him to walk, and he almost hung in our arms, but he wouldn’t let us carry him. His eyes were closed, and he mumbled guiltily, “Gokuro-sama, gokuro-sama—” The oceanographers went behind and to one side, but Akiko walked right next to Sergei, holding out the shabby white cap famous over the whole ocean with both her hands, like a tray, and crying bitterly. That was the first and most serious attack of the disease—six years ago on a nameless islet fifteen nautical miles to the west of Octopus Reef.
“… I’ve known him for twenty years. Since I was a child. I very much wish to say good-by to him.”
The gridded arch of a microweather installation swam up out of the damp darkness and passed overhead. There were no lights at the weather station. The installation’s not working, Zvantsev thought. That’s why we’re getting this crap from the sky. He looked sidelong at Akiko. She was sitting with her legs drawn up on the seat, looking straight ahead. Lights from the dashboard dials fell on her face.
“What’s going on here?” said Zvantsev. “Some sort of quiet zone?” “I don’t know,” said Akiko. She turned, trying to make herself more
comfortable, poked her knee against Zvantsev’s side, and suddenly froze, staring at him with eyes shimmering in the semi-darkness.
“What’s the matter?” he asked. “Perhaps he is already…”


“Nonsense,” said Zvantsev.
“And everyone has gone to the Institute…” “Nonsense,” Zvantsev said decisively. “Rubbish.”
An uneven red light burned far ahead. It was weak and flickering, like a small star on a turbulent night. Just in case, Zvantsev again reduced speed. Now the car was moving very slowly, and they could hear the patter of rain. Three figures in shiny wet rain capes appeared in the headlight beam, standing in the middle of the highway. In front of them, a substantial-sized log lay across the road. The one standing on the right was holding a large smoking torch overhead, and slowly waving it from side to side. Zvantsev moved the car up a little closer and stopped. So here’s the roadblock, he thought. The man with the torch shouted something indistinct into the patter of the rain, and all three started quickly toward the car, moving clumsily in their enormous wet rain capes. The man with the torch once again shouted something, contorting his mouth angrily. Zvantsev turned off the headlights and opened the door. “The engine!” shouted the man. He came up close. “Turn off the engine, for God’s sake!”
Zvantsev turned off the engine and got out onto the highway, into the drizzle. “I’m Zvantsev, the oceanographer,” he said. “I’m on my way to see Academician Okada.”
“Put out the dome light in the car!” said the man. “And quickly, please!” Zvantsev turned, but the light in the passenger compartment was already
out.
“Who’s that with you?” the man with the torch asked.
“My colleague,” Zvantsev answered shortly. “Oceanographer Kondrateva.”
The three figures in the rain capes remained silent. “Can we go on?”
“I’m Mikhailov, technician,” said the man with the torch. “I was sent to meet you and tell you that it’s impossible to see Academician Okada.”
“I’ll speak about that with Professor Casparo,” said Zvantsev. “Take me to him.”
“Professor Casparo is very busy. We would not like him to be disturbed.”
Zvantsev would have liked to ask who “we” were, but he restrained himself, because Mikhailov had the vague monotonous voice of a man who is dead tired.


“I have news of the highest importance for the Academician,” said Zvantsev. “Take me to Casparo.”
The three remained silent, and the uneven red light played over their faces. The faces were wet, pinched.
“Well?” Zvantsev said impatiently. Suddenly he realized that Mikhailov was asleep. The hand with the torch trembled and dipped lower and lower. Mikhailov’s eyes were closed.
“Tolya,” one of his companions said quietly, poking him in the shoulder. Mikhailov came to himself, waved the torch, and fixed his swollen eyes
on Zvantsev. “What?” he asked hoarsely. “Ah, you want to see the Academician. It’s impossible to see Academician Okada. The whole area of the Institute is closed. Please, go away.”
“I have news of the highest importance for Academician Okada,” Zvantsev repeated patiently. “I am Oceanographer Zvantsev, and in the car is Oceanographer Kondrateva. We’re bringing important news.”
“I’m Technician Mikhailov,” the man with the torch said again. “It’s impossible to see Okada now. He will be dead in the next six hours or so, and we may not make it.” His lips were barely moving. “Professor Casparo is very busy and has requested not to be disturbed. Please, go away.”
He suddenly turned to his companions. “Give me another two tablets,” he said despairingly.
Zvantsev stood in the rain and thought about what else he could say to this man who was falling asleep on his feet. Mikhailov stood sideways to him and threw back his head and swallowed something. Then Mikhailov said, “Thanks, guys, I’m dead on my feet. It’s still raining here, and cool, and back there we’re just falling off our feet, one after another, getting up again, and collapsing again… Then we carry them off…” He was still speaking indistinctly.
“Oh, well. It’s the last night.”
“Yes, and the ninth one,” said Mikhailov. “The tenth.”
“Is it really the tenth? My head is like mush.” Mikhailov turned to Zvantsev. “Excuse me, comrade…”
“Zvantsev, oceanographer,” Zvantsev said for the third time. “Comrade Mikhailov, you simply have to let us through. We’ve just flown in from the Philippines. We’re bringing information to the Academician, very important scientific information. He has been waiting for it all his life. You


see, I’ve known him thirty years. I can tell better than you whether he should die without hearing this. It’s extremely important information.”
Akiko got out of the car and stood beside him. The technician was silent, shivering with cold underneath his rain cape. “Well, all right,” he said at last. “Only there are too many of you.” That was how he said it: “too many.”
“Only one of you should go.” “Very well,” said Zvantsev.
“But if you ask me it won’t do any good,” Mikhailov said.
“Casparo won’t let you see the Academician. The Academician is in isolation. You could ruin the whole experiment if you break the isolation, and then…”
“1 will speak with Casparo myself,” Zvantsev interrupted. “Take me to him.”
“All right,” said the technician. “Let’s go.”
Zvantsev looked back at Akiko. There were many large and small drops on her face. She said, “Go on, sir.” Then she turned to the men in the rain capes. “Somebody give him a rain cape, and get in the car yourself. Park the car crosswise across the road.”
They gave Zvantsev a rain cape. Akiko wanted to go back to the car and turn it around, but Mikhailov said that the engine should not be turned on. He got up and lit the way with his awkward smoking torch, while they shoved the car around and positioned it across the road manually. Then the full complement of the roadblock crew got into the passenger compartment. Zvantsev peered inside. Akiko had sat down again, curling up, in the front seat. Mikhailov’s companions were already asleep, leaning their heads on one another.
“Tell him…” said Akiko. “Yes, of course.”
“Tell him we’ll be waiting.”
“Right,” said Zvantsev. “I’ll tell him.” “Well, go.”
“Sayonara, Aki-tyan.” “Go on…”
Zvantsev carefully closed the door and went up to the technician. “Let’s go.”


“Let’s go,” the technician responded in a quite new, very brisk voice. “We’ll walk fast—we’ve got to cover seven kilometers.”
They started off, taking broad steps over the rough wet concrete. “What are you doing out there?” asked the technician.
“‘Out there’?”
“Well, out there… in the outside world. We haven’t heard anything in two weeks. What’s going on in the Council? How is the Big Shaft project coming?”
“There are a lot of volunteers,” said Zvantsev. “But not enough annihilators. Not enough cooling units. The Council is planning on transferring thirty percent of energy to the project. Practically all the specialists on deep penetration have been called back from Venus.”
“A good move,” said the technician. “There’s nothing for them to do on Venus now. Who did they choose to head up the project?”
“I haven’t the vaguest idea,” Zvantsev said angrily. “Not Sterner?”
“I don’t know.”
They were silent for a bit.
“Real junk, right?” said the technician. “What?”
“These torches are real junk, right? What crap! Can you smell how it stinks?”
Zvantsev sniffed and stepped two paces to the side. “Yes,” he said. The torch reeked of oil. “Why are you using them?” he asked.
“It was Casparo’s order. No electrical appliances, no electric lights. We’re trying to keep interference down to a minimum. Do you smoke, by the way?”
“Yes.”
The technician stopped. “Give me your lighter,” he said. “And your radiophone. You do have a radiophone?”
“I do.”
“Give them to me.” Mikhailov took the lighter and radiophone, removed their batteries, and threw these into a ditch. “I’m sorry, but it’s necessary. For twenty kilometers around not one electrical appliance is turned on.”
“So that’s what’s going on,” said Zvantsev.
“Yes. We’ve plundered all the apiaries around Novosibirsk to make beeswax candles. Have you heard about those?”


“No.”
They again started walking quickly in the steady rain.
“The candles are junk too, but at least they’re better than torches. Or woodsplints—have you heard about those?”
“No,” said Zvantsev.
“There’s an old song, ‘Light My Fire.’ I had always thought the metaphor involved some sort of generator.”
“Now I understand why it’s raining,” Zvantsev said after a silence. “That is, I understand why the microweather installations are shut down.”
“No, no,” said the technician. “The microweather stations are one thing, but the rain is being driven to us specially from Wind Ridge. There’s a continental installation there.”
“What’s it for?” Zvantsev asked.
“To shield us from direct solar illumination.” “What about discharges from the clouds?”
“The clouds arrive electrically neutral—they are discharged along the way. And in general, the experiment has turned out to be on a much grander scale than we had thought at first. We’ve got all the biocoding specialists gathered here. From the whole world. Five hundred people. And that’s still too few. And the whole Northern Ural region is working for us.”
“And so far everything’s going all right?” Zvantsev asked. The technician was silent.
“Can you hear me?” Zvantsev asked.
“I can’t give you an answer,” Mikhailov said reluctantly. “We hope everything is going as it should. The principle has been verified, but this is the first experiment with a human being. One hundred twenty trillion megabits of information, and a mistake in any one bit can distort a good deal.”
Mikhailov fell silent, and they walked a long time without saying a word. Zvantsev did not notice at first that they were walking through a village. The village was empty. The dull walls of the cottages shone weakly, and the windows were dark. Here and there, open garage doors showed black behind lacy wet hedges.
The technician forgot about Zvantsev. Another six hours and it will be all over, he thought. I’ll go home and collapse into bed. The Great Experiment will be over. The great Okada will die and become immortal. Oh, how beautiful! But until the time has come, no one will even know


whether the experiment was a success. Not even Casparo himself. The great Casparo, the great Okada, the Great Experiment! The Great Encoding. Mikhailov shook his head—the familiar heaviness was once again crawling onto his eyes, clouding his brain. No, you’ve got to think. Valerio Casparo said that we’ve got to start thinking now. Everyone should think, even the technicians, even though we don’t know enough. But Casparo said that everyone must think Valerio Casparo—or Valerii Konstantinovich Kasparo, in the vulgar tongue. It ‘s funny, how he works and works, and suddenly he says to the whole hall, “Enough. Let’s sit for a while, staring stupidly ahead!” He picked up that phrase from something he read. If you ask him about something during that time, he says, “Young man, you see to it yourself. Don’t bother me while I’m sitting here, staring stupidly ahead. I’m thinking about the wrong thing again. So: first off we’ll state the problem. Given: that a complex of physiological neuronic states (to put it more simply, a living brain) is hard-coded according to the third Casparo-Kaprov system onto a crystalline quasibiomass. With the proper isolation, a hard code on a crystalline quasibiomass will be preserved with a normal noise level for quite a long time—the relaxation time for the code is on the order of twelve thousand years. Time enough. Required: to find a means of transferring the biomass code onto a living brain, that is to say onto a complex of physiological functioning neurons in the null state. Of course, for this we also need a living brain in the null state, but for such a business people always have been found and will be found—me, for example… But they still wouldn’t permit it. Casparo won’t even hear of a living brain. There’s an eccentric for you. So now you sit and wait for the guys in Leningrad to build an artificial one. So. In short, we have encoded Okada’s brain onto a crystalline biomass. We have the number for Okada’s brain, the number for Okada’s thoughts, the number for his ego. And now we have to find a means of transferring the numbers to another brain. Let it be an artificial one. Then Okada will be reborn. The enciphered ego Okada will once again become a real, acting ego. Question: how is this to be done? How?… It would be nice to figure it out right now and make the old man happy. Casparo has been thinking about this for a quarter of a century. Run up to him sopping wet like Archimedes, and shout, Eureka!” Mikhailov stumbled and almost dropped the torch.
“What’s the matter?” asked Zvantsev. “Are you falling asleep again?”


Mikhailov looked at him. Zvantsev walked on, his hood raised, his arms stuck under the rain cape. In the red, flickering light his face seemed drawn and hard. “No,” said Mikhailov. “I’m thinking. I’m not sleeping.”
Some sort of dark hulk loomed ahead. They walked quickly, and soon caught up to a large truck that was slowly crawling along the highway. At first Zvantsev did not realize that the truck was moving with its engine turned off. Two good-sized camels were pulling it.
“Hey, Saka!” shouted the technician.
The door of the cab opened a bit, a head stuck out, fixed shining eyes on them, and disappeared again. “What can I do for you?” asked a voice from the cab.
“Let me have a candy bar,” Mikhailov said.
“Get it yourself—I don’t feel like getting out. It’s wet.”
“So I’ll get it myself,” Mikhailov said briskly, and disappeared somewhere along with the torch.
It got very dark. Zvantsev walked alongside the truck, matching his pace to that of the camels, which were barely moving. “Can’t they go a little faster?” he muttered.
“They don’t want to, the scoundrels,” came the voice from the cab. “I’ve tried thrashing them with a stick, but they only spit at me.” The voice was silent for a bit and then added, “Just four kilometers an hour. And they spit all over my rain cape.” The driver sighed deeply and suddenly yelled, “Hey, you weird critters! Giddap! Giddap! Or whatever they say where you come from.”
The camels snorted distainfully.
“You should move over to the side,” advised the driver. “Though I guess they’re not going to do anything right now.”
The air smelled of oil, and Mikhailov again appeared alongside. His torch smoked and crackled. “Let’s go,” he said. “It’s close now.”
They easily passed the camel team, and soon low, dark structures appeared along the sides of the road. Peering ahead in the darkness, Zvantsev made out an enormous building—a black rift in the black sky. Here and there in the windows, yellow flames flickered weakly.
“Look,” Mikhailov said in a whisper. “Do you see the buildings by the sides of the road?”
“So?” Zvantsev whispered back.
“That’s where the quasibiomass is. This is where he’ll be kept.”


“Who?”
“Well, the brain, then,” Mikhailov whispered. “His brain!”
They suddenly turned and came out right at the entrance to the Institute building. Mikhailov swung open the heavy door. “Go on in,” he said. “Just don’t make any noise, please.”
It was dark, cold, and strange-smelling in the hall. In the middle of a large table winked several fat, guttering candles, along with dishes and a large soup pot. The dishes were dirty. Dried-out pieces of bread lay in a basket. The candlelight provided only poor illumination. Zvantsev took several steps, and brushed his rain cape against a chair. The chair fell over with a crash.
“Yike!” someone shouted from behind. “Tolya, is that you?” “Yes, it’s me,” Mikhailov said.
Zvantsev looked around. A reddish form occupied a corner of the hall, and when Mikhailov went over there with his torch, Zvantsev saw a girl with a pale face. She was lying on a sofa, wrapped up in something black.
“Did you bring something scrumptious?” the girl asked.
“Saka is bringing it,” Mikhailov answered. “Would you like a chocolate bar?”
“Please.”
Mikhailov started digging into the folds of his rain cape, waving his torch.
“Go spell Zina,” the girl said. “She can sleep in here. The boys are sleeping in Room Twelve now. Is it still raining outside?”
“Yes.”
“Good. There’s not much to go now.”
“Here’s your candy bar,” said Mikhailov. “I’m going. This comrade is here to see the Academician.”
“To see who?”
“The Academician.” The girl whistled softly.
Zvantsev walked across the hall and looked back impatiently. Mikhailov came after him, and the girl sat down on the couch and unwrapped the candy bar. By the candlelight Zvantsev could only make out her small, pale face and a strange silvery lab coat with a hood. Mikhailov threw off his rain cape, and Zvantsev saw that he also wore a long silvery coat. In the uncertain light of the torch he looked like a ghost.


“Comrade Zvantsev,” he said, “wait here for a little bit. I’ll go bring you a lab coat. Only, in the meantime, don’t take off your rain cape.”
“All right,” Zvantsev said, and sat down on a chair.
Casparo’s study was dark and cold. The rain pattered on. Mikhailov had left, saying that he would call Casparo. He had taken the torch, and there were no candles in the study. At first Zvantsev sat in the visitors’ chair in front of the large empty desk. Then he got up, went over to the window, and started looking out into the night, leaning his forehead against the cold glass. Casparo did not come.
It’s going to be very difficult without Okada, Zvantsev thought. He could have lasted another twenty years—we should have taken better care of him. We should have stopped him from going on deep-water searches a long time ago. If a man is over a hundred, and has spent sixty of those years at a depth of five hundred fathoms… then begets blue palsy, damn him!
Zvantsev stepped back from the window, went over to the door, and looked out into the corridor. Candles burned sparsely along the long corridor walls. From somewhere came a voice repeating something over and over with the steadiness of a metronome. Zvantsev listened closely, but he could not make out a single word. Then long white figures glided out of the reddish twilight at the end of the corridor, and slipped past noiselessly, as if swimming in air. Zvantsev saw drawn dark faces under the peaks of the silvery hoods.
“Are you hungry?” one said. “No. Sleepy.”
“I think I’ll go eat.”
“No, no. Sleep. First sleep.”
They spoke softly, but he could hear them a long way down the corridor. “Jean almost screwed up her section. Casparo grabbed her arm just in
time.”
“What a mess!”
“Yeah. You should’ve seen his face.”
“What a mess, what a mess! Which section?”
“One twenty-six oh three. Approximately. Aural associations.” “Oh boy, oh boy, oh boy.”
“Casparo sent her off to get some sleep. She’s sitting in Room Sixteen, crying.”


The two people in white disappeared. Zvantsev could hear them talking as they went down the staircase, but he no longer could make out the words. He closed the door and returned to the chair.
So, some Jean had almost screwed up the aural association center. Disgraceful! Casparo had grabbed her by the arm. But what if he hadn’t grabbed her? Zvantsev folded his arms and closed his eyes. He knew almost nothing about the Great Experiment. He knew only that it was a great experiment, that it was the most complicated thing that science had ever come up against. To encode the distribution of excitations in each of billions of brain cells, to encode the linkages between the excitations, the linkages between the linkages. The smallest mistake threatened irrevocable distortions… A girl had almost annihilated a whole section… Zvantsev remembered that it was section number 12603, and he became afraid. Even if the probability of a mistake or distortion during the transfer of the code was very small… Twelve thousand sections, trillions of units of information. Casparo still hadn’t come.
Zvantsev went out into the corridor again. He moved from candle to candle, toward the strange monotonous voice. Then he caught sight of a wide-open door, and the voice became quite loud. Beyond the door was an enormous hall, winking with hundreds of flames. Zvantsev saw panels with dials stretching along the walls. Several hundred people were sitting along the walls in front of the panels. They all wore white. The air in the hall was hot and heavy, and smelled of hot wax. Zvantsev realized that the ventilation and air-conditioning system was shut off. He went into the hall and looked around. He was searching for Casparo, but even if Casparo was here, it was impossible to pick him out among the hundreds of people in identical silvery coats with hoods pulled low.
“Section one eighty-seven twenty-two filled,” said a voice. It was unnaturally quiet in the hall-there was only that voice and the rustle of many movements. Zvantsev spied a table with several armchairs in the center of the hall. He went over to the table.
“Section one eighty-seven twenty-three filled.”
A broad-shouldered man with his head propped up by his arms was sitting in one of the chairs opposite Zvantsev. He was sleeping, and he sighed heavily in his sleep.
“Section one eighty-seven twenty-four filled.”


Zvantsev looked at his watch. It was exactly 3:00 a.m. He saw a man in white come into the hall and disappear somewhere into the gloom, where nothing could be seen except the winking flames.
“Section one eighty-seven twenty-five filled.”
A man with a candle came over to the table, stood the candle in a puddle of wax, and sat down. He laid a folder full of papers on the table, turned over one page, and immediately fell asleep. Zvantsev watched his head sink lower and lower and at last come to rest on the papers.
“Section one eighty-seven twenty-six filled.”
Zvantsev once again glanced at his watch. It had taken little more than ninety seconds to fill two sections. The Great Encoding had been going on for ten days, and fewer than twenty thousand sections were full.
“Section one eighty-seven twenty-seven filled.”
And so on for ten days. Someone’s strong hand came to rest on Zvantsev’s shoulder. “Why aren’t you sleeping?”
Zvantsev lifted his head and saw a round, tired face under a hood. Zvantsev recognized it.
“Get to sleep. Right now.”
“Professor Casparo,” Zvantsev said, getting up.
“Get to sleep, get to sleep—” Casparo looked him in the eye. “Or if you can’t sleep, relieve somebody.”
He walked quickly to one side, stopped, and again peered fixedly at Zvantsev. “I don’t recognize you,” he said. “But it doesn’t matter—get to sleep!”
He turned his back and quickly walked along the rows of people sitting before the control boards. Zvantsev heard his harsh receding voice: “A half unit. Pay a little more attention, Leonid, half a unit… Good… fine… also good… A unit, Johnson, watch it more carefully… Good… also good…”
Zvantsev got up and walked behind him, trying not to let him out of sight. Suddenly Casparo shouted, “Comrades! Everything is going beautifully! Just be a little more attentive! Everything’s going very well. Just watch the stabilizers, and everything will be fine!”
Zvantsev bumped into a long table at which several people were sleeping. No one turned around, and none of the sleepers raised his head. Casparo had disappeared. Then Zvantsev walked at random along a yellow chain of flames in front of the control boards.
“Section one eighty-seven nine zero filled,” said a new, fresh voice.


Zvantsev realized that he was lost, and now did not know where the exit was, nor where Casparo had disappeared to. He sat on an overturned chair, his elbows resting on his knees, his chin propped on his hands, and stared at a winking candle in front of him. The candle was slowly guttering.
“Section one eighty-seven ninety-eight… Eighty-seven ninety-nine… Eighty-eight zero zero… Filled… Filled.”
“Aaaugh!” Someone shouted loudly, frightfully. Zvantsev jumped up. He saw that no one had turned around, but even so, everyone at once froze, their backs tensed. Twenty paces away, by one of the technicians’ chairs, a tall man was standing clutching his head and shouting, “Back! Back! Aaaugh!”
Casparo appeared from somewhere and darted toward the board, walking at a headlong pace. It was quiet in the hall except for the sputtering of wax.
“I’m sorry!” the tall man said. “I’m sorry… sorry…” he repeated. Casparo straightened up and shouted, “Listen to me! Sections one
eighty-seven ninety-six, eighty-seven ninety-seven, eighty-seven ninety-eight, eighty-seven ninety-nine, eighty-eight zero zero! Re-tape! Do it over!”
Zvantsev saw hundreds of people in white simultaneously raise their right hands and make some adjustment on their boards. The candle flames began to flicker.
“I’m sorry, I’m sorry,” the man repeated.
Casparo clapped him on the back. “Get to sleep, Henry,” he said. “Get to sleep right away. Calm down, it’s no big deal.”
The man walked along the boards, repeating the same thing: “I’m sorry, I’m sorry.” No one turned around. Someone else already sat at his station.
“Section one eighty-seven ninety-six filled,” said the fresh voice. Casparo stood a while, then slowly, stooping far over, he started walking
past Zvantsev. Zvantsev moved toward him, and suddenly caught sight of his face. He stopped and let Cas-paro pass. Casparo went up to a small separate board, sank heavily into a chair, and sat there for several seconds. Then he roused himself, and, collapsing forward, pushed his face into the large eyepiece of a periscope which extended down through the floor.
Zvantsev stood nearby, near the long table, with his gaze fixed on the tired, hunched back. He could still see Casparo’s face as it had looked in the flickering candlelight. He remembered that Casparo was no longer


young either, only, say, five or six years younger than Okada. He thought, How many years has he lost in these ten days? There will be a reckoning for this, and soon!
Two people walked up to Casparo. Instead of a hood, one of them wore a round, transparent helmet, which gleamed dimly in the candlelight. “We won’t make it,” the man in the helmet said quietly. He spoke to Casparo’s back.
“How long?” Casparo asked without turning around. “Clinical death in two hours. Plus or minus twenty minutes.”
Casparo turned around. “But he looks good… See for yourself.” He tapped the eyepiece with a finger.
The man in the helmet shook his head.
“Paralysis of the nerves,” the second one said very quietly. He looked back, ran his bulging eyes over Zvantsev, and, bending over toward Casparo, said something in his ear.
Zvantsev recognized him. It was Professor Ivan Krasnov.
“Very well,” said Casparo. “We’ll do it this way.” The two turned together and quickly disappeared into the darkness.
Zvantsev groped for a chair, sat down, and closed his eyes. It’s over, he thought. They won’t make it. He’ll die. He’ll die completely.
“Section one nine zero zero two filled,” said the voice. “Section one nine zero zero three filled… Section one nine zero zero four…”
Zvantsev did not know anything about the encoding of nerve linkages. He imagined Okada lying on a table under a deathly white light, with a fine needle crawling slowly over the convolutions of his exposed brain, and that the code impulses were put down character after character on a long tape. Zvantsev understood perfectly well that in reality it wasn’t done like that at all, but his imagination kept sketching him the same picture: the shining needle crawling over the brain, and, recorded on an endless tape, the mysterious signs signifying memory, habits, associations, experience… And from somewhere death was creeping up, destroying cell after cell, linkage after linkage, and they had to outrace it.
Zvantsev knew almost nothing about the encoding of nerve linkages. But he did know that the boundaries of the brain areas that carried out separate thought processes were still unknown. That the Great Encoding was possible only under conditions of the most extreme isolation and with the most precise registration of all irregular fields. Hence the candles and


torches, and the camels on the highway, the empty villages, and the black windows of the microweather installation, and the halting of the moving roads. Zvantsev knew that a means of monitoring the encoding that did not distort it had not yet been found. That Casparo worked half-blind and anyhow was encoding things which, perhaps, were not at all what should be encoded. But Zvantsev also knew that the Great Encoding was the road toward the immortality of the human ego, because a person wasn’t arms and legs. A person was memory, habits, associations, a brain. A brain.
“Section one ninety-two sixteen filled…”
Zvantsev opened his eyes, got up, and went over to Casparo. Casparo was sitting looking straight ahead.
“Professor Casparo,” said Zvantsev, “I am Zvantsev, the oceanographer. I must speak to Academician Okada.”
Casparo raised his eyes and looked up at Zvantsev for a long time. His eyes were dull, half-closed. “That is impossible,” he said.
They looked at each other silently for some time.
“Academician Okada has been waiting for this information all his life,” Zvantsev said quietly.
Casparo did not answer. He turned his eyes away and once again stared straight ahead. Zvantsev looked around. Darkness. Candle flames. White silvery hooded coats.
“Section one ninety-two ninety-two filled,” said the voice. Casparo got up and said, “That’s it. The end.”
And Zvantsev saw a small red lamp winking on the board by the eyepiece of the periscope. The light, he thought. So it’s over.
“Section one ninety-two ninety-four filled…”
Out of the darkness a small girl in a fluttering lab coat came running at top speed. She darted straight to Casparo, knocking Zvantsev out of the way.
“Sir,” she said despairingly, “there’s only one free section left.” “We won’t need any more,” Casparo said. He got up and ran into
Zvantsev. “Who are you?” he asked tiredly.
“I’m Zvantsev, the oceanographer,” Zvantsev said quietly. “I had wanted to speak to Academician Okada.”
“That is impossible,” Casparo said. “Academician Okada is dead.” He bent over the board and turned four switches, one after another. A
blinding light flashed on under the ceiling of the enormous hall.


It was already light when Zvantsev went down into the lobby. The grayish light of a foggy morning poured into the enormous windows, but there was a feeling that any moment now the sun would burn through, and the day would be clear. There was no one in the lobby. A crumpled coverlet lay on the sofa. Several candles were burning down on the table between jars and dishes of food. Zvantsev looked back at the staircase. Voices sounded from above. Mikhailov, who had promised to go with Zvantsev, was somewhere up there.
Zvantsev went over to the sofa and sat down. Three young men came down the staircase. One went up to the table and started wolfing down food with his bare hands. He moved plates around, dropped a soft-drink bottle, grabbed it, and started drinking. The second was sleeping as he walked, scarcely moving his eyes. The third, holding the sleeper back by the shoulders, was saying enthusiastically, “Casparo told Krasnov. That’s all he said. And right away the old man collapsed right onto the board. We grabbed him and took him to the study, and Serezhka Kruglov was already sleeping there. So we laid the two of them together.”
“I can’t believe it,” the first one said indistinctly—he was still chewing. “Did we really have time for so much?”
“Damn it, how many times do I have to tell you! Ninety-eight percent. And some tenths—I don’t remember exactly.”
“Really ninety-eight percent?”
“I see you’re zonked out altogether. You don’t understand what people are saying to you.”
“I understand all right, but I don’t believe it.” The one who was eating suddenly sat down and grabbed a jar of preserves. “I can’t believe it. Things seemed to be going quite poorly.”
“Guys,” muttered the sleepy one. “Let’s go, huh? I’ve plain had it.” All three suddenly made a great commotion and left. More and more
people were coming down the staircase. Sleepy ones, barely dragging their legs. Excited ones, with bulging eyes and voices hoarse from long silence.
It doesn’t look like a funeral, Zvantsev thought. He knew that Okada was dead, but he didn’t believe it. It seemed as if the Academician had simply fallen asleep, except that no one knew yet how to wake him. No matter—they would find out. Ninety-eight percent, he thought. Not bad at all It was very strange, but he did not feel the grief of loss. There was no mourning. He felt only something on the order of dissatisfaction, thinking


that he would have to wait, perhaps for a long time, for Okada to return. As had happened before, when Okada had gone away to the mainland for an extended stay.
Mikhailov touched him on the shoulder. He was wearing neither rain cape nor lab coat. “Let’s go, Comrade Zvantsev.”
Zvantsev got up and walked after him toward the doorway. The heavy double doors opened by themselves, easily and silently.
The sun had not yet come up, but it was light, and the clouds were rapidly disappearing from the blue-gray sky. Zvantsev saw low cream-colored buildings, streets sprinkled with red fallen leaves running between them. People were coming out of the Institute and dispersing among the streets in groups of twos or threes.
Someone shouted, “The fellows from Kostroma are relaxing in building six, floors two and three!”
Small, many-legged litter robots moved along the streets in sparse files. They left behind them dry, gray, clean concrete.
“Would you like a candy bar?” asked Mikhailov.
Zvantsev shook his head. They walked toward the highway between rows of squat yellow buildings that lacked doors and windows.
There were many buildings-a whole street of them. These were the blocks with the quasibiomass, the repository of Okada’s brain-twenty thousand sections of biomass, twenty squat buildings, each with a frontage of thirty meters, each extending six levels underground.
“Not bad for a start,” said Mikhailov. “But we can’t go on like this. Twenty buildings for one person is too much. If so much space were assigned to each of us—” He laughed and threw the candy wrapper onto the pavement.
Who knows? thought Zvantsev. Maybe one suitcase will be enough for you. And for me too. The litter robot, its long legs tapping on the pavement, toddled unhurriedly over to the discarded wrapper.
“Hey, Saka!” Mikhailov shouted suddenly. A truck drew up to them and stopped, and their driver with the flashing eyes stuck his head out of the cab. They all climbed in. “Where are your camels?” Mikhailov asked.
“They’re grazing somewhere,” the driver said. “I’ve had enough of them. They spat at me again while I was unharnessing them.”
Mikhailov was already asleep, with his head on Zvantsev’s shoulder.


The driver, small and dark-eyed, drove the heavy truck fast, and sang quietly, almost without moving his lips. It was some old, half-forgotten song. At first Zvantsev listened, and then suddenly he caught sight of helicopters moving low over the highway. There were six of them. The quiet zone, so recently dead, was now teeming with life. The moving roads had started up. People were hurrying to their homes. The microweather installations had started working, as had the traffic lights on the highway. Someone was already tearing off the plywood sheet with the rough lettering. The radio would be announcing that the Great Encoding had been completed and had gone satisfactorily. The helicopters must be carrying in a press group. They would stereocast an image of the squat yellow buildings and the burned-out candles before the powered-down control boards to the whole world. And someone, of course, would creep in to wake up Casparo, and they would grab the interloper by the seat of his pants, and in the heat of the moment maybe even give him a sound thrashing. And the whole world soon would know that human beings would soon become eternal. Not humanity, but human beings, each individual human being, each personality. Well, perhaps at first only the best ones… Zvantsev looked at the driver. “Comrade,” Zvantsev said, smiling, “do you want to live forever?”
“Yes,” answered the driver, also smiling. “And I will live forever.” “I want to too,” said Zvantsev.