20. What You Will Be Like
T 


he ocean was mirror smooth. The water by the shore was so calm that the dark fibers of seaweed that usually swayed on the bottom, hung motionless.
Kondratev steered the minisub into the cove, brought it right up to shore, and announced, “We’re here.”
The passengers began to stir. “Where’s my camera?” asked Slavin.
“I’m lying on it,” Gorbovsky answered in a weak voice. “Which, I might add, is very uncomfortable. Can I get out?”
Kondratev threw open the hatch, and everyone caught sight of the clear blue sky. Gorbovsky climbed out first. He took some uncertain steps along the rocks, stopped, and poked at a dry mat of driftwood with his foot. “How nice it is here!” he exclaimed. “How soft! May I lie down?”
“You may,” said Slavin. He also got out of the hatch and stretched happily.
Gorbovsky lay down immediately.
Kondratev dropped anchor. “I personally don’t advise lying on driftwood. There are always thousands of sand fleas there.”
Slavin, spreading his legs exaggeratedly wide, started the movie camera chattering. “Smile!” he said sternly.
Kondratev smiled.
“Wonderful!” shouted Slavin, sinking down on one knee.
“I don’t quite understand about fleas,” came Gorbovsky’s voice. “What do they do, Sergei, just hop? Or can they bite you?”
“Yes, they can bite you,” Kondratev answered. “Quit waving that camera at me, Evgeny! Go gather some driftwood and make a fire.” He climbed into the hatchway and got a bucket.
Slavin squatted down and started digging briskly into the driftwood with two hands, picking out the larger pieces. Gorbovsky watched him with interest.
“Still, Sergei, I don’t quite understand about the fleas.”
“They burrow into the skin,” Kondratev explained, rinsing the pail out with industrial alcohol. “And they multiply there.”
“Oh,” said Gorbovsky, turning over on his back. “That’s terrible.”


Kondratev filled the pail with fresh water from the tank on the submarine, and jumped onto the shore. Without talking, he deftly gathered driftwood, lit a fire, hung the pail over it, and got a line, hooks, and a box of bait out of his voluminous pockets. Slavin came up with a handful of wood chips.
“Look after the fire,” Kondratev directed. “I’ll catch some perch. I’ll be back in an instant.” Jumping from stone to stone, he headed toward a large moss-covered rock sticking out of the water twenty paces from the shore, moved around a bit on it, and then settled down. The morning was quiet—the sun, just coming above the horizon, shone straight into the cove, blinding him. Slavin sat down tailor-fashion by the fire and started feeding in chips.
“Amazing creatures, human beings,” Gorbovsky said suddenly. “Follow their history for the past ten thousand years. What an amazing development has been achieved by the productive sector, for instance. How the scope of scholarship has broadened! And new fields and new professions crop up every year. For instance, I recently met a certain comrade, a very important specialist, who teaches children how to walk. And this specialist told me that there is a very complicated theory behind this work.”
“What’s his name?” Slavin asked lazily.
“Elena something. I’ve forgotten her last name. But that’s not the point. What I mean is that here we have the sciences and the means of production always developing, while our amusements, our means of recreation, are the same as in ancient Rome. If I get tired of being a spacer, I can be a biologist, a builder, an agronomist—lots of things. But suppose I get tired of lying around, then what is there to do? Watch a movie, read a book, listen to music, or watch other people running. In stadiums. And that’s it! And that’s how it always has been—spectacles and games. In short, all our amusements come down in the last analysis to the gratification of a few sensory organs. And not even all of them, you’ll note. So far no one has, say, figured out how to amuse oneself gratifying the organs of touch and smell.”
“There’s the thing!” said Slavin. “We have public spectacles, so why not public tactiles? And public, uh, olfactiles?”
Gorbovsky chortled quietly. “Precisely,” he said. “Olfactiles. And there will be, Evgeny! There inevitably will be, some day!”


“But seriously, it’s all what you should expect, Leonid. A human being strives in the last analysis not so much for the perception itself as for the processing of these perceptions. He strives to gratify not so much the elementary sensory organs as his chief organ of perception, the brain.”
Slavin picked out some more chips of driftwood and threw them onto the fire. “My father told me that in his time someone had prophesied the extinction of the human race under conditions of material abundance. Machines would do everything, no one would have to work for his bread and butter, and people would become parasites. The human race would be overrun with drones. But the fact is that working is much more interesting than resting. A drone would just get bored.”
“I knew a drone once,” Gorbovsky said seriously. “But the girls didn’t like him at all and he just became extinct as a result of natural selection. But I still think that the history of amusements is not yet over, I mean amusement in the ancient sense of the word. And we absolutely will have to have some sort of olfactiles. I can easily imagine—”
“Forty thousand people in the stadium,” put in Slavin, “and all sniff as one. The ‘Roses in Ketchup Symphony.’ And the critics—with enormous noses—will write, ‘In the third movement, with an impressive dissonance, into the tender odor of two rose petals bursts the brisk fragrance of a fresh onion.’”
When Kondratev returned with a string of fresh fish, the spacer and the writer were guffawing in front of a dying fire.
“What’s so funny?” Kondratev inquired curiously.
“It’s just joie de vivre, Sergei,” Slavin answered. “Why don’t you ornament your own life with some merry jape?”
“All right,” said Kondratev. “Right now I’ll clean the fish, and you take the guts and stick them over under that rock. I always bury them there.”
“The ‘Gravestone Symphony,’” said Gorbovsky. “First movement, allegro ma non troppo.”
Slavin’s face grew long, and he fell silent, staring glumly at the fatal rock. Kondratev took a flounder, slapped it down on a flat stone, and took out a knife. Gorbovsky followed his every movement with absorption. Kondratev cut off the flounder’s head slantwise in one blow, deftly stuck his hand under the skin, and swiftly skinned the flounder whole, as if he were peeling off a glove. He threw the skin and the intestines over to Slavin.


“Leonid,” Kondratev said, “fetch the salt, please.” Without saying a word, Gorbovsky got up and climbed into the submarine. Kondratev quickly dressed the flounder and started in on a perch. The pile of fish intestines in front of Slavin grew.
“And just where is the salt?” called Gorbovsky from the hatch. “In the provisions box,” Kondratev shouted back. “On the right.” “And she won’t start off?” Gorbovsky asked cautiously.
“Who is ‘she’?”
“The sub. The control board is what is on the right down here.” “To the right of the board is a box,” said Kondratev.
They could hear Gorbovsky moving around in the cabin.
“I found it,” he said happily. “Should I bring all of it? There must be over five kilos of the stuff.”
Kondratev raised up his head. “What do you mean, five kilos? There should be a little packet.”
After a minute’s pause, Gorbovsky said, “Yes, you’re right. Coming up.” He got out of the hatch, holding the packet of salt in one hand. His hands were covered with flour.
Putting the packet down near Kondratev, he groaned, “Ah, universal entropy!” He was preparing to lie down when Kondratev said, “And now, Leonid, fetch a bay leaf, please.”
“Why?” Gorbovsky asked with great astonishment. “Do you mean that three mature, nay, elderly people, three old men, cannot get along without bay leaf? With their enormous experience, with their endurance—”
“Oh, come now,” said Kondratev. “I promised you that you would have some proper relaxation, Leonid, but I didn’t mean you could fall asleep on me. We can’t have this! The bay leaf, on the double!”
Gorbovsky fetched the bay leaf, and then fetched the pepper and sundry other spices, and then, on another trip, the bread. In token of protest, along with the bread he dragged out a heavy oxygen tank and said venomously, “I brought this at the same time. Just in case you needed it.”
“Many thanks,” said Kondratev. “I don’t. Take it back.”
Gorbovsky dragged the tank back with curses. When he returned, he did not even try to lie down. He stood next to Kondratev and watched him cook fish soup. Meanwhile, the gloomy correspondent for the European Information Center, with the help of two bits of driftwood, was burying the fish intestines under the “gravestone.”


The soup was boiling. From it wafted a stunning aroma, seasoned with the odor of smoke. Kondratev took a spoon, tasted, and considered.
“Well?” asked Gorbovsky.
“A pinch more salt,” Kondratev answered. “And perhaps some pepper, eh?”
“Perhaps,” said Gorbovsky, his mouth watering. “Yes,” Kondratev said firmly. “Salt and pepper.”
Slavin finished interring the fish guts, put the stone on top, and went off to wash his hands. The water was warm and clear. He could see small yellow-gray fish scurrying among the seaweeds. Slavin sat down on a rock and looked around. A shining wall of ocean rose up beyond the cove. Blue peaks on the neighboring island hung motionless over the horizon. Everything was deep blue, shining, and motionless, except for large black and white birds which sailed over the rocks in the cove without crying out. A fresh salt odor came from the water. “A wonderful planet, Earth,” he said aloud.
“It’s ready!” Kondratev announced. “We will now have fish soup. Leonid, be a good lad and bring the bowls, please.”
“Okay,” said Gorbovsky. “And I’ll bring the spoons while I’m at it.” They sat down around the steaming pail, and Kondratev dished out the
fish soup. For some time they ate silently. Then Gorbovsky said, “I just love fish soup. And it’s so seldom that I get a chance to eat it.”
“There’s still half a bucket left,” Kondratev said.
“Ah, Sergei!” Gorbovsky said with a sigh. “I can’t eat enough to hold me for two years.”
“So there won’t be fish soup on Tagora,” said Kondratev. Gorbovsky sighed again. “Quite possibly not. Although Tagora isn’t
Pandora, of course, so there’s still hope. If only the Commission lets us go fishing.”
“Why wouldn’t they?”
“Those are stern and harsh men on the Commission. Like Gennady Komov. He’s sure to not even let me lie down. He will demand that all my actions coincide with the interests of the aboriginal population of the planet. And how should I know what their interests are?”
“You are an incredible whiner, Leonid,” Slavin said. “Taking you on the Contact Commission was a terrible mistake. Can you see it, Sergei—


Leonid, our anthropocentrist par excellence, representing the human race to the civilization of another world!”
“And why not?” Kondratev said judiciously. “I greatly respect Comrade Gorbovsky.”
“I respect him too,” said Gorbovsky.
“Oh, I even respect him myself,” said Slavin. “But I don’t like the first question he’s planning to ask the Tagorans.”
“What question?” asked Kondratev, surprised. “The very first: ‘Could I perhaps lie down?’”
Kondratev snorted into his soup spoon, and Gorbovsky looked reproachfully at Slavin.
“Ah, Evgeny!” he said. “How can you joke like that? Here you are laughing, while I’m shaking in my shoes, because the first contact with a newly discovered civilization is a historic occasion, and the slightest blunder could bring harm down on our descendants. And our descendants, I must say to you, trust us implicitly.”
Kondratev stopped eating and looked at him.
“No, no,” Gorbovsky said hurriedly. “I can’t vouch for our descendants as a whole, of course, but take Petr Petrovich—he expressed himself quite explicitly on the question of his trust in us.”
“And whose descendant is this Petr Petrovich?” asked Kondratev. “I can’t tell you any more than that. It’s clear from his patronymic,
however, that he is the direct descendant of someone named Petr. We didn’t discuss it with him, you see. Would you like me to tell you about what we did discuss with him?”
“Hmm,” said Kondratev. “What about washing the dishes?”
“No, I will not. It’s now or never. People should lie down for a while after a meal.”
“Right!” exclaimed Slavin, turning over on his side. “Go ahead and tell us, Leonid.”
And Gorbovsky began to tell them. “We were traveling on the Tariel to EN 6—an easy flight and not a very interesting one—taking Percy Dickson and seventy-seven tons of fine food to the astronomers there, and then the concentrator blew up on us. God alone knows why—these things happen sometimes even now. We hung in space two parsecs from the nearest base and quietly began to prepare for entry into the next world, because without the plasma concentrator you can’t even think about


anything else. In this spot, as in any other, there were two ways out: open the hatches immediately, or first eat the seventy-seven tons of the astronomers’ groceries and then open the hatches. Mark Falkenstein and I held a meeting over Percy Dickson in the wardroom, and started making up our minds. Dickson had it easy—he had been conked on the head and was still unconscious. Falkenstein and I quickly came to the conclusion that there was no need to hurry. It was the greatest task that we had ever set ourselves—the two of us (there was no hope for Dickson) would annihilate seventy-seven tons of provisions. We could stretch it out for thirty years, anyhow, and after that would be time enough for opening the hatches if we had to. The water and oxygen regeneration systems were in perfect shape, and we were moving with a velocity of two hundred fifty thousand kilometers per second, and we still had the prospect of seeing all sorts of unknown worlds before we got around to the Next One.
“I want to make sure you understand our situation—it was two parsecs to the nearest inhabited point, and there was hopeless void around us, and on board there were two of us alive and one half-dead—three people, note; precisely three, and I say that as ship’s captain. And then the door opens, and into the wardroom walks a fourth. At first we weren’t even surprised. Falkenstein asked rather impolitely, ‘What are you doing here?’ And then suddenly it sank in, and we jumped up and stared at him. And he stared at us. Average height, thin, pleasant face, didn’t have all that frizzy hair that, say, Dickson has got. Only his eyes were unusual—they had the look of a pediatrician’s. And another thing—he was dressed like a spacer during a mission, but his jacket buttoned from right to left. Like a woman’s. Or, according to rumor, like the Devil’s. That surprised me most of all. And while we were looking at each other, I blinked, and looked again, and now his jacket buttoned the proper way. So I sat down.
“‘Hello,’ said the stranger. ‘My name is Petr Petrovich. And I know your names, so let’s not waste time on that. Instead we’ll see how Doctor Percy Dickson is doing.’ He shoved Falkenstein aside rather unceremoniously and sat down next to Dickson. ‘Excuse me,’ I say, ‘but are you a doctor?’ ‘Yes,’ he says, ‘you could say that.’ And he starts undoing the bandage around Dickson’s head. Laughing and joking, you know, like a kid undoing a candy wrapper. A chill actually ran across my skin. I looked at Falkenstein—he’s turned pale and is just opening and shutting his mouth. Meanwhile, Petr Petrovich had taken off the bandage


and exposed the wound. The wound, I should tell you, was horrible, but Petr Petrovich kept his cool. He spread his fingers wide and started massaging Dickson’s skull. And, can you imagine, the wound closed up! Right before our eyes. There was no trace of it left. Dickson turned over on his right side and started snoring as if nothing had happened to him.
“‘Let him get his sleep now,’ says Petr Petrovich. ‘And meanwhile you and I will go see what things are like in the engine room.’ And he took us to the engine room. We walked after him like sheep. Except that, in contradistinction to sheep, we didn’t even bleat. As you can imagine, we were simply speechless. We hadn’t gotten any words ready for such an encounter. Petr Petrovich opens the hatch to the reactor and crawls right into the concentration chamber. Falkenstein gave a cry, and I shouted, ‘Be careful! Radiation!’ He looked at us thoughtfully, then said, ‘Oh, yes, right. Leonid and Mark,’ he says, ‘you go straight to the control room, and I’ll be along in a minute.’ And he closed the hatch behind him. Mark and I went to the control room and started pinching each other. We pinched silently, fiercely, cruelly. But neither of us woke up. And two minutes later the instruments come on, and the concentrator board shows the contraption is in a number-one state of readiness. Then Falkenstein stopped pinching and said in a low voice, ‘Leonid, do you know how to perform an exorcism?’ He had just said that when in came Petr Petrovich. ‘Ah,’ he says, ‘some starship you have here, Leonid. And some coffin. I admire your daring, comrades.’ Then he suggests that we sit down and ask him questions.
“I started to think furiously about what would be the smartest question to ask him while Falkenstein, a profoundly practical man, inquired, ‘Where are we now?’ Petr Petrovich smiled sadly, and at the same instant the walls of the control room became transparent. ‘There,’ says Petr Petrovich, and he points. ‘Right there is our Earth. Four and a half parsecs. And there is EN 6, as you call it. Change course by six-tenths of a second and go straight into deritrinitation. Or maybe,’ he says, ‘I should throw you right over to EN 6?’ Mark answered touchily, ‘Thanks just the same, but don’t bother, we’d rather do it ourselves.’ And he took the bull by the horns and started orienting the ship. Meanwhile I had been thinking about a question, and all the time into my head came something about ‘the eternal silence of the infinite spaces.’ Petr Petrovich laughed and said, ‘Well, all right, you’re too shaken up now to ask questions. And I must be on my way.


They’re expecting me back in those infinite spaces. I think I had better explain briefly.
“‘You see, I am your remote descendant,’ he says. ‘We, the descendants, very much like to drop in on you, our ancestors, every now and then. To see how things are going, and to show you what you will be like. Ancestors are always curious about what they will be like, and descendants, about how they got that way. But I’ll tell you frankly that such excursions are not exactly encouraged. We’ve got to watch what we’re doing with you ancestors. We could goof something up and turn history head over heels. And sometimes it’s very hard to refrain from intervening in your affairs. It’s all right to intervene the way I’m doing now. Or like another friend of mine. He ended up in one of the battles near Kursk and took it upon himself to repel a German tank attack. He got himself killed, chopped into kindling. Terrible even to think about. Of course he didn’t repel the attack by himself, so nobody noticed. And another colleague of mine tried to wipe out the army of Genghis Khan. They hardly even slowed down… Well, that’s it, more or less. I’ve got to go now—they’re probably worrying about me already.’
“Here I yelled out, ‘Wait, one question! So you people are omnipotent now?’ He looked at me with a sort of kindly condescension and said, ‘Oh, come now, Leonid. We can do a few things, but there’s still enough work left for hundreds of millions of years. For instance,’ he says, ‘not long ago one of our children accidentally grew up spoiled. We brought him up—brought him up, and gave up on him. Threw up our hands and sent him off to put out galaxies. There are,’ he says, ‘ten too many in the next megasystem over. And you, comrades,’ he says, ‘are on the right track. We like you. We believe in you,’ he says. ‘Just remember: if you are what you plan on being, then we’ll become what we are. And what you, accordingly, will be.’ And he waved and left. And that’s the end of my tale.”
Gorbovsky propped himself up on his elbows and looked around at his audience. Kondratev was drowsing, basking in the sun.
Slavin lay on his back, staring thoughtfully at the sky. “‘We get up out of bed for the future,’” he slowly recited.” ‘We mend blankets for the future. We marshal our thoughts for the future. We gather strength for the future… We will hear the approaching footsteps of the element of fire, but we will already be prepared to loose waves upon the flame.’” Gorbovsky


listened to the end and said, “That has to do with something about the form?”
Gorbovsky listened to the end and said, “That has to do with the content. But what about the form?”
“A good beginning,” Slavin said professionally, “but it turned sour toward the end. Is it really so difficult to think of something besides that spoiled child of yours?”
“Yes, it’s difficult,” Gorbovsky said.
Slavin turned over on his stomach. “You know, Leonid,” he said, “Lenin’s idea about the development of the human race in spirals has always struck me. From the primitive communism of the destitute, through hunger, blood, and wars, through insane injustices, to the communism of endless material and spiritual wealth. I strongly suspect that this is just theory for you, but I come from a time when the turn of the spiral was not yet completed. It was only in movies, but I did see rockets setting fire to villages, people in flames, covered with napalm. Do you know what napalm is? Or a grafter—do you know about that? You see, the human race began with communism and it returned to communism, and with this return a new turn of the spiral begins, a completely fantastic one.”
Kondratev suddenly opened his eyes, stretched, and sat up. “Philosophers,” he said. “A bunch of Aristotles. Let’s hurry up and wash the dishes, and then go swimming, and I’ll show you the Golden Grotto. You haven’t seen anything like it, you many-traveled old men.”
-Moscow-Leningrad, 1960-1966






Table of Contents






Introduction
Part One: Almost the Same
1. Night on Mars
2. Almost the Same Part Two: Homecoming
3. Old-timer
4. The Consp irators 5. Chronicle
6. Two from the Taimyr 7. The Moving Roads 8. Cornucop ia
9. Homecoming
Part Three: The Planet with All the Conveniences
10. Languor of the Sp irit 11. The Assaultmen
12. Deep  Search
13. The Mystery of the Hind Leg
14. Candles Before the Control Board 15. Natural Science in the Sp irit World 16. Pilgrims and Wayfarers
17. The Planet with All the Conveniences Part Four: What You Will Be Like
18. Defeat
19. The Meeting
20. What You Will Be Like