11. The Assaultmen
T 


he satellite was enormous. It was a torus a mile and a quarter in diameter, divided inside into numerous chambers by massive bulkheads. The corridor rings were empty and bright, and the
triangular hatchways leading into the bright empty rooms stood wide open. The satellite had been abandoned an improbably long time ago, perhaps even millions of years earlier, but the rough yellow floor was clean, and August Bader had said that he hadn’t seen even one speck of dust here.
Bader walked in front, as befitted the discoverer and master. Gorbovsky and Falkenstein could see his big protruding ears, and the blondish tuft of hair on the top of his head.
“I had expected to see signs of neglect here,” Bader said unhurriedly. He spoke in Russian, painstakingly enunciating each syllable. “This satellite interested us most of all. That was ten years ago. I saw that the outer hatches were open. I said to myself, ‘August, you will see a picture of horrifying disaster and destruction.’ I told my wife to stay on the ship. I was afraid of finding dead bodies here, you see.” He stopped before some sort of hatch, and Gorbovsky almost ran into him. Falkenstein, who had fallen a bit behind, caught up to them and stopped alongside, knitting his brows.
“Aber here it was empty,” said Bader. “It was light here, very clean, and completely empty. Please, look around.” He made a smooth gesture with his arm. “I am inclined to think that this was the traffic control room of the satellite.”
They pushed through to a chamber with a dome-shaped ceiling, and with a low semicircular stand in the middle. The walls were bright yellow, translucent, and they shone from within. Gorbovsky touched the wall. It was smooth and cool.
“Like amber,” he said. “Feel it, Mark.” Falkenstein felt it and nodded.
“Everything had been dismantled,” said Bader, “but in the walls and bulkheads, and also even in the toroid covering of the satellite, remain light sources as yet hidden from us. I am inclined to think—”
“We know,” Falkenstein said quickly.


“Oh?” Bader looked at Gorbovsky. “But what have you read? You, Mark, and you, Leonid.”
“We’ve read your series of articles, August,” said Gorbovsky. “‘The Artificial Satellites of Vladislava.’”
Bader inclined his head. “‘The Artificial Satellites of Nonterrestrial Origin of the Planet Vladislava of the Star EN 17,’” he corrected. “Yes. In that case, of course, I can omit an exposition of my ideas on the question of the light sources.”
Falkenstein walked along the wall, examining it. “Strange material,” he said from a distance. “Metaloplast, probably. But I never saw metaloplast like this.”
“It’s not metaloplast,” said Bader. “Don’t forget where you are. You, Mark, and you, Leonid.”
“We won’t forget,” said Gorbovsky. “We’ve been on Phobos, and there, it’s an entirely different material, actually.”
Phobos, a satellite of Mars, had for a long time been considered a natural one. But it had turned out to be a two-and-a-half-mile torus covered with a metal antimeteorite net. The thick net had been eaten away by meteorite corrosion, and torn through in places. But the satellite itself was intact. Its exterior hatches were open, and the gigantic doughnut was just as empty as this one. By the wear on the antimeteorite net they had calculated that the satellite had been placed in orbit around Mars at least ten million years before.
“Oh, Phobos!” Bader shook his head. “Phobos is one thing, Leonid. Vladislava is something else entirely.”
“Why?” Falkenstein inquired as he came up. He disagreed.
“For example, because between the Sun, or Phobos, and Vladislava where we are now, there are two and a half million astronomical units.”
“We covered that distance in half a year,” Falkenstein argued. “They could do the same. And the satellites of Vladislava and Phobos have much in common.”
“That remains to be proven,” said Bader.
Grinning lazily, Gorbovsky said, “That’s just what we’re trying to do.” Bader pondered for some time and then announced, “Phobos and Earth’s
satellites also have much in common.”
It was an answer in Bader’s style—very weighty and off target by half a meter.


“Well, all right,” said Gorbovsky. “What else is there besides the traffic-control room?”
“On this satellite,” Bader said pompously, “there are one hundred sixty chambers ranging in size from fifteen to five hundred square meters. We can look at them all. But they’re empty.”
“If they’re empty,” Falkenstein said, “we’d be better off getting back to the Tariel.”
Bader looked at him and once again turned to Gorbovsky. “We call this satellite Vladya. As you know, Vladislava has another satellite, also artificial, and also of nonterrestrial origin. It is smaller in size. We call it Slava. Do you get it? The planet is called Vladislava. It is only natural to call its two satellites Vladya and Slava. Right?”
“Yes, of course,” said Gorbovsky. This elegant reasoning was familiar to him. This was the third time he had heard it. “It was very clever of you to suggest that, August. Vladya and Slava. Vladislava. Wonderful.”
“You people on Earth,” Bader continued unhurriedly, “call these satellites Y-i and Y-2, corresponding respectively to Vladya and Slava. But as for us, we do it differently. We call them Vladya and Slava.”
He looked sternly at Falkenstein. Falkenstein bit his lip to keep from smiling. As far as Falkenstein knew, “we” was Bader himself, and only Bader.
“As for the composition of this yellow material, which is by no means metaloplast, and which I call amberine—”
“A very good name,” Falkenstein put in.
“Yes, not bad… Well, its composition is as yet unknown. It remains a mystery.”
A silence set in. Gorbovsky looked absently about the room. He tried to imagine the beings who had built this satellite and then had worked here at a time so long past. They were another race. They had come to the Solar System and had departed, leaving to Mars the abandoned space laboratories and a large city near the northern icecap. The satellites were empty, and the city was empty—there remained only strange buildings which extended for many levels below the ground. Then—or perhaps earlier—they had come to the EN 17 system, had constructed two artificial satellites around Vladislava, and then had left there as well. And here, on Vladislava, there ought to be an abandoned city as well. Where had they come from, and why? Where had they gone and why? The whys were


clear. They were of course great explorers—the Assaultmen of another world.
“Now,” said Bader, “we will go and examine the chamber in which I found the object which I arbitrarily call a button.”
“Still there?” asked Falkenstein, coming to life. “Who?” asked Bader.
“The object.”
“The button,” Bader said weightily, “at the present time is to be found on Earth, in the keeping of the Commission for Research of the Evidence of the Activity of Extraterrestrial Intelligence in Outer Space.”
“Ah,” said Falkenstein. “The Pathfinders have it. But I collected material about Vladislava, and no one showed me this button of yours.”
Bader tugged his chin. “I sent it with Captain Anton Bykov half a subjective year ago.”
They had passed Bykov en route. He should be arriving at Earth seven months after the takeoff of the Tariel for EN 17. “So,” Gorbovsky said. “In that case we will have to postpone inspection of the button.”
“But we can look at the chamber where I found it,” Bader said. “There is a possibility, Leonid, that in the hypothetical city on the surface of the planet Vladislava you will find analogous objects.” He climbed through the hatch.
Falkenstein said through his teeth, “I’ve had it with him, Leonid.” “Patience,” said Gorbovsky.
The chamber where Bader had found the button turned out to be a third of a mile off. Bader pointed to the place where the button had lain and related in detail how he had found the button. (He had stepped on it and squashed it.) In Bader’s opinion, the button was a battery, which originally had been spherical in shape. It was made of silvery translucent material, very soft. Its diameter was thirty eight point one six millimeters… density… weight… distance from the nearest wall…
In the room opposite, on the other side of the corridor, two young fellows in blue work jackets sat amid instruments arranged on the floor. As they worked, they glanced over at Gorbovsky and Falkenstein, and conversed in low tones.
“Assaultmen. Docked yesterday.”
“Um-hum. The tall one there is Gorbovsky.” “I know.”


“And the other one, with the blond hair?” “Mark Falkenstein. Navigator.”
“Ah. I’ve heard of him.” “They’re beginning tomorrow.”
Bader at last finished his explanations and asked whether they had understood everything. “Everything,” Gorbovsky said, and he heard laughter in the room opposite.
“Now we will go back home,” Bader said.
They emerged into the corridor, and Gorbovsky nodded to the fellows in blue. They got up and bowed, smiling. “Good luck,” one said. The other smiled silently, turning a skein of multicolored wiring in his hands.
“Thanks,” Gorbovsky said. Falkenstein also said, “Thanks.”
After he had gone a hundred paces or so, Gorbovsky turned around. The two fellows in blue jackets were standing in the corridor watching them.
In the Baderian Empire (as jokers called the whole system of artificial and natural satellites of Vladislava—observatories, workshops, repair stations, chlorella plantations in black tanks, greenhouses, plant nurseries, glassed-in recreational gardens, and the empty tori of nonterrestrial origin), time was calculated in thirty-hour cycles. At the end of the third cycle after the D-ship Tariel, a giant almost four miles in length that from a distance looked like a sparkling flower, had assumed a meridional orbit around Vladislava, Gorbovsky undertook the first search run. D-ships are not suited for landings on massive planets, especially planets with atmospheres, and especially planets with wild atmospheres. The ships are too fragile for this. Auxiliary boats with either atomic-impulse or photon drive, steady, lightweight, intrasystem craft with a variable center of gravity, carry out such landings. A regular starship carries one such boat, but an Assault ship, two to four. The Tariel had two photon boats on board, and Gorbovsky made the first attempt to sound Vladislava’s atmosphere in one of them. “To see whether it’s worth it,” Gorbovsky said to Bader.
Bader visited the Tariel personally. He did a lot of nodding and saying “ah, yes,” and now, when Gorbovsky had cast off from the Tariel, he sat on a stool to one side of the observation board, and began to wait patiently.
All the Assaultmen had gathered by the screen and were watching the indistinct flashes on the gray oscillograph screen-the traces of the signal impulses sent by the telemetry on the boat. There were three Assaultmen in


addition to Bader. They kept silent and thought about Gorbovsky, each in his own way.
Falkenstein thought about the fact that Gorbovsky would return in an hour. Falkenstein could not stand uncertainty, and he wished that Gorbovsky had already returned, even though he knew that the first search run always comes out all right, especially with Gorbovsky piloting the Assault boat. Falkenstein remembered his first meeting with Gorbovsky. Falkenstein had just returned from a jaunt to Neptune—had returned without losses, was proud of this, and was boasting dreadfully. That was on Chi Fei, the circumlunar satellite from which all photon ships usually took off. Gorbovsky had come over to him in the mess-room and had said, “Excuse me—you wouldn’t happen to be Mark Falkenstein?” Falkenstein had nodded and said, “What can I do for you?” Gorbovsky had a very sad expression. He sat down alongside, twitched his long nose and asked plaintively, “Listen, Mark, do you know where I can get a harp around here?”
“Here” was a distance of one hundred ninety thousand miles from Earth, at a starship base. Falkenstein choked on his soup. Gorbovsky looked him over with curiosity, then introduced himself and said, “Calm down, Mark; it’s not urgent. Actually, what I want to know is at what rate did you enter Neptune’s exosphere?” That was Gorbovsky’s way—to go up to somebody, especially a stranger, and ask a question like that to see how the victim would handle it.
The biologist Percy Dickson—black, overgrown, with curly hair—also thought about Gorbovsky. Dickson worked in space psychology and human space physiology. He was old, he knew a great deal, and he had carried out on himself and others a heap of insane experiments. He had come to the conclusion that a person who has been in space all in all for more than twenty years grows unused to Earth and ceases to consider it home. Remaining an Earthman, he ceases to be a man of Earth. Percy Dickson himself had become one such, and he could not understand why Gorbovsky, who had covered fifty parsecs and had touched on a dozen moons and planets, now and then would suddenly raise his eyes high and said with a sigh, “Oh, to be in a meadow! On the grass. Just to lie there. And with a stream.”
Ryu Waseda, atmosphere physicist, thought about Gorbovsky too. He thought about his parting words, “I’ll go see whether it’s worth it.” Waseda


greatly feared that Gorbovsky, on returning, would say, “It’s not worth it.” That had happened several times. Waseda studied wild atmospheres and was Gorbovsky’s eternal debtor, and it seemed to him that he was sending Gorbovsky off to his death every time. Once Waseda had told Gorbovsky about this. Gorbovsky had answered seriously, “You know, Ryu, there hasn’t been a time yet when I haven’t come back.”
Professor and Assaultman August Johann Bader, general plenipotentiary of the Cosmonautical Council, director of the far-space starship base and laboratory Vladislava (EN 17), also thought about Gorbovsky. For some reason he remembered how Gorbovsky had said good-by to his mother fifteen years before, on Chi Fei. Gorbovsky and Bader were going to Transpluto. That was a very sad moment—taking leave of relatives before a space flight. It seemed to Bader that Gorbovsky had said good-by to his mother very brusquely. Bader, as ship’s captain—he had been captain of the ship then—had considered it his duty to provide inspiration for Gorbovsky. “In such a sad moment as this,” he had said sternly but softly, “your heart must beat in unison with that of your mother. The sublime virtue of every human being consists in…” Gorbovsky had listened silently, and when Bader finished his reprimand, had said in a strange voice, “August, do you have a mama?” Yes, that was how he said it! “Mama.” Not mother, not Mutter, but mama.
“He’s come out on the other side,” said Waseda.
Falkenstein looked at the screen. The splotches of dark spots had disappeared. He looked at Bader. Bader sat there gripping the seat of his stool, looking nauseated. He raised his eyes to Falkenstein’s and gave a labored smile. “It is one thing,” he said, enunciating with effort, “when it’s you yourself. Aber it is quite another when it is someone else.”
Falkenstein turned around. In his opinion it did not matter in the least who was doing it. He got up and went into the corridor. By the airlock hatch he caught sight of an unfamiliar young man with a tanned, clean-shaven face and a gleaming, clean-shaven skull. Falkenstein stopped and looked him over from head to toe and back. “Who are you?” he asked ungraciously. Meeting an unfamiliar person on the Tariel was the last thing he had expected.
The young man grinned a bit crookedly. “My name is Sidorov,” he said. “I’m a biologist and I want to see Comrade Gorbovsky.”


“Gorbovsky’s on a search run,” said Falkenstein. “How did you get on board?”
“Director Bader brought me—”
“Ah…” said Falkenstein. Bader had arrived on board two hours before. “—and probably forgot about me.”
“It figures,” said Falkenstein. “That’s quite natural for Director Bader. He’s quite excitable.”
“I understand.” Sidorov looked at the toes of his shoes and said, “I had wanted to talk with Comrade Gorbovsky.”
“You’ll have to wait a little,” Falkenstein said. “He’ll be back soon. Come on, I’ll take you to the wardroom.” He took Sidorov to the wardroom, laid a bundle of the latest Earth magazines in front of him, and returned to the control room. The Assaultmen were smiling. Bader was wiping sweat from his forehead and smiling too. The flashes of dark could again be seen on the screen.
“He’s coming back,” said Dickson. “He said one turn is enough for the first time.”
“Of course it’s enough,” said Falkenstein. “Quite enough,” said Waseda.
In a quarter-hour Gorbovsky scrambled out of the airlock, unfastening his pilot’s coverall as he walked. He seemed abstracted, and looked over their heads,
“Well?” Waseda asked impatiently.
“Everything’s all right,” said Gorbovsky. He stopped in the middle of the corridor and started climbing out of his flight suit. He freed one leg, stepped on a sleeve, and almost fell. “That is to say, everything’s all right, but nothing’s any good.”
“What is it, exactly?” inquired Falkenstein.
“I’m hungry,” Gorbovsky declared. He finally got out of the flight suit and headed for the wardroom, dragging the suit along the deck by a sleeve. “Stupid planet!” he snapped.
Falkenstein took the suit from him and walked alongside. “Stupid planet,” repeated Gorbovsky, staring over their heads.
“It is quite a difficult planet for landings,” Bader affirmed, enunciating distinctly.
“Let me have something to eat,” said Gorbovsky.


In the wardroom he collapsed onto the sofa with satisfied moaning. As he entered, Sidorov jumped to his feet.
“Sit down, sit down,” Gorbovsky said graciously. “So what happened?” asked Falkenstein.
“Nothing in particular,” said Gorbovsky. “Our boats are no good for landing.”
“Why not?”
“I don’t know. Photon craft are no good for landing. The tuning of the magnetic traps in the reactor is always breaking down.”
“Atmospheric magnetic fields,” Waseda, the atmosphere physicist, said, and wrung his hands, making an audible rubbing sound.
“Perhaps,” said Gorbovsky.
“Ah, well,” Bader said unhurriedly. “I’ll give you an impulse rocket. Or an ion craft.”
“Do that, August,” said Gorbovsky. “Please give us an ion craft or an impulse rocket. And somebody get me something to eat.”
“Good lord,” said Falkenstein. “I can’t even remember the last time I flew an impulse rocket.”
“Never mind,” said Gorbovsky. “It’ll come back. Listen,” he said affectionately. “Are they going to feed me today?”
“Right away,” said Falkenstein. He excused himself to Sidorov, took the magazines off the table, and covered it with a chlorovinyl tablecloth. Then he placed bread, butter, milk, and kasha on the table.
“The table is laid, sir,” he said.
Gorbovsky got up from the sofa reluctantly. “You’ve always got to get up when you have to do something,” he said. He sat down at the table, took a cup of milk with both hands, and drank it in one gulp. Then he drew a plate of kasha toward him with both hands and picked up a fork. Only when he picked up the fork did it become clear why he had used both hands for the cup and the plate. His hands were trembling. His hands were trembling so badly that he missed twice when he tried to take a bit of butter on the end of his knife.
Craning his neck, Bader looked at Gorbovsky’s hands. “I’ll try to give you my very best impulse rocket, Leonid,” he said in a weak voice. “My very best.”
“Do that, August,” said Gorbovsky. “Your very best. And who is this young man?”


“This is Sidorov,” Falkenstein explained. “He wanted to talk with you.” Sidorov stood up again. Gorbovsky looked benevolently up at him and
said, “Please, sit down.”
“Oh,” said Bader. “I completely forgot. Forgive me. Leonid, comrades, allow me to introduce—”
“I’m Sidorov,” said Sidorov, grinning uncomfortably because everyone was looking at him. “Mikhail. Biologist.”
“Welcome, Mikhail Sidorov,” Percy Dickson said in English. “Okay,” said Gorbovsky. “I’ll finish eating in a minute, Comrade
Sidorov, and then we’ll go to my cabin. There’s a sofa there. There’s a sofa here too,” he said, lowering his voice to a conspiratorial whisper, “but Bader is sprawled out all over it, and he’s the director.”
“Don’t even think of taking him,” Falkenstein said in Japanese. “I don’t like him.”
“Why not?” asked Gorbovsky.
Gorbovsky was taking his ease on the couch, and Falkenstein and Sidorov were sitting by the table. On the table lay shiny skeins of videotape.
“I advise against it,” said Falkenstein. Gorbovsky put his hands behind his head.
“I don’t have any relatives,” Sidorov said. Gorbovsky looked at him sympathetically. “No one to cry over me.”
“Why ‘cry’?” asked Gorbovsky.
Sidorov frowned. “I mean that I know what I’m getting into. I need data. They’re waiting up for me on Earth. I’ve been sitting here over Vladislava for a year already. A year gone almost for nothing.”
“Yes, that’s annoying,” Gorbovsky said.
Sidorov linked his fingers together. “Very annoying, sir. I thought there would be a landing on Vladislava soon. I couldn’t care less about being among the first ones down. I just need data, do you understand?”
“I understand,” Gorbovsky said. “Indeed so. You, as I recall, are a biologist.”
“Yes. Besides that, I passed the cosmonaut-pilot courses and graduated with honors. You gave me my examinations, sir. But of course you don’t remember me. I’m a biologist first and last, and I don’t want to wait any more. Quippa promised to take me with him. But he made two landing attempts and then gave up. Then Sterling came. There was a real daredevil.


But he didn’t take me along either. He didn’t have the chance—he went for a landing on the second run, and he didn’t come back.”
“He was an idiot!” said Gorbovsky, looking at the ceiling. “On a planet like this you have to make at least ten runs. What did you say his name was? Sterling?”
“Sterling,” Sidorov answered.
“An idiot,” declared Gorbovsky. “A brainless idiot.”
Falkenstein looked at Sidorov’s face and muttered, “Well, there we have it. We’ve got ourselves a hero here.”
“Speak Russian,” Gorbovsky said sternly. “What for? He knows Japanese.”
Sidorov flushed. “Yes,” he said. “I know it. Only I’m no hero. Sterling —there’s a hero. But I’m a biologist, and I need data.”
“How much data did you get from Sterling?” asked Falkenstein. “From Sterling? None,” said Sidorov. “He got killed, after all,” “So why are you so thrilled with him?”
Sidorov shrugged. He did not understand these strange people. They were very strange people-Gorbovsky, Falkenstein, and probably their friends too. To call the remarkable daredevil Sterling a brainless idiot… He remembered Sterling—tall, broad-shouldered, with a booming carefree laugh and sure gestures. And how Sterling had said to Bader, “The careful ones stay on Earth, August. It’s a qualification for the job, August!” and snapped his sturdy fingers. Brainless idiot…
Okay, thought Sidorov, that’s their business. But what should I do? Sit back again with folded hands and radio Earth that our allotment of cyberscouts have burned up in the atmosphere; that the scheduled attempt to land hasn’t succeeded; that the scheduled detachment of explorer spacers refused to take me along on a search run; that I argued myself blue in the face with Bader again and he still insists he won’t trust me with a ship, and that he’s expelling me from “the little corner of the universe entrusted to his care” for “systematic impertinence”? And once again kind old Rudolf Kruetzer in Leningrad, shaking his head under his academic skullcap, will put forward his intuitive notions in favor of the existence of life in systems of blue stars, and that mad dog Gadzhibekov will roar on about his experimental conclusions denying the possibility of life in the systems of blue stars; and again Rudolf Kruetzer will tell everyone about the same eighteen bacteria caught by Quippa’s expedition in the


atmosphere of the planet Vladislava; and Gadzhibekov will deny any link whatsoever between these eighteen bacteria and the atmosphere of Vladislava, alluding with full justification to the difficulty of identification given the actual conditions of the experiment in question. And once again the Academy of Biology will leave open the question of the existence of life in the systems of blue stars. But there is life, there is, is, is, and we only need to reach out to it. Reach out to Vladislava, a planet of the blue star EN 17.
Gorbovsky looked at Sidorov and said affectionately, “When all is said and done, why is it so necessary to come with us? We have our own biologist—Percy Dickson, a wonderful scientist. He’s a little crazy but he’ll get you samples, whatever sort you like, and in any quantity.”
“Eh,” Sidorov said, and waved his hand.
“Honestly,” said Gorbovsky. “You wouldn’t like it at all if you did come along. And so everything will be all right. We’ll land and get you everything you need. Just give us instructions.”
“And you’ll do everything backward,” said Sidorov. “Quippa asked for instructions too, and then brought back two containers full of penicillium. An ordinary terrestrial mold. You yourself don’t know the working conditions on Vladislava. You won’t be in the mood for my instructions there.”
“You’ve got a point,” sighed Gorbovsky. “We don’t know the conditions. You’ll have to wait a little longer, Comrade Sidorov.”
Falkenstein nodded in satisfaction.
“All right,” said Sidorov. His eyes were almost closed. “Then at least take the instructions.”
“Absolutely,” said Gorbovsky. “Immediately.”
In the course of the next forty cycles, Gorbovsky made sixteen search runs. He was using an excellent impulse craft which Bader had supplied him, the Skiff-Aleph. He did the first five runs by himself, testing Vladislava’s exosphere at the poles, at the equator, at different latitudes. Finally he selected the north polar region and started taking Falkenstein with him. Time after time they plunged into the atmosphere of the orange-black planet, and time after time they jumped back out like corks from water. But each time they plunged deeper.
Bader assigned three observatories to the work of the Assaultmen. They continually kept Gorbovsky informed about the movements of weather


fronts in Vladislava’s atmosphere. The production of atomic hydrogen—the fuel for the Skiff-Alepb—began on Bader’s order: the fuel expenditure had turned out to be enormous, beyond expectations. The research into the chemical composition of the atmosphere by means of bomb probes with meson emitters was curtailed.
Falkenstein and Gorbovsky would return from a run exhausted, worn to shreds, and they would greedily rush to a meal, after which Gorbovsky would force his way to the nearest sofa and lie there for a long time, amusing his friends with various maxims.
Sidorov, on Gorbovsky’s invitation, remained on the Tariel. He was allowed to place trap containers for biosamples, and an automatic biological laboratory, in the Skiff-Aleph’s test-equipment slots. In the course of this he cut into the domain of Ryu, the atmosphere physicist. But Sidorov had little to show for his efforts—the containers came back empty, the recordings of the autolab did not yield to decipherment. The influence on the instruments of the wild atmosphere’s magnetic fields fluctuated chaotically, and the autolab required human direction. When he came out of the airlock, Gorbovsky would first of all see Sidorov’s gleaming skull and would wordlessly clap his hand to his forehead. Once he said to Sidorov, “The thing is, Mikhail, that all biology flies out of my head at the one-hundred-twenty-kilometer mark. It’s simply knocked out. It’s very dangerous there. Just sneeze, and you’re dead.”
Sometimes Gorbovsky took Dickson with him. After each such run the long-haired biologist rested in bed. At Sidorov’s timid request that Dickson look after the instruments, he answered straight out that he did not plan on worrying about any side issues. “There’s just not enough time, kid.”
None of them is planning on worrying about side issues, Sidorov thought bitterly. Gorbovsky and Falkenstein are looking for a city, Falkenstein and Ryu are studying the atmosphere, and Dickson is observing the godlike pulses of all three of them. And they put off the landing, put it off, put it off… Why don’t they hurry? Can they really not care?
It seemed to Sidorov that he would never understand these strange creatures called Assaultmen. Everyone in the whole huge world knew of the Assaultmen and was proud of them. It was considered an honor just to be the personal friend of an Assaultman. But now it turned out that no one knew clearly what an Assaultman was. On the one hand, it was something


incredibly daring—on the other, something shamefully cautious; they kept coming back. They always died natural deaths.
They said, “An Assaultman is one who prudently waits for the exact moment when he can afford to be imprudent.” They said, “An Assaultman stops being an Assaultman when he gets killed.” They said, “An Assaultman goes places that machines don’t come back from.” They also said, “You can say, ‘He lived and died a biologist.’ But you have to say, ‘He lived an Assaultman and died a biologist.’” All these sayings were very emotional, but they explained absolutely nothing. Many outstanding scientists and explorers were Assaultmen. There was a time when Sidorov had been thrilled by the Assaultmen too. But it was one thing to be thrilled sitting at a school desk, and quite another to see Gorbovsky crawl like a tortoise over miles that could be covered in a single risky but lightning-fast swoop.
When he returned from the sixteenth run, Gorbovsky declared that he intended to move on to the exploration of the last and most complex part of the path to the surface of Vladislava. “There are twenty-five kilometers of an unknown layer left before the surface,” he said, blinking his sleepy eyes and gazing over their heads. “Those are very dangerous miles, and I will move with particular caution. Falkenstein and I will make at least another ten or fifteen runs. If, of course, Director Bader will furnish us with the fuel.”
“Director Bader will furnish you with the fuel,” Bader said majestically. “You need not have the least doubt about that, Leonid.”
“Wonderful!” said Gorbovsky. “The fact is that I will be extremely cautious, and for that reason I feel justified in taking Sidorov with me.”
Sidorov jumped up. Everyone looked at him. “Well, so you’ve waited it out, kid,” said Dickson.
“Yes. We have to give a new boy a chance,” said Bader.
Waseda only smiled, shaking his handsome head. And even Falkenstein remained silent, although he was displeased. Falkenstein did not like heroes.
“It’s the thing to do,” Gorbovsky said. He stepped back and, without looking behind him, sat down with enviable precision on the sofa. “Let the new boy go.” He smiled and lay down. “Get your containers ready, Mikhail—we’re taking you along.”


Sidorov tore himself from the spot and ran out of the wardroom. When he had left, Falkenstein said, “Bad move.”
“Don’t be selfish, Mark,” Gorbovsky drawled lazily. “The kid has been sitting here for a year already. And all he needs is to collect some bacteria from the atmosphere.”
Falkenstein shook his head and said, “It’s a bad move. He’s a hero.” “That’s nothing,” Gorbovsky said. “I remember him now—the cadets
called him Athos. Besides, I read a little book of his. He’s a good biologist and he won’t act up. There was a time when I was a hero too. And you. And Ryu. Right, Ryu?”
“Right, captain,” Waseda said.
Gorbovsky narrowed his eyes and rubbed his shoulder. “It aches,” he said in a plaintive voice. “Such a horrible turn. And against the wind at that. How’s your knee, Mark?”
Falkenstein raised his leg and flexed it several times. Everyone followed his movements attentively. “‘Oh, that this too, too solid flesh would melt,’” he said in a drawl.
“I’ll give you a massage right now,” Dickson said, and got up ponderously.
The Tariel moved along a meridional orbit, passing over Vladislava’s north pole every three and a half hours. Toward the end of the cycle, the landing craft, with Gorbovsky, Falkenstein, and Sidorov aboard, separated from the starship and dropped down, into the very center of a black spiral funnel that slowly twisted inside the orange haze covering Vladislava’s north pole.
At first everyone was silent. Then Gorbovsky said, “They must have landed at the north pole.”
“Who?” asked Sidorov.
“Them,” Gorbovsky explained. “And if they built their city anywhere, then it’s right at the north pole.”
“In the place where the north pole was back then,” Falkenstein said. “Yes, of course, there. Like on Mars.”
Sidorov tensely watched an orange kernel and black spots on the screen fly headlong from some sort of weather center. Then this motion slowed down. The Skiff-Aleph was braking. Now they were descending vertically.
“But they could have landed at the south pole too,” said Falk-enstein. “They could have,” Gorbovsky agreed.


If Gorbovsky did not find the extraterrestrials’ settlement at the north pole, Sidorov thought, he would dawdle around the south pole just as methodically, and then, if he found nothing at the south pole, he would crawl over the whole planet, until he did find something. He even began to pity Gorbovsky and his colleagues. Especially his colleagues.
“Mikhail,” Gorbovsky suddenly called. “Yes?” Sidorov called back.
“Mikhail, did you ever see elves dancing on the green?” “Elves?” asked Sidorov in surprise.
He looked back. Gorbovsky was sitting turned half toward him, staring at him with a wicked look in his eyes. Falkenstein sat with his back to Sidorov.
“Elves?” asked Sidorov. “What elves?”
“With wings. You know, like this…” Gorbovsky took one hand off the control keys and moved his fingers vaguely. “You haven’t? A pity. I haven’t either. Nor Mark nor anyone else that I know of. But it would be interesting to watch, wouldn’t it?”
“Undoubtedly,” Sidorov said dryly.
“Leonid,” said Falkenstein. “Why didn’t they dismantle the shells of their stations?”
“They didn’t need to,” said Gorbovsky. “It’s uneconomical,” said Falkenstein. “So they were uneconomical.”
“Wastrel explorers,” Falkenstein said, and fell silent. The craft shook.
“It’s got us, Mark,” Gorbovsky said in an unfamiliar voice.
The craft began to shake horribly. It was impossible to imagine that they could endure such violent shaking. The Skiff-Aleph was entering the atmosphere, where wild horizontal currents roared, dragging long black stripes of crystalline dust after them; where the radar was blinded; where lightning of unimaginable force flashed in the thick orange fog. Here powerful, completely inexplicable surges of magnetic fields deflected instruments and broke up the plasma cord in a photon rocket’s reactor. Photon rockets were no good here, but neither were things pleasant on the first-line atomic intrasystem craft Skiff-Alepk.
But it was quiet in the control room. Gorbovsky, lashed to his seat by straps, writhed in front of the control panel. Black hair fell into his eyes,


and at every shock he bared his teeth. The shocks continued without interruption, and he looked as if he were laughing. But it was not laughter. Sidorov had never dreamed that Gorbovsky could look like that—not merely strange, but somehow alien. Gorbovsky was like a devil. Falkenstein was like a devil too. His legs spread apart, he hung over the atmosphere traps, jerking his stretched-out neck. It was surprisingly quiet. But the needles of the instruments, the green zigzags and spots on the fluorescent screens, the black and orange spots on the periscope screen-everything rushed about, circled around in a merry dance, and the deck swayed from side to side like a shortened pendulum, and the ceiling jerked, fell, and jumped up again.
“The cybernavigator,” Falkenstein croaked hoarsely.
“Too early,” Gorbovsky said, and once again bared his teeth. “We’re getting carried away. There’s a lot of dust.”
“Damn it, it’s too early,” said Gorbovsky. “I’m going for the pole.” Sidorov did not hear Falkenstein’s answer, because the autolab had
started working. The indicator light flashed, and under the transparent plastic plate, the recording tape had started inching along. “Ha!” shouted Sidorov. There was protein outside. Living protoplasm. There was a lot of it, and with every second there was more. “What’s going on?” Sidorov said then. The width of the tape was not sufficient for the recorder, and the instrument automatically switched over to the zero level. Then the indicator light died out, and the tape stopped. Sidorov gave a growl, tore off the factory seal, and dug into the instrument’s mechanism with both hands. He knew this instrument well. He himself had taken part in its construction and he could not imagine what had gone wrong. Under great strain, trying to keep his balance, Sidorov groped at the block of printed circuits. They could fracture from shocks. He had completely forgotten about that. They could have fractured twenty times over during the previous runs. Just as long as they haven’t fractured, he thought. Just as long as they’re still intact
The ship shook unbearably, and Sidorov banged his forehead several times against a plastic panel. Once he banged the bridge of his nose, and for a while was completely blinded by tears. Evidently the circuit blocks were intact. Then the Skiff-Aleph turned sharply over on its side.
Sidorov was thrown from his seat. He flew across the control room, clenching in both arms fragments of panel torn out by the anchors. He did


not even realize at first what had happened. Then he realized, but could not believe it.
“Should have strapped in,” said Falkenstein. “Some pilot.”
Sidorov managed to crawl back to his seat on hands and knees along the dancing deck. He fastened the straps and stared dully at the smashed interior of the instrument.
The craft lurched as if it had run into a wall. His dry mouth gaping, Sidorov swallowed air. It was very quiet in the control room, except for Falkenstein’s wheezing—his throat had filled with blood. “The cybernavigator,” he said. At that moment the walls again shuddered. Gorbovsky remained silent.
“There’s no fuel feed,” said Falkenstein, unexpectedly calmly. “I see,” said Gorbovsky. “Do your job.”
“Not a drop. We’re falling. It’s jammed.”
“I’m turning on the emergency tank, last one. Altitude forty-five kilometers… Sidorov!”
“Yes,” Sidorov said, and started coughing.
“Your containers are filling up.” Gorbovsky turned his long face with the dry flashing eyes toward him. Sidorov had never seen such an expression on him while he was lying on the sofa. “The compressors are working. You’re in luck, Athos!”
“In real luck,” said Sidorov.
Now they were hit from below. Something crunched inside Sidorov, and his mouth filled with bitter-tasting saliva.
“The fuel’s coming through!” shouted Falkenstein.
“Fine—wonderful! But man your own station, for God’s sake. Sidorov! Hey, Mikhail!”
“Yes,” Sidorov said hoarsely, without unclenching his teeth. “Do you have a reserve rig?”
“Um,” said Sidorov. He was thinking poorly now. “Um what?” shouted Gorbovsky. “Yes or no?” “No,” said Sidorov.
“Some pilot,” said Falkenstein. “Some hero.”
Sidorov gnashed his teeth and started looking at the periscope screen. Turbid orange stripes raced from right to left across the screen. It was so frightening and so sickening to look at it that Sidorov shut his eyes.
“They landed here!” shouted Gorbovsky. “The city is there, I know it!”


Something in the control room chimed delicately during the frightful reeling silence, and suddenly Falkenstein roared out in a heavy broken bass:


The whirlwind thunders forth its rage The sky explodes in red;
A blinding firestorm blocks your way But if you should turn back this day Then who would go on ahead?


I would go on, thought Sidorov. Fool, jackass. I should’ve waited for Gorbovsky to decide on a landing. Not enough patience. If he had gone for a landing today, I wouldn’t give a damn about the autolab.
And Falkenstein roared,


The smiles like frost, the looks that stray Your night thoughts in your bed:
The Assaultman funked it, people say, But had you not come back that day, Then who would go on ahead?


“Altitude twenty-one kilometers!” shouted Gorbovsky. “I’m switching over to horizontal.”
Now come the endless minutes of horizontal flight, thought Sidorov. The ghastly minutes of horizontal flight. Minute after minute of jerks and nausea, until they’ve enjoyed their explorations to the full. And I’ll sit here like a blind man, with my stupid smashed machine.
The craft lurched. The blow was very strong, enough to cause a momentary vision blackout. Then Sidorov, gasping for breath, saw Gorbovsky smash his face into the control board, and Falkenstein stretch out his arms, fly over the couch, and slowly, as if in a dream, come to rest on the deck. He remained there, face down. A piece of strap, broken in two places, slid over his back evenly, like an autumn leaf. For a few seconds the craft moved by inertia, and Sidorov, seizing the clasp of his straps, felt that everything was falling. But then his body became heavy once again.
Finally he unfastened the clasp and stood up on legs of cotton. He looked at the instruments. The needle of the altimeter was climbing upward, the yellow zigzags of the monitoring system rushed about in blue


hops, leaving behind foggy traces which slowly faded out. The cybernavigator was heading the craft away from Vladislava. Sidorov jumped over Falkenstein and went up to the board. Gorbovsky was lying with his head on the control keys. Sidorov looked back at Falkenstein. He was already sitting up, propping himself up on the deck. His eyes were closed. Then Sidorov carefully lifted up Gorbovsky and laid him on the back of the seat. To hell with the autolab, he thought. He turned off the cybernavigator and rested his fingers on the sticky keys. The Skiff-Aleph began to swing about, and suddenly dropped a hundred yards. Sidorov smiled. He heard Falkenstein wheeze angrily behind him, “Don’t you dare!”
But he didn’t even turn around.




“You’re a good pilot, and you made a good landing. And in my opinion you’re an excellent biologist,” said Gorbovsky. His face was all bandaged. “Excellent. A real go-getter. Isn’t that so, Mark?”
Falkenstein nodded, and, parting his lips, he said, “Undoubtedly. He made a good landing. But he wasn’t the one who raised ship again.”
“You see,” Gorbovsky said with great feeling, “I read your monograph on protozoa—it’s superb. But we have come to the parting of the ways.”
Sidorov swallowed with difficulty and said, “Why?” Gorbovsky looked at Falkenstein, then at Bader. “He doesn’t
understand.”
Falkenstein nodded. He was not looking at Sidorov. Bader also nodded, and looked at Sidorov with a sort of vague pity.
“Well? And?” Sidorov asked defiantly.
“You’re too fond of excitement,” Gorbovsky said softly. “You know, Sturm und Drang, as Director Bader would say.”
“Storm and stress,” Bader translated pompously.
“Precisely,” said Gorbovsky. “Entirely too fond. And we can’t have that. It’s a rotten character trait. It’s deeply ingrained. And you don’t even understand.”
“My lab was smashed,” said Sidorov. “I couldn’t do anything else.” Gorbovsky sighed and looked at Falkenstein. Falkenstein said with
disgust, “Let’s go, Leonid.”
“I couldn’t do anything else,” Sidorov repeated stubbornly.


“You should have done something else. Something quite different,” said Gorbovsky. He turned and started down the corridor.
Sidorov stood in the middle of the corridor and watched the three of them leave, Bader and Falkenstein each supporting Gorbovsky by an arm. Then he looked at his own hand and saw red drops on the fingers. He started for the med section, leaning against the wall because he was swaying from side to side. I wanted to do what was right, he thought. I mean, that was the most important thing, landing. And I brought back the containers of microfauna. I know that’s very valuable. It’s valuable for Gorbovsky too: after all, sooner or later he himself will have to land and carry out a sortie across Vladislava. And the bacteria will kill him if I don’t neutralize them. I did what I had to. On Vladislava, on a planet of a blue star, there is life. Of course I did what I had to. He whispered several times, “I did what I had to.” But he felt that it wasn’t quite so. He had first felt this down there, down below, when they were standing by the spaceship, waist deep in seething petroleum, with geysers on the horizon rising up in enormous columns, and Gorbovsky had asked him, “Well, what do you intend to do now, Mikhail?” and Falkenstein had said something in an unfamiliar language and had climbed back into the spaceship. He had felt it again when the Skiff-Aleph had forced her way off the surface of the fearsome planet for the third time, and once again had flopped down into the oily mud, struck back by a blow of the storm. And he felt it now.
“I wanted to do what was right,” he said indistinctly to Dickson, who was helping him lie down on the examining table.
“What?” said Dickson.
“I had to land,” Sidorov said.
“Lie down,” said Dickson. He muttered, “Primordial enthusiasm…” Sidorov saw a large white pear-shape coming down from the ceiling.
The pear-shape hung quite close, over his very face. Dark spots swam before his eyes, his ears rang, and suddenly Falkenstein started singing in a heavy bass,


But had you not come back that day, Then who would go on ahead?


“Anybody at all,” Sidorov said stubbornly with closed eyes. “Anyone would go on ahead.”
Dickson stood by, and watched the cybersurgeon’s delicate shining needle enter the mutilated arm. There’s sure enough blood! thought Dickson. Oceans and oceans. Gorbovsky barely got them out of there in time. Another half hour, and the kid would never again be making excuses. Well, Gorbovsky always comes back in time. That’s the way it ought to be. Assaultmen ought to come back, or else they wouldn’t be Assaultmen. And once upon a time, every Assaultman was like Athos here.