17. The Planet with All the Conveniences
R 


yu stood up to his waist in lush green grass and watched the helicopter land. Silver and dark-green shock waves from the rotors’ backwash swept over the grass. It seemed to him that the helicopter
was taking its time about landing, and he shifted impatiently from foot to foot. It was very hot and close. The small, white sun was high, and moist heat rose up from the grass. The rotors started squealing more loudly, and the helicopter turned sideways to Ryu, then instantly dropped four or five feet and sank into the grass at the top of the hill. Ryu ran up the slope. The engine went quiet, the rotors turned more slowly, then stopped. Several people got out of the helicopter. The first was a lanky man in a jacket with rolled-up sleeves. He wore no helmet, and his sun-bleached hair stuck out on end over his long brown face. Ryu recognized him: it was Pathfinder Gennady Komov, the leader of the group. “Hello, landlord,” Komov said gaily, extending his hand. “Konnichi-wa!”
“Konnichi-wa, Pathfinders,” said Ryu. “Welcome to Leonida.”
He held out his hand too, but they had to cross another ten paces to make contact.
“I’m very, very glad to see you,” said Ryu, smiling widely. “Did you get lonely?”
“And how! Alone on a whole planet.”
Behind Komov’s back someone said, “Damn!” and something dropped noisily into the grass.
“That’s Boris Fokin,” Komov said without turning around. “An archaeologist equipped with full autodescent.”
“At least when there’s such lush grass,” Boris Fokin said, getting up. He had a small red mustache, a freckled nose, and a white filmiplast helmet, now knocked aslant. He wiped his green-smeared hands on his pants and introduced himself. “Fokin. Pathfinder archaeologist.”
“Welcome, Fokin,” said Ryu.
“And this is Tatyana Palei, archaeological engineer,” said Komov. Ryu pulled himself together and inclined his head politely. The
archaeological engineer had outrageous gray eyes and blinding white teeth. The archaeological engineer’s hand was strong and rough. The archaeological engineer’s coverall draped itself with devastating elegance.


“Just call me Tanya,” said the archaeological engineer.
“Ryu Waseda,” said Ryu. “Ryu is the given name, and Waseda is the surname.”
“Mboga,” said Komov. “Biologist and hunter.”
“Where?” asked Ryu. “Oh, forgive me. A thousand apologies.” “Never mind, Comrade Waseda,” said Mboga. “Pleased to meet you.”
Mboga was a pigmy from the Congo, and only his black head, wrapped tightly in a white kerchief, could be seen over the grass. The steel-blue barrel of a carbine stuck up next to his head.
“This is Tora-Hunter,” Tanya said.
Ryu had to bend down to shake Tora-Hunter’s hand. Now he knew who Mboga was, Tora-Hunter Mboga, member of the Commission on the Preservation of the Wildlife of Alien Planets. The biologist who had discovered the “battery of life” on Pandora. The zoopsychologist who had tamed the monstrous Martian sora-tobu hiru, the “flying leeches.” Ryu was embarrassed by his faux pas.
“I see that you don’t carry a weapon, Comrade Waseda,” said Mboga. “I do have a pistol,” Ryu said. “But not a very heavy one.”
“I understand.” Mboga nodded encouragingly and looked about, “We did end up setting the prairie on fire,” he said softly.
Ryu turned around. A flat plain covered with lush shining grass stretched from the hill to the very horizon. Two miles from the hill the grass was on fire, kindled by the landing boat’s reactor. Thick puffs of white smoke sailed through the whitish sky. The boat could be seen dimly through the smoke-a dark egg on three widespread struts. A wide burned-out patch around the boat showed black.
“It will soon go out,” said Ryu. “It’s very damp here. Let’s go—I’ll show you your estate.”
He took Komov by the arm and led him past the helicopter to the other side of the hill. The others followed. Ryu looked back several times, nodding at them with a smile.
Komov said in vexation, “It’s always a bad show when you spoil things with your landing.”
“The fire will soon go out,” Ryu repeated.
He heard Fokin behind him, fussing over the archaeological engineer. “Careful, Tanya girl, there’s a tussock here.”
“I see it,” the archeological engineer answered. “Watch your own step.”


“Here is your estate,” said Ryu.
A broad, calm river crossed the green plain. In a river bend gleamed a corrugated roof. “That’s my lab,” said Ryu. To the right of the laboratory, streams of red and black smoke rose up into the sky. “They’re building a storehouse there,” Ryu said. They could see silhouettes of some sort rushing about in the smoke. For an instant there appeared an enormous clumsy machine on caterpillar treads-a mother robot-and then something flashed in the smoke, a peal of rolling thunder rang out, and the smoke began to pour more thickly. “And there’s the city,” said Ryu. It was rather more than a kilometer from the base to the city. From the hill the buildings looked like squat gray bricks. Sixteen flat gray bricks, sticking up out of the green grass.
“Yes,” said Fokin. “A very unusual layout.”
Komov nodded silently. This city was quite unlike the others. Before the discovery of Leonida, the Pathfinders—the workers of the Commission for the Research of the Evidence of the Activity of Extraterrestrial Intelligence in Outer Space—had come across only two cities—the empty city on Mars and the empty city on Vladislava. Obviously the same architect had designed both—cylindrical buildings descending many levels underground, made of shining silicones arranged in concentric rings. But this city on Leonida was entirely different—two rows of gray boxes made of porous limestone.
“Were you there after Gorbovsky?” asked Komov.
“No,” answered Ryu. “Not even once. Actually, I had no time. After all, I’m not an archaeologist—I’m an atmosphere physicist. And then, Gorbovsky had asked me not to go there.”
A boom! boom! came from the construction site. Red puffs of smoke flew up in thick clouds. Through them the smooth walls of the storehouse could already be made out. The mother robot came out of the smoke into the grass. Next to her hopped black cyberbuilders like praying mantises. Then the cybers formed a chain and ran off to the river.
“Where are they going?” Fokin asked curiously. “Swimming,” said Tanya.
“They’re leveling an obstruction,” Ryu explained. “The storehouse is almost ready. Now the whole cybernetic system is retiming. They’ll build a hangar and a water system.”
“A water system!” exclaimed Fokin.


“Still, it would have been better to have moved the base a little farther from the city,” Komov said doubtfully.
“This is how Gorbovsky laid it out,” said Ryu. “It’s not a good idea to get too far from base.”
“Also true,” Komov agreed. “But I wouldn’t want the cybers wrecking the city.”
“Come now! I never let them near it.”
“A planet with all the conveniences,” said Mboga.
“Yes indeed!” Ryu confirmed happily. “The river, the air, the greenery, and no mosquitoes, no harmful insects.”
“All the conveniences indeed,” Mboga repeated. “Is it possible to go swimming?” asked Tanya.
Ryu looked at the river. It was greenish and turbid, but it was a real river with real water. Leonida was the first planet that had turned out to have real water and breathable air. “I think so,” said Ryu. “I haven’t tried it myself, though. There hasn’t been time.”
“We’ll swim every day,” said Tanya.
“I’ll say!” shouted Fokin. “Every day! Three times a day! All we’ll do is go swimming!”
“Okay,” said Komov. “What’s that?” He pointed to a ridge of low hills on the horizon.
“I don’t know,” said Ryu. “No one has been there yet. Falkenstein got sick all of a sudden, and Gorbovsky had to leave. He only had time to unload the equipment for me, and then he shipped out.”
For some time everyone stood silently, looking at the hills on the horizon. Then Komov said, “In three days or so I’m going to fly along the river myself.”
“If there are any more traces,” said Fokin, “then undoubtedly we’d find them along the river.”
“Probably,” Ryu agreed politely. “Now let’s go to my place.” Komov looked back at the helicopter.
“Never mind, let it stay,” said Ryu. “The hippopotamuses don’t climb hills.”
“Hippopotamuses?” said Mboga.
“That’s what I call them. They look like hippopotamuses from far off, and I’ve never seen them close up.” They started down the hill. “On the other side of the river the grass is very tall, so I’ve only seen their backs.”


Mboga walked next to Ryu with a light gliding step. The grass seemed to flow around him.
“On the other hand there are birds up here,” Ryu continued. “They’re very large and sometimes they fly very low. One almost grabbed my radar set.”
Komov, without slowing down, looked into the sky, shading his eyes with a hand. “By the way,” he said. “I should send a radiogram to the Sunflower. May I use your communicator?”
“By all means,” said Ryu. “You know, Percy Dickson wanted to shoot one. A bird, I mean. But Gorbovsky wouldn’t let him.”
“Why not?” asked Mboga.
“I don’t know,” said Ryu. “But he was dreadfully angry; he even wanted to take everyone’s weapons away.”
“He did take them away from us,” Fokin said. “There was a great flap at the Council. If you ask me, it became very ugly. Gorbovsky simply ladled out his authority on top of everyone.”
“Except Tora-Hunter,” noted Tanya.
“Yes, I took a gun,” Mboga said. “But I understand Gorbovsky. You don’t feel like shooting here.”
“Still, Gorbovsky is a peculiar man,” declared Fokin. “Possibly,” said Ryu with restraint.
They approached the low circle of the door to the spacious laboratory dome. Over the dome three gridwork radar dishes turned in various directions.
“You can pitch your tents here,” said Ryu. “And if you need it, I’ll give you a team of cybers, and they’ll build you something more substantial.”
Komov looked at the dome, looked at the puffs of red and black smoke behind the laboratory, and then looked back at the gray roofs of the city and said guiltily, “You know, Ryu, I’m afraid we’ll be in your way here. Wouldn’t it be better if we got settled in the city? Eh?”
“Besides, there’s a smell of burning here,” added Tanya. “And I’m afraid of the cybers.”
“I’m afraid of the cybers too,” Fokin said decisively.
Offended, Ryu shrugged his shoulders. “As you like,” he said. “I think it’s very nice here myself.”
“Tell you what,” said Tanya. “We’ll put up the tents and you can move in with us. You’ll like it, you’ll see.”


“Hmm,” said Ryu. “Maybe… But for now you’re all invited to my place.”
The archaeologists stooped down and walked toward the low door. Mboga went last, and he did not even have to bow his head.
Ryu hesitated at the threshold. He looked back and saw the trampled ground, the yellowed crushed grass, the dismal pile of lithoplast, and he thought that somehow there really was a smell of burning here.
The city consisted of a single street, very broad, overgrown with thick grass. The street extended almost due north and south, and stopped close to the river. Komov decided to make camp in the center of the city. The setting up started at around 3:00 p.m. local time (a day on Leonida was twenty-seven hours some minutes).
The heat seemed to grow worse as the afternoon wore on. There was no breeze, and warm air shimmered over the gray parallelepipeds of buildings. It was a bit cooler only in the southern part of the city, near the river. There was a smell of, in Fokin’s words, hay and “a touch of chlorella plantation.”
Komov took Mboga and Ryu, who had offered his help, got in the helicopter, and set off for the boat to get equipment and provisions, while Tanya and Fokin surveyed the city. There was relatively little equipment, and Komov transferred it in two trips. When he had come back the first time, Fokin, while helping with the unloading, had stated somewhat pompously that all the buildings in the city were quite similar in size.
“Very interesting,” Ryu said politely.
This showed, Fokin stated, that all the buildings had one and the same function. “All we have to do is establish what,” he added as an afterthought.
When the helicopter returned the second time, Komov saw that Tanya and Fokin had set up a high pole and had raised over the city the unofficial flag of the Pathfinders-a white field with a stylized depiction of a heptagonal nut. A long time ago, almost a century back, one prominent spaceman and fervent opponent of the study of the evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence in outer space had once said heatedly that the only evidence that he was ready to consider irrefutable would be a wheel on an axle, a diagram of the Pythagorean theorem carved onto a cliffside, or a heptagonal nut. The Pathfinders had accepted the challenge and had emblazoned their flag with a depiction of a heptagonal nut.


Komov saluted the flag gladly. Much fuel had been burned and many parsecs had been traveled since the flag had been created. It had first flown over the circular streets of the empty city on Mars. At that time the fantastic hypothesis that both the city and the Martian satellites could have a natural origin had still had currency. At that time even the most daring Pathfinders merely considered the city and the satellites to be the sole remains of a mysterious vanished Martian civilization. And many parsecs had to be traveled, and much ground had to be dug, before only one hypothesis remained unrefuted: the empty cities and the abandoned satellites had been built by visitors from an unknown distant planetary system. But this city on Leonida…
Komov got the last pack out of the helicopter cabin, jumped into the grass, and slammed the door shut. Ryu went up to him, and said while rolling down his sleeves, “And now I must leave you, Gennady. I have a sounding in twenty minutes.”
“Of course,” said Komov. “Thank you, Ryu. Come have supper with us.”
Ryu looked at his watch and said, “Thank you, but I can’t guarantee it.” Mboga, leaning his carbine against the wall of the nearest building,
inflated a tent right in the middle of the street. He watched Ryu leave and then smiled at Komov, parting the gray lips on his small wrinkled face. “This is verily a planet with all the conveniences, Gennady,” he said. “Here we walk around weaponless, pitch tents right on the grass. And this…” He nodded in the direction of Fokin and Tanya. The Pathfinder archaeologist and the archaeological engineer, having trampled down the grass around them, were fussing over the autolab in the shade of a building. The archaeological engineer wore shorts and a silk sleeveless blouse. Her heavy shoes adorned the roof of the building, and her coverall lay next to the packs. Fokin, wearing gym shorts, was tearing off his sweat-drenched jacket.
“Good grief,” Tanya was saying, “How did you connect the batteries?” “In a minute, in a minute, Tanya,” Fokin answered vaguely.
“No,” said Komov. “This isn’t Pandora.” He dragged a second tent out of the pack and set about fitting the rotary pump to it. No, this isn’t Pandora, he thought. On Pandora they had forced their way through murky jungles wearing heavy-duty spacesuits, carrying cumbersome disintegrators with the safety catches off. It squished underfoot, and with


every step multilegged vermin ran every which way, while overhead two blood-red suns shone dimly through the tangle of sticky branches. And it was not only Pandora! On every planet with an atmosphere the Pathfinders and the Assaultmen moved with the greatest caution, driving before them columns of robot scouts, self-propelled biolabs, toxicanalyzers, condensed clouds of universal virophages. Immediately after landing, a ship’s captain was required to burn out a safety zone with thermite. It was considered an enormous crime to return to a ship without a preliminary, very careful disinfection and disinfestation. Invisible monsters more terrible than the plague or leprosy lay in wait for the unwary. It had happened only thirty years back.
It could happen even now on Leonida, the planet with all the conveniences. There were microfauna here too, and very abundant they were. But thirty years ago, small Doctor Mboga had found the “battery of life” on fierce Pandora, and Professor Karpenko on Earth had discovered bioblockading. One injection a day. You could even get by with one a week. Komov wiped his damp face and started undoing his jacket.
When the sun had sunk toward the west and the sky in the east had turned from a whitish color to dark violet, they sat down to supper. The camp was ready. Three tents crossed the street, and the packs and boxes of equipment were neatly stacked along the wall of one of the buildings. Fokin, sighing, had cooked supper. Everyone was hungry, and consequently they did not wait for Ryu. From the camp they could see that Ryu was sitting on the roof of his laboratory, doing something with the antennas.
“Never mind—we’ll leave some for him,” Tanya promised.
“Go ahead,” said Fokin, starting to eat his boiled veal. “He’ll get hungry and he’ll come.”
“You picked the wrong place to put the helicopter, Gennady,” said Tanya. “It blocks off the whole view of the river.”
Everyone looked at the helicopter. It really did destroy the view. “You get a fine river view from the roof,” Komov said calmly. “No, really,” said Fokin, who was sitting with his back to the river.
“There’s nothing tasteful around here to look at.”
“What do you mean nothing?” Komov said as calmly as before. “What about the veal?” He lay down on his back and started looking at the sky.


“Here’s what I’m thinking about,” Fokin retorted, wiping his mustache with a napkin. “How will we dig into these graves?” He tapped his finger against the nearest building. “Shall we go under, or cut into the wall?”
“That’s not quite the problem,” Komov said lazily. “How did the owners get in?—that’s the problem. Did they cut into the walls too?”
Fokin looked thoughtfully at Komov and asked, “And what in fact do you know about the owners? Maybe they didn’t need to get in there.”
“Uh-huh,” said Tanya. “A new architectural principle. Somebody sat down on the grass, put walls and a ceiling around himself, and… and…”
“And went away,” Mboga finished.
“Well, suppose they really are tombs?” Fokin insisted. Everyone discussed this proposal for some time. “Tatyana, what do the analyses say?” asked Komov.
“Limestone,” said Tanya. “Calcium carbonate. Plus many impurities, of course. You know what it’s like? Coral reefs. And the more so, since the building is made out of a single piece.”
“A monolith of natural origin.”
“Here we go again with that natural business!” cried Fokin. “It’s a scientific law: you have only to find new evidence of aliens, and immediately people appear to declare that it’s a natural formation.”
“It’s a natural proposition,” said Komov.
“Tomorrow we’ll put together the intravisor and have a look,” Tanya promised. “The main thing is that this limestone has nothing in common with the stuff that the city on Mars is built from. Or the amberine of the city on Vladislava.”
“So someone else is wandering among the planets,” said Komov. “It would be nice if this time they left us something a little more substantial.”
“If we could just find a library,” moaned Fokin. “Or some sort of machinery!”
They fell silent. Mboga got out a short pipe, and started filling it. He squatted, looking pensively over the tents into the bright sky. Under the white kerchief, his small face had a look of complete peace and satisfaction.
“It’s peaceful,” said Tanya.
Boom! Bang! Rat-tat-tat! came from the direction of the base. “The devil!” muttered Fokin. “What in hell do we need that for?”


Mboga blew a smoke ring, and, watching it rise, said softly, “I understand, Boris. For the first time in my life I myself feel no joy in hearing our machines at work on an alien planet.”
“It’s somehow not alien, that’s the thing,” said Tanya.
A large black beetle flew in from somewhere or other, buzzing noisily, circled over the Pathfinders twice, and left. Fokin sniffed softly, and buried his nose in his bent elbow. Tanya got up and went into the tent. Komov got up too and stretched happily. It was so quiet and nice around that he was completely nonplussed when Mboga suddenly jumped up on his feet as if shot from a gun, and then froze, with his face turned toward the river. Komov turned his head in that direction too.
Some sort of enormous black hulk was moving toward the camp. The helicopter partly hid it, but they could see it sway as it walked, and could see the evening sun gleam on its moist shiny sides, which were puffed out like the belly of a hippopotamus. The hulk moved fairly rapidly, brushing aside the grass, and Komov saw with horror that the helicopter was swaying and had slowly started to tip over. Between the wall of a building and the belly of the helicopter a massive low forehead with two enormous bulges stuck out. Komov saw two small dull eyes, staring, as it seemed, straight at him. “Look out!” he yelled.
The helicopter tipped over, propping itself up in the grass on its rotor vanes. The monster kept moving toward the camp. It was no less than ten feet tall. Its striped sides rose and fell evenly, and they could hear measured, noisy breathing.
Behind Komov’s back, Mboga cocked the carbine with a click. Then Komov came to himself and backed toward the tent. Fokin scrambled quickly back on all fours, overtaking him. The monster was already just twenty paces away.
“Can you manage to break camp?” Mboga asked quickly. “No,” answered Komov.
“Then I’m going to fire,” said Mboga.
“Wait a moment,” said Komov. He stepped forward, waved his arm, and shouted “Stop!”
For an instant the mountain of meat on the hoof did stop. The knobby forehead suddenly lifted up, and a mouth as capacious as a helicopter cabin, stuffed with green grass cud, gaped open.
“Gennady!” cried Tanya. “Get back at once!”


The monster emitted a prolonged screeching sound and moved forward even faster.
“Stop!” Komov shouted again, but now without much enthusiasm. “Evidently it’s herbivorous,” he stated, and moved back toward the tents.
He looked back. Mboga was standing with his carbine at his shoulder, and Tanya was already covering her ears. Next to Tanya stood Fokin, with a pack on his back. “Are you going to shoot at it today or not?” Fokin yelled in a strained voice. “It’ll make off with the intravisor or—”
Ka-thwak! Mboga’s semiautomatic hunting carbine was a .64 caliber, and the kinetic energy of the bullet at a distance of ten paces equaled nine tons. The bullet landed in the very center of the forehead between the two bulges. The monster sat down hard on its rear. Ka-thwak! The second bullet turned the monster over on its back. Its short fat legs moved convulsively through the air. A “kh-h-a-a-a” came from the thick grass. The black belly rose and fell, and then all was quiet. Mboga put the carbine down. “Let’s go have a look,” he said.
The monster was no smaller in size than an adult African elephant, but it more resembled a gigantic hippopotamus.
“Red blood,” said Fokin. “And what is this?” The monster lay on its side, and along its belly extended three rows of soft protuberances the size of a fist. A shiny thick liquid oozed from the growths. Mboga suddenly inhaled noisily, took a drop of liquid on the tip of a finger, and tasted it.
“Yuck!” said Fonin.
The same expression appeared on all their faces. “Honey,” said Mboga.
“You don’t say!” exclaimed Komov. He hesitated, then also extended a finger. Tanya and Fokin watched his movements with disgust. “Real honey!” he exclaimed. “Lime-blossom honey!”
“Doctor Dickson had said that there are many saccharides in this grass,” said Mboga.
“A honey monster,” said Fokin. “Pity we did him in.”
“We!” exclaimed Tanya. “Good grief, go put away the intravisor.” “Well, okay,” said Komov. “What do we do now? It’s hot here, and with
a carcass like this next to the camp…”
“I’ll take care of it,” said Mboga. “Drag the tents twenty paces or so down the street. I’ll make all the measurements, look it over, and then annihilate it.”


“How?” asked Tanya.
“With a disintegrator. I have a disintegrator. And you, Tanya, get away from here. I am now going to embark on some very unappetizing work.”
They heard footsteps, and Ryu jumped out from behind the tent with a large automatic pistol. “What happened?” he asked, panting.
“We killed one of your hippopotamuses,” Fokin explained pompously. Ryu quickly looked everyone over and immediately relaxed. He stuck
his pistol in his belt. “Did it charge?” he asked.
“Not exactly,” Komov answered confusedly. “If you ask me, it was simply out for a stroll, but we have to stop it.”
Ryu looked at the overturned helicopter and nodded. “Can’t we eat it?” Fokin shouted from the tent.
Mboga said slowly, “It looks like somebody has already tried eating it.” Komov and Ryu went over to him. With his fingers, Mboga was feeling broad, deep, straight scars on the loin parts of the animal. “Powerful fangs
did that,” said Mboga. “Ones sharp as knives. Someone took off slices of five or six kilos each with one swipe.”
“Some sort of horror,” Ryu said very sincerely.
A strange, prolonged cry sounded high in the sky. Everyone looked up. “There they are!” said Ryu.
Large light-gray birds like eagles rushed headlong down on the city. One behind another, they dropped from an enormous altitude. Just over the humans’ heads they spread broad, soft wings and darted upward just as violently, pouring waves of warm air over the humans. They were enormous birds, larger than terrestrial condors or even the flying dragons of Pandora.
“Meat eaters!” Ryu said excitedly. He started to draw the pistol from his belt, but Mboga seized him firmly by the arm.
The birds rushed over the city and off into the violet evening sky to the west. When the last of them had disappeared, the same disturbing prolonged cry sounded.
“I was ready to fire,” Ryu said with relief.
“I know,” said Mboga. “But it seemed to me—” He stopped. “Yes,” said Komov. “It seemed that way to me too.”
Upon consideration, Komov ordered the tents to be moved not merely twenty paces, but onto the flat roof of one of the buildings. The buildings were low—only seven feet or so high—so it was not difficult to climb on


top of them. Tanya and Fokin put the packs with the most valuable instruments on the roof of the next building over. The helicopter was not damaged. Komov took it up and landed it neatly on the roof of a third building.
Mboga spent the whole night under the floodlights, examining the monster’s carcass. Then at dawn the street filled with a shrill hissing sound, a large cloud of white steam flew up over the city, and a short-lived orange glow flashed out. Fokin, who had never before seen an organic disintegrator at work, dashed out of a tent wearing only shorts, but all he saw was Mboga, who was unhurriedly cleaning a flood light, and an enormous cloud of fine gray dust over blackened grass. All that remained of the honey monster was its ugly head, expertly prepared, coated with transparent plastic, and destined for the Capetown Museum of Exozoology.
Fokin wished Mboga a good morning and was about to go back into the tent and finish his sleep, when he ran into Komov.
“Where are you going?” Komov inquired.
“To get dressed, of course,” Fokin replied with dignity. The morning was fresh and clear, except for scattered white clouds which floated unmoving in the violet sky to the south. Komov jumped down onto the grass and set off to fix breakfast. He planned on fixing fried eggs, but he couldn’t find the butter.
“Boris,” he called, “where’s the butter?”
Fokin was standing on the roof in a strange pose—he was doing Yoga exercises.
“I have no idea,” he said haughtily.
“You did the cooking yesterday evening.”
“Uh… yes. So the butter is where it was last evening.”
“And where was it last evening?” Komov asked with restraint.
Fokin, with a displeased look, disengaged his head from under his right knee. “How should I know?” he said. “We restacked all the boxes afterward.”
Komov sighed, and started patiently examining box after box. There was no butter. Then he went over to the building and dragged Fokin down by a leg. “Where’s the butter?” he asked.
Fokin had just opened his mouth to reply when Tanya came around the corner, wearing a sleeveless blouse and shorts. Her hair was wet.
“Morning, boys,” she said.


“Morning, Tanya my sweet,” said Fokin. “You haven’t by any chance seen the box of butter?”
“Where have you been?” Komov asked fiercely. “Swimming,” said Tanya.
“What do you mean you’ve been swimming?” said Komov. “Who gave you permission?”
Tanya unfastened from her belt an electric hacker in a plastic sheath, and threw it onto the boxes. “Gennady, old dear,” she said, “there aren’t any crocodiles here. The water is wonderful and the bottom is grassy.”
“You haven’t seen the butter?” Komov asked. “No, I haven’t—but has anybody seen my shoes?” “I have,” said Fonin. “They’re on the other roof.” “No, they’re not.”
All three turned around and looked at the roof. The shoes were gone. Komov looked at Mboga. He was lying on the grass in the shade, sleeping soundly, with his small fists under his cheek.
“Come now!” said Tanya. “What would he do with my shoes?” “Or the butter,” added Fokin.
“Perhaps they were in his way,” muttered Komov. “Well, all right. I’ll cook something without butter.”
“And without shoes.”
“All right, all right,” said Komov. “Go work on the intravisor. You too, Tanya. Try to get it put together as soon as possible.”
Ryu came to breakfast. Before him he herded a large black machine on six hemomechanical legs. The machine left behind it a broad swath through the grass, stretching all the way back to the base. Ryu scrambled up to the roof and sat at the table, while the machine stopped in the middle of the street below.
“Tell me, Ryu,” said Komov. “Did anything ever get lost on you back at the base?”
“Like what?” asked Ryu.
“Well, say you leave something outside overnight, and you can’t find it in the morning.”
“Not that I know of.” Ryu shrugged. “Sometimes little things get lost—bits of rubbish, pieces of wire, scraps of lithoplast. But I think my cybers pick up that sort of trash. They’re very economical little comrades, and they can find a use for anything.”


“Could they find a use for my shoes?” asked Tanya.
Ryu laughed. “I don’t know,” he said. “I hardly think so.” “And could they find a use for a box of butter?” asked Fokin. Ryu stopped laughing. “You’ve lost your butter?” he asked. “And a pair of shoes.”
“No,” said Ryu. “The cybers don’t go into the city.”
Deftly as a lizard, Mboga climbed onto the roof. “Good morning,” he said. “I’m late.”
Tanya poured him his coffee. Mboga always breakfasted on one cup of coffee.
“So, we’ve been robbed,” he said, smiling. “Meaning it wasn’t you?” asked Fokin.
“No, it wasn’t me. But last night the birds we saw yesterday flew over the city twice.”
“And so much for the shoes,” said Fokin. “Somewhere I—”
“I haven’t lost anything in two months,” said Ryu. “Of course, I keep everything in the dome. And then, I have the cybers. And smoke and noise all the time,”
“Okay,” said Fokin, getting up. “Let’s get to work, Tanya girl. Imagine, a pair of shoes!”
They left, and Komov started gathering up the dishes. “I’ll post a guard around you this evening,” said Ryu.
“As you like,” Mboga said thoughtfully. “But I’d prefer doing it myself at first. Gennady, I’m going to bed right now, and tonight I’ll set up a little ambush.”
“Very well, Doctor Mboga,” Komov said reluctantly. “Then I’ll come too,” said Ryu.
“Do that,” Mboga agreed. “But no cybers, please.”
From the next roof came an outburst of indignation. “Good grief, I asked you to put the packs down in order of assembly!”
“I did! That is how I put them!”
“You call this order of assembly? E-7, A-2, B-16… then E again!” “Tanya my sweet! Honest! Comrades!” Fokin called across the street in
a wounded voice. “Who mixed up the packs?”
“Look!” shouted Tanya. “Pack E-9 is gone completely!” Mboga said quietly, “Messieurs, we’re also missing a sheet.”


“What?” said Komov. He was pale. “Search everywhere!” he shouted, jumping from the roof and running toward Fokin and Tanya. Mboga watched him go and then started looking to the south, across the river. He could hear Komav say on the next roof, “What exactly is missing?”
“The HFG,” Tanya answered.
“So what are you standing there jabbering for? Put together a new one.” “That will take two days,” Tanya said angrily.
“Then what do you suggest?”
“We’ll have to cut,” said Fokin. Then silence reigned on the roof. “Ryu, look,” Mboga said suddenly. He stood up and, shading his eyes
from the sun, looked across the river.
Ryu turned around. Across the river the green plain was dotted with black spots-hippopotamus backs, and there were very many of them. Ryu had never imagined that there could be so many. The spots were slowly moving south.
“I think they’re going away,” Mboga said.
Komov decided to spend the night under the open sky. He dragged his cot out of the tent and lay down on the roof, his hands behind his head. The sky was blue-black, and a large greenish-orange disk with fuzzy edges —Palmyra, the moon of Leonida—crawled slowly up from the eastern horizon. Muffled drawn-out cries, no doubt those of the birds, came from the dark plain across the river. Brief flashes of sheet lightning appeared over the base, and something gnashed and crackled softly.
We’ll have to put up a fence, thought Komov. Enclose the city with an electric fence, and run through a fairly weak current But then, if it’s the birds, a fence won’t help. And it probably is the birds. A huge critter like that wouldn’t have any trouble at all in dragging off a pack. It could probably even carry off a person. After all, on Pandora once a flying dragon grabbed a man in a heavy-duty spacesuit, and that was maybe one-hundred-fifty kilos. That’s the way things are going. First shoes, then a pack… and the whole expedition has only one carbine. Why was Gorbovsky so set against weapons? Of course we should have opened fire then—at least to scare them away. Why wouldn’t the doctor fire? Because it “seemed” to him… and I wouldn’t have fired myself because it had “seemed” to me too. And just exactly what had it seemed to me? Komov wiped his forehead, wet from nervousness, vigorously with his hand. Enormous birds, beautiful birds, and how they flew! What noiseless,


effortless, perfect flight! Well, even hunters sometimes pity the game, and I’m no hunter.
A bright white little spot among the twinkling stars slowly went past the zenith. Komov got up on his elbows and watched it. It was the Sunflower —a kilometer-long super-long-range Assault starship. It was now orbiting Leonida at a distance of two megameters. They had only to send a distress signal, and help would come from there. But should they send a distress signal? They had lost one pair of shoes, a pack, and something had “seemed” to the chief…
The little white spot grew dim and vanished. The Sunflower had gone off into Leonida’s shadow. Komov lay down again and put his hands behind his head. Aren’t there just too many conveniences? he thought. Warm green plains, sweet-scented air, an idyllic river with no crocodiles… Maybe this is only a smokescreen that some sort of unknown forces are operating behind? Or is everything much simpler? Say Tanya lost her shoes somewhere in the grass. And everyone knows Fokin is a muddler—the lost packs could be lying somewhere under a pile of excavator parts. I mean, today he was running around all day from pile to pile, glancing around on the sly.
Komov must have dozed off. When he awoke again, Palmyra was high in the sky. From the tent where Fokin was sleeping came smacking and snoring sounds. There was whispering on the next roof:
“… As soon as the cable broke, off we flew, leaving Saburo below. He chased after us and shouted for us to stop, then named me captain and ordered me to stop. Of course right away I started steering for the relay mast. We tied up to it and hung there for the whole night. And the whole time we shouted at each other, arguing over whether Saburo should go find Teacher or not. Saburo could go, but wouldn’t, and we would, but couldn’t. Finally in the morning they saw us and got us down.”
“Well, I was a quiet girl. And I was always scared of any sort of machinery. I’m still afraid of cybers.”
“There’s no reason to be afraid of cybers, Tanya. Cybers are gentle.” “I don’t like them. I don’t like the way they’re sort of animate and
inanimate at the same time.”
Komov turned over on his side and looked. Tanya and Ryu were sitting crosslegged on the next roof. Ah, the lovebirds, thought Komov. Tomorrow


they’ll be yawning all day. “Tanya,” he said in a low voice, “it’s time to go to sleep.”
“I’m not sleepy,” said Tanya. “We were walking along the bank.” Ryu started to move off in embarrassment. “It’s nice by the river. The moonlight, and the fish jumping…”
Ryu said, “Hey, where’s Doctor Mboga?” “He’s at work,” said Komov.
“Really!” Tanya said happily, “Ryu, let’s go find Doctor Mboga!”
She’s hopeless, Komov thought, and rolled over onto his other side. The whispering on the roof continued. Komov got up decisively, took his cot, and went back into the tent. It was very noisy there—Fokin was sleeping with all his might. You muddler, you muddler, Komov thought as he settled himself in. Such a night for romance. But you grew your mustache and thought it was in the bag. He wrapped himself up in a sheet and fell asleep instantly.
A muffled roar tossed him on the cot. It was dark in the tent. Ka-thwack! Ka-thwack! thundered two more shots. “The devil!” Fokin yelled in the darkness. “Who’s there?” Komov heard a short harelike cry and a triumphant yell, “Ha! Come here, come with me!” Komov tangled himself up in the sheet and could not get up. He heard a muffled blow, Fokin’s “Ow!”, and then something small and dark showed for an instant, and disappeared through the light triangle of the doorway of the tent. Komov darted after it. Fokin did too, and they bumped heads violently. Komov clenched his teeth and at last flung himself outside. The other roof was empty. Looking around, Komov saw Mboga running through the grass down the street toward the river, and Riu and Tanya following on his heels, stumbling. And Komov noticed something else—someone was running far ahead of Mboga, parting the grass before him—was running much faster than Mboga. Mboga stopped, pointed his carbine straight up with one arm, and fired again. The wake in the grass swerved to one side and disappeared around the corner of the last building. After a second a bird, white in the moonlight, gracefully spread wide its enormous wings, and rose up from that spot.
“Shoot!” yelled Fokin.
He was already dashing down the street, stumbling at every fifth step. Mboga stood motionless, with his carbine lowered, and, craning his neck, watched the bird. It made an even, noiseless circle over the city, gaining


altitude, and flew off to the south. In a moment it had disappeared. Then Komov saw more birds flying very low over the base—three, four, five—five enormous white birds shot upward over the cybers’ workplace, and disappeared.
Komov got down from the roof. The dead parallelepipeds of the buildings threw dense black shadows onto the grass. The grass looked silver. Something jingled underfoot. Komov bent over. A cartridge-case gleamed in the grass. Komov crossed over the distorted shadow of the helicopter, and heard voices. Mboga, Fokin, Ryu, and Tanya were walking unhurriedly toward him.
“I had him in my hands!” Fokin said excitedly. “But he knocked me on the head and tore away. If he hadn’t slugged me, I never would have let him go! He was soft and warm, like a child. And naked.”
“We almost caught him too,” said Tanya. “But he turned into a bird and flew away.”
“Come now!” scoffed Fokin. “Turned into a bird…”
“No, really,” Ryu insisted. “He rounded the corner, and right away a bird flew up.”
“So?” said Fokin. “He flushed a bird, and you stood there with your mouths gaping.”
“A coincidence,” said Mboga.
Komov went up to them, and they stopped. “What exactly happened?” asked Komov.
“I had caught him,” declared Fokin, “but he knocked me over the head.” “I heard that,” said Komov. “How did it all start?”
“I was sitting on the packs, in ambush,” said Mboga. “I saw someone creeping through the grass right in the middle of the street. I wanted to catch him, and I moved toward him, but he saw me and turned back. I saw I couldn’t catch him, and fired into the air. I’m very sorry, Gennady, but I think I frightened them off.”
Silence reigned. Then Fokin asked doubtfully, “Exactly why are you sorry, Doctor Mboga?”
Mboga did not answer at once. Everyone waited. “There were at least two of them,” he finally said. “I discovered one, and the other was in the tent with you. But when I ran past the helicopter… well, look for yourselves,” he concluded unexpectedly. “You’ll have to examine it. Probably I’m wrong.” Silently Mboga started walking toward the camp.


The others, exchanging glances, moved after him. Mboga stopped near the building on which the helicopter was sitting. “Somewhere around here,” he said.
Fokin and Tanya quickly crawled into the dark shadow under the wall. Ryu and Komov looked down expectantly at Mboga. He was thinking.
“There’s nothing here,” Fokin snapped.
“Just what did I see?” muttered Mboga. “Just what did I see?” Fokin, irritated, moved away from the wall. The black shadow of the
rotor vane crept across his face.
“Aha!” Mboga said loudly. “A strange shadow!”
He threw down the carbine and with a running jump he leapt onto the wall. “Please!” he said from the roof.
On the roof, beyond the helicopter fuselage, as if in a shop window, the things were neatly arranged-the butter, pack number E-9, the shoes, a neatly folded sheet, a pocket microelectrometer in a plastic case, four neutron batteries, a ball of dried vitriplast, and a pair of sunglasses.
“Here are my shoes,” said Tanya. “And my sunglasses. I dropped them into the river yesterday.”
“Ye-es,” Fokin said, and looked around carefully.
Komov seemed to come to himself. “Ryu!” he quickly shouted. “I have to get hold of the Sunflower immediately. Fokin, Tanya, make a photograph of this display! I’ll be back in half an hour.”
He jumped off the roof and started walking quickly, then broke into a run, heading down the street toward the base. Ryu followed him without saying anything.
“What’s going on?” yelled Fokin.
Mboga squatted down, got out his small pipe, puffed at it unhurriedly, and said, “They’re people, Boris. Even animals can steal things, but only people can bring back what they have stolen.”
Fokin moved back and sat on the wheel of the helicopter.
Komov returned alone. He seemed very excited, and in a high-pitched metallic voice he ordered them to break camp immediately. Fokin started showering him with questions. He demanded explanations. Then Komov recited in the same metallic voice: “By order of the captain of the starship Sunflower: Within three hours the meteorological base and laboratory, and the archeological camp will be dismantled; all cybernetic systems will be shut down; and all personnel, including Atmosphere Physicist Waseda,


will return on board the Sunflower.” Fokin submitted out of sheer surprise and set to work with unusual diligence.
In two hours the helicopter made eight trips, and the cargo robots trampled down a broad road through the grass from the base to the boat. Of the base, only empty construction sites remained—all three systems of construction robots had been herded inside the storehouse and completely deprogrammed.
At six o’clock in the morning local time, when the east had begun to glow with the green dawn, the exhausted humans gathered by the boat, and here, at last, Fokin lost patience.
“Well, all right,” he began in an irate hoarse whisper. “You relayed us orders, Gennady, and we have carried them out honestly. But I would like to find out at last how come we’re leaving here! Why?” he yelped suddenly in a falsetto, picturesquely throwing up his hands. Everyone jumped, and Mboga dropped the pipe from his teeth. “Why? We look for Brothers in Reason for three hundred years, and run off with our tails between our legs as soon as we’ve discovered them? The best minds of humanity—”
“Good grief,” said Tanya, and Fokin shut up.
“I don’t understand a thing,” he said then in a hoarse whisper.
“Do you think, Boris, that we are capable of representing the best minds of humanity?” asked Mboga.
Komov muttered gloomily, “We’ve sure messed things up here! We burned out a whole field, trampled crops, shot guns. And around the base!” He waved his hand.
“But how could we know?” Ryu said guiltily.
“Yes,” said Mboga. “We made many mistakes. But I hope they’ve understood us. They’re civilized enough for that.”
“What sort of a civilization is this!” said Fokin. “Where are the machines? Where are the tools? Where are the cities?”
“Shut up, Boris,” said Komov. “‘Machines, cities’—just open your eyes! Do we know how to fly on birds? Have we bred animals that produce honey? Has our last mosquito been long exterminated? ‘Machines.’…”
“A biological civilization,” said Mboga. “What?” asked Fokin.
“A biological civilization. Not machines, but selection, genetics, animal training. Who knows what forces they’ve mastered? And who can say


whose civilization is superior?” “Imagine, Boris,” said Tanya,
Fokin twirled his mustache furiously.
“And we’re clearing out,” said Komov, “because none of us has the right to take upon himself the responsibility of first contact.” Oh, am I sorry to leave! he thought. I don’t want to go—I want to search them out, to meet them, to talk, to see what they’re like. Can this really have happened at last? Not some brainless lizards, not some sort of leeches, but a real human race. A whole world, a whole history… Did you have wars and revolutions? Which did you get first, steam or electricity? And what is the meaning of life? And might I perhaps have something to read? The first essay in the comparative history of intelligent species. And we have to go. Oh boy, oh boy, do I ever feel like staying! But on Earth there has already for fifty years been a Commission on Contacts, which for all those years has been studying the comparative psychology of fish and ants, and arguing over in what language to say the first “uh.” Only now you can’t laugh at them any more. I wonder whether any of them had foreseen the possibility of a biological civilization. Probably. What haven’t they foreseen?
“Gorbovsky is a man of phenomenal penetration,” said Mboga. “Yes,” said Tanya. “It’s frightening to think what old Boris could have
done if he’d had a gun.”
“Why single me out?” Fokin said angrily, “What about you? Who was it that went swimming with a hacker?”
“We’re all a fine bunch,” Ryu said with a sigh.
Komov looked at his watch. “Takeoff in twenty minutes,” he announced. “Stations, please.”
Mboga hesitated in the airlock and looked back. The white star EN 23 had already risen over the green plain. It smelled of moist grass, warm earth, fresh honey. “Yes,” said Mboga. “Really a planet with all the conveniences. Why did we ever think nature could have created anything like it?”






Part Four: What You Will Be Like
Y