2. Almost the Same
T 


hey were sitting in the corridor on the windowsill opposite the door —they were about to be called in. Sergei Kondratev swung his feet, while Panin, twisting his short neck around, looked out the window
at the park. There, in the volleyball court, the girls from the Remote Control Division were jumping up and down near the net. His chin resting on his hands, Sergei Kondratev looked at the door, at the shining black plate that read “Large Centrifuge.” In the Advanced School of Cosmonautics there were four divisions. Three of them had training halls, with plates with the same words hanging at the door. It always made you nervous waiting till they called you into the Large Centrifuge. Take Panin, for example. He was obviously gawking at the girls in order not to show how nervous he was. And Panin just had the most ordinary conditioning scheduled for today. “They play a good game,” Panin said in his bass voice.
“Right,” Sergei said without turning around. “Number four does a great pass.”
“Yeah,” said Sergei. He shrugged. He had a great pass too, but he didn’t turn around.
Panin looked at Sergei, glanced at the door, and then said, “They’re going to carry you out of here today.”
Sergei remained silent. “Feet first,” said Panin.
“Sure thing,” said Sergei holding himself back. “No chance of them carrying you, though.”
“Calm down, superjock,” said Panin. “A true superjock is always calm, cool, ready for anything.”
“I am calm,” said Sergei.
“You? Calm?” Panin said, poking him in the chest with his finger. “You’re vibrating, shaking like a smallfry at a launch. It’s disgusting, seeing the way you tremble.”
“So don’t look,” Sergei advised him. “Look at the girls instead. Great passing ability, and all that.”
“You haven’t got the right attitude,” Panin said, and looked through the window. “They’re fantastic girls! They play an amazing game!”


“So look,” said Sergei. “And try not to let your teeth chatter.” “Whose teeth are chattering?” Panin asked in amazement. “Yours.” Sergei remained silent.
“It’s all right for my teeth to chatter,” Panin said after thinking it over. “I’m not a jock.” He sighed, looked at the door and said, “But I wish they’d call us in and—” He broke off.
From the left, at the end of the corridor, appeared Grigory Bystrov, a second-year cadet who was class representative. He was wearing a test suit. He walked slowly, running his finger along the wall, his face pensive. He stopped in front of Kondratev and Panin and said, “Hello, guys.” His voice was sad.
Sergei nodded. Panin condescended to say, “Hello, Grigory. Do you start vibrating before you ride the Centrifuge, Grigory?”
“Yeah,” Grigory answered. “A little.”
“Well,” Panin said to Sergei. “So Grigory vibrates just a little. But then of course he’s still a smallfry.”
“Smallfry” was what they called underclassmen at the school. Grigory sighed and sat down on the windowsill too. “Sergei,” he said,
“Are you really making your first try at eight Gs today?”
“Yeah,” said Sergei. He had not the least desire to talk, but he didn’t want to offend Grigory. “If they let me, of course,” he added.
“Probably they will,” Grigory said.
“Think of it, eight Gs!” Panin said flippantly.
“Have you tried pulling eight yourself?” Grigory asked with interest. “No,” said Panin. “But then I’m not a jock.”
“But maybe you will try?” said Sergei. “Right now, together with me.” “I’m a simple man, a guileless man,” Panin answered. “There is a norm.
The norm is five gravities. My simple, uncomplicated organism cannot bear anything exceeding the norm. My organism tried six once, and got carried out at six minutes some seconds. With me along.”
“Who got carried out?” asked Grigory, confused. “My organism,” Panin explained.
“Oh,” said Grigory with a weak smile. “And I haven’t even pulled five yet.”
“You don’t have to pull five in the second year,” said Sergei. He jumped off the windowsill and started doing knee-bends alternately on right and left legs.


“Well, I’m off,” Grigory said, and jumped off the windowsill too. “What happened, Great Leader?” Panin asked him. “Why such
melancholy?”
“Someone played a joke on Kopylov,” Grigory answered sadly. “Again?” said Panin. “What kind of joke?”
Second-year cadet Valentin Kopylov was famous throughout the division for his devotion to computer technology. Recently a very good new LIANTO waveguide computer had been installed in the division, and Valentin spent all his free time at its side. He would have spent his nights there too, but at night LIANTO did calculations for the diplomats, and Valentin was heartlessly shown the door.
“One of our people programmed a love letter,” Grigory said. “Now on the last cycle LIANTO prints, ‘Kopylov fills my life with blisses / So from LIANTO, love and kisses.’ In simple letter code.”
“‘Love and kisses,’” said Sergei, massaging his shoulders. “Some poets. They should be put out of their misery.”
“Just think,” said Panin. “One of the current smallfry has gotten all jolly.”
“And witty,” said Sergei.
“What are you telling me for?” said Grigory. “Go tell those idiots. ‘Love and kisses,’ indeed! Last night Kan was running a calculation, and instead of an answer, zap!—’Love and kisses.’ Now he’s called me on the carpet.”
Todor Kan, Iron Kan, was the head of the Navigation Division. “Wow!” said Panin. “You’re going to have an interesting half hour,
Great Leader. Iron Kan is a very lively conversationalist.”
“Iron Kan is a lover of literature,” Sergei said. “He won’t tolerate a class representative with such rotten versifiers for classmates.”
“I’m a simple man, a guileless man…” Panin began. At that moment the door opened slightly and the trainer stuck his head through.
“Panin, Kondratev, get ready,” he said.
Panin stopped short and straightened out his jacket. “Let’s go,” he said. Kondratev nodded to Grigory and followed on Panin’s heels into the
training hall. The hall was enormous, and in the middle of it sparkled a thirteen-foot double arm resting on a fat cubical base-the Large Centrifuge. The arm was turning. The gondolas on its ends, thrown outward by centrifugal force, lay almost horizontal. There were no windows in the gondolas; observation of the cadets was carried out from inside the base


with the help of a system of mirrors. By the wall several cadets were resting on a vaulting box. Craning their necks, they followed the hurtling gondolas.
“Four Gs,” said Panin, looking at the gondolas. “Five,” said Kondratev. “Who’s in there now?” “Nguyen and Gurgenidze,” the trainer said.
He brought two acceleration suits, helped Kondratev and Panin to put them on, and laced them up. The acceleration suits looked like silkworm cocoons.
“Wait,” the trainer said, and went over to the base.
Once a week every cadet rode the centrifuge, getting acceleration conditioning. One hour once a week for the whole five years. You had to sit there and stick it out, and listen to your bones creak, and feel the broad straps dig through the thick cloth of the suit into your soft body, feel your face droop, feel how hard it was to blink, because your eyelids were so heavy. And while this was going on you had to solve boring problems, or else assemble standard computer subprograms, and this wasn’t at all easy, even though the problems and the subprograms were ones you had had your first year. Some cadets could pull seven gravities, while others couldn’t manage even three—they couldn’t cope with vision blackouts. They were transferred to the Remote Control Division.
The arm turned more slowly, and the gondolas hung more nearly vertical. From one of them crawled skinny, dark Nguyen Phu Dat. He stopped, hanging onto the open door, rocking. Gurgenidze tumbled clumsily from the other gondola. The cadets on the vaulting box jumped to their feet, but the trainer had already helped him up, and he sat down on the floor, propping himself up with his arms.
“Step lively now, Gurgenidze,” one of the cadets shouted loudly. Everyone laughed. Everyone except Panin.
“Never mind, guys,” Gurgenidze said hoarsely, and got up. “Nothing to it!” He contorted his face horribly, stretching the numbed muscles of his cheeks. “Nothing to it!” he repeated.
“Boy, they sure are going to carry you out today, superjock!” Panin said, softly but very energetically.
Kondratev made as if he were not listening. If they do carry me out, he thought, that will be the end. They can’t do it. They mustn’t. “He’s on the


chubby side, Gurgenidze is,” he said aloud. “The heavy ones don’t take acceleration well.”
“He’ll thin down,” Panin said cheerfully. “If he wants to, he’ll thin down.”
Panin had lost fifteen pounds before he had managed to endure the five gravities established as the norm. It was an excruciating process. But he did not at all want to get sent to Remote Control. He wanted to be a navigator.
A hatch opened in the base. Out crawled an instructor in a white coat, who took the sheets of paper with Nguyen and Gurgenidze’s answers.
“Are Kondratev and Panin ready?” he asked. “Ready,” said the trainer.
The instructor glanced cursorily over the sheets of paper. “Right,” he said. “Nguyen and Gurgenidze can go. You’ve passed.”
“Hey, great!” Gurgenidze said. He immediately began to look better. “You mean I passed too?”
“You too,” said the instructor.
Gurgenidze suddenly hiccuped resoundingly. Everyone laughed again, even Panin, and Gurgenidze was very embarrassed. Even Nguyen Phu Dat laughed, loosening the lacing of his suit at the waist. He obviously felt wonderful.
The instructor said, “Panin and Kondratev, into the gondolas.” “Sir—” began Sergei.
The instructor’s face took on a preoccupied look. “Oh, I forgot. I’m very sorry, Sergei, but the doctor has forbidden you to try accelerations above the norm. Temporarily.”
“What?” Sergei asked with fright. “You’re forbidden.”
“But I’ve already pulled seven Gs.”
“I’m very sorry, Sergei,” the instructor repeated. “It’s some sort of mistake. It’s got to be.”
The instructor shrugged.
“I can’t have this,” Sergei said in despair. “I’ll get out of shape.” He looked at Panin. Panin was looking at the floor. Sergei once again faced the instructor. “It’s the end of everything for me.”
“It’s only temporary,” said the instructor. “How long is temporary?”


“Until further notice. Maybe two months, no longer. It happens sometimes. In the meantime you’ll be training at five Gs. You’ll catch up later.”
“Never mind, Sergei,” Panin said in his bass. “Take a little rest from your multigravities.”
“I would still like to ask—” Sergei began in a repulsively ingratiating voice that he had never used before in his life.
The instructor frowned. “We’re wasting time, Kondratev,” he said. “Get into the gondola.”
“Yes, sir,” Sergei said softly, and crawled into the gondola.
He seated himself in the couch, fastened himself in with the broad straps, and began to wait. In front of the couch was a mirror, and in it he saw his gloomy, angry face. It would be better if they did carry me out, he thought. Now my muscles will get soft and I’ll have to start all over Now when will I ever get to ten Gs? Or even eight? They all think I’m some sort of jock, he thought venemously. The doctor too. Maybe I should tell him? He imagined that he was telling the doctor why he had to have all this and that the doctor looked at him with cheery, faded eyes and said, “Moderation, Sergei, moderation.”
“Overcautious old bird,” Sergei said aloud. He meant the doctor, but suddenly he realized that the instructor might hear him over the speaking tube and take it personally. “Well, all right,” he said loudly.
The gondola rocked smoothly. The conditioning session had begun. When they had left the training hall, Panin quickly started massaging the
bags under his eyes. Like all the cadets inclined to stoutness, he always got bags under his eyes after the Large Centrifuge. Panin worried a good deal about his appearance. He was handsome and was used to being admired. Consequently, right after the Large Centrifuge he immediately set to work on the bags.
“You never get this crud,” he said to Sergei. Sergei remained silent.
“You have a very efficient physique, superjock. Like a roach.” “I wish I had your problems,” Sergei said.
“They told you it’s only temporary, worrywart.”
“That’s what they told Galtsev, and then they switched him over to Remote Control.”


“Oh, well,” Panin said judiciously, “so this wasn’t the job he was cut out for.”
Sergei clenched his teeth.
“Oh, agony!” said Panin. “They won’t let him pull eight Gs. Now take me, I’m a simple man, a guileless man…”
Sergei stopped. “You listen,” he said. “Bykov brought the Takhmasib back from Jupiter only by going to twelve gravities. Maybe you didn’t know that?”
“I know it,” said Panin.
“And Yusupov died because he couldn’t take eight. You know that too?” “Yusupov was a test navigator,” Panin said, “so he doesn’t count here.
And Bykov, I’ll have you know, did not have one hour of acceleration conditioning in his entire life.”
“Are you sure?” Sergei asked angrily.
“Well, maybe he did have conditioning, but he didn’t go try and rupture himself like you, superjock.”
“Do you really think I’m a jock?” Sergei asked.
Panin looked at him in puzzlement. “Well, I’m not saying there’s anything wrong with it. It’s a very useful thing out there, of course.”
“Okay,” said Sergei. “Let’s go over to the park. We have a chance to loosen up.”
They started down the corridor. Panin, still massaging the bags under his eyes, glanced through every window.
“The girls are still playing,” he said. He stopped at a window and stuck out his neck. “Ha! There she is!”
“Who?” asked Sergei.
“I don’t know her name.” “Impossible.”
“No, really—I danced with her day before yesterday. But I have no idea what her name is.”
Sergei looked out the window too.
“That one,” said Panin. “With the bandaged knee.”
Sergei caught sight of the girl with the bandaged knee. “I see her,” he said. “Let’s go.”
“Very nice-looking,” said Panin. “Very. And smart.”
“Come on, come on,” said Sergei. He took Panin by the elbow and dragged him along.


“Where’s the fire?” Panin asked in surprise.
They walked past empty classrooms and glanced into the simulator room. The simulator room was fitted out like the navigation deck of a real interplanetary photon ship, except that on the control board was mounted the big white cube of the stochastic computer in the place of the video screen. The computer was the source of navigation problems. When turned on, it randomly supplied input for the board’s indicators. The cadet then had to set up a system of course commands optimally responding to the conditions of the problem.
Right now, a whole gaggle of obvious smallfry was crowded in front of the control board. They shouted to one another, waved back and forth, and shoved each other. Then suddenly it became quiet, and the clicking of the keys on the board could be heard. Someone was entering a command. The agonizing silence was broken by the buzz of the computer, and on the board a red light went on—an incorrect solution. The smallfry let out a roar. They dragged somebody out of the control seat and shoved him away. The disheveled unfortunate shouted loudly, “I told you so!”
“Why are you so sweaty?” Panin asked him with disdain. “Because I’m so mad,” said the smallfry.
The computer buzzed again, and again the red light on the control board went on.
“I told you so!” the same smallfry yelled.
“Now then,” Panin said, and shouldered his way through the crowd. All the smallfry quieted down. Sergei saw Panin bend over the board,
then the keys clattered quickly and surely, the computer began to hum, and a green light appeared on the board. The smallfry groaned.
“Well, so that’s Panin,” someone said.
“That’s Panin for you,” the sweaty smallfry said to Sergei reproachfully. “Smooth plasma,” said Panin, extracting himself from the crowd. “Carry
on. Let’s go, Sergei.”
Then they glanced into the computer room. People were studying there, but beside the graceful gray casing of LIANTO squatted three technicians, rummaging through circuit diagrams. The sad second-year cadet, Grigory Bystrov, was there as well.
“From LIANTO, love and kisses,” Panin said. “It seems that Bystrov is still alive. Curious.”


He looked at Sergei and slapped him on the back. A respectable echo rang down the corridor. “Buck up,” Panin said.
“Cut it out,” said Sergei.
They descended the staircase, passed through the lobby with the big bronze bust of Tsiolkovsky, and went out into the park.
By the entrance a second-year man was watering the flowers with a hose. As he passed him, Panin declaimed, with exaggerated gestures, “Kopylov fills my life with blisses / So from LIANTO, love and kisses.” The second-year man smiled with embarrassment and glanced at a window on the second floor.
They walked along a narrow lane planted with bird-cherry bushes. Panin was about to begin a loud song, but a group of girls in shorts and T-shirts came out from around a bend, walking towards them. The girls were coming back from the volleyball court. In front, with the ball under her arm, walked Katya. That’s just what I needed, thought Sergei. Now she’ll stare at me out of those round eyes. And she’ll start the thousand-words-with-a-glance routine. He even stopped for a second. He had a fierce desire to jump through the bird-cherry bushes and crawl away somewhere. He glanced sidelong at Panin.
Panin smiled pleasantly, straightened his shoulders, and said in a velvet voice, “Hello, girls!”
The Remote Control Division vouchsafed him closed-mouthed smiles. Katya had eyes only for Sergei.
Oh, lord, he thought, and said, “Hi, Katya.”
“Hi, Sergei,” said Katya. She lowered her head and walked on. Panin stopped.
“Well, what’s your problem?” Sergei asked. “It’s her,” said Panin.
Sergei looked back. Katya was standing there, arranging her tousled hair and looking at him. Her right knee was wrapped in a dusty bandage. They looked at each other for several seconds—Katya’s eyes opened wide. Sergei bit his lip, turned, and went on without waiting for Panin. Panin caught up with him.
“Such beautiful eyes,” he said. “Sheep’s eyes,” said Sergei.
“Sheep yourself,” Panin snapped. “She’s a very, very beautiful girl. Hold it,” he said. “How come she knows you?”


Sergei didn’t answer, and Panin kept silent.
In the center of the park was a broad meadow with thick soft grass. Here the cadets usually crammed before theory exams and rested after acceleration conditioning, and here couples met on summer nights. At present the place was occupied by the fifth-year men of the Navigation Division. Most of them were under a white awning, where a game of four-dimensional chess was in progress. This highly intellectual game, in which the board and pieces had four spatial dimensions and existed only in the imaginations of the players, had been introduced to the school several years before by Zhilin, the same Zhilin who was now engineer on the
trans-Martian voyager Takhmasik. The senior classmen were quite fond of the game, but by no means could everyone play it. On the other hand, anyone who felt like it could kibitz. The shouts of the kibitzers filled the entire park.
“Should’ve moved the pawn to E-one-delta-H.” “Then you lose the fourth knight!”
“So? The pawns move into the bishops’ volume—”
“What bishops’ volume? Where do you get bishops’ volume? You’ve got the ninth move down wrong!”
“Listen, guys, take old Sasha away and tie him to a tree. And leave him there.”
Someone, probably one of the players, yelled excitedly, “Shut up! I can’t think!”
“Let’s go watch,” said Panin. He was a great fan of four-dimensional chess.
“I don’t want to,” said Sergei. He stepped over Gurgenidze, who was lying on Malyshev and twisting his arm up toward his neck. Malyshev was still struggling, but it was clear who had won. Sergei walked a few paces away from them and collapsed on the grass, stretching out full length. It was a little painful to stretch muscles after acceleration, but it was very helpful, and Sergei did a neck bridge, then a handstand, then another neck bridge, and finally lay down on his back and gazed at the sky. Panin sat down beside him and listened to the shouts of the kibitzers while he chewed on a stem of grass.
Maybe I should go see Kan? Sergei thought. Go to him and say, “Comrade Kan, what do you think about interstellar travel?” No—not like that. “Comrade Kan, I want to conquer the universe.” Damn—what


nonsense! Sergei turned over on his stomach and propped himself up on his elbows.
Gurgenidze and Malyshev had quit fighting, and they sat down near Panin. Malyshev caught his breath and asked, “What was on the SV yesterday?”
“Blue Fields,” Panin said. “Relayed from Argentina.” “So how was it?” asked Gurgenidze.
“They should’ve kept it,” said Panin.
“Oh,” said Malyshev. “Is that where he keeps dropping the refrigerator?”
“The vacuum cleaner,” Panin corrected.
“Then I’ve seen it,” said Malyshev. “Why didn’t you like it? It’s not a bad film. The music is good, and it has a good odor scale. Remember, when they’re by the sea?”
“Maybe,” said Panin. “Only the olfactor on my set’s broken. It reeks of smoked fish all the time. It was really something when they went into the florist shop and smelled the roses.”
Gurgenidze laughed. “Why don’t you fix it?”
Malyshev said thoughtfully, “It would be something if they could figure out a way to broadcast tactile sensations in movies. Imagine—somebody is kissing somebody on the screen, and you feel like you’re getting slapped in the face…”
“I can imagine,” said Panin. “That’s already happened to me. Without any movie.”
And then I’d pick my crew, Sergei thought. Even now I could pick good guys for this. Mamedov, Petrov, Zavialov from Engineering. Briushkov from the third year can pull twelve gravities. He didn’t even need conditioning—he has some special sort of middle ear. But of course he’s a smallfry and doesn’t understand anything yet. Sergei remembered how, when Panin had asked him what the point of it was, Briushkov had puffed up self-importantly and said, “You try it, like me.” A smallfry, and too little to eat at that—a minnow smallfry. Yes, anyway, all of them are jocks, the smallfry and the final-year men. Maybe Valentin Petrov…
Sergei turned over on his back again. Valentin Petrov. Transactions of the Academy of Nonclassical Mechanics, Volume Seven. Valentin Petrov eats and sleeps with that book. And of course other people read it too. They’re always reading it! There are three copies in the library, all of them


thumbed to pieces, and most of the time they’re all checked out. So I’m not alone? Does that mean other people too are interested in “The Behavior of Pi-Quanta in Accelerators” and that they’re drawing conclusions too? I should take Petrov aside, Sergei thought, and have a talk with him.
“Well, what are you staring at me for?” said Panin. “Guys, how come he’s staring at me? I’m terrified.”
Sergei only now realized that he was up on all fours, and looking straight into Panin’s face.
“Ah, the foreshortening!” said Gurgenidze. “I could use you as a model for ‘Reverie’.”
Sergei got up and looked around the meadow. Petrov wasn’t in sight. He lay back down and pressed his cheek against the grass.
“Sergei,” called Malyshev, “what’s your analysis of all this?” “Of all what?” Sergei asked into the grass.
“The nationalization of United Rocket Construction.” He gave the name in English.
“‘Approve Mr. Hopkins’ present action. Expect more same spirit. Stop, Kondratev,’” said Sergei. “Send the telegram collect, payment through the Soviet State Bank.”
United Rocket has good engineers. We have good engineers too. And this is the time for all of them to get together and build ramscoops. It’s all up to the engineers now—we’ll do our part. We’re ready. Sergei imagined squadrons of gigantic starships at the launch, and then in deep space, at the edge of the light barrier, accelerating at ten or twelve gravities, devouring diffuse matter, tons of interstellar dust and gas. Enormous accelerations, powerful artificial-gravity fields.
…The special theory of relativity was no longer any good—it would end up standing on its head. Decades would pass on the starship, and only months on Earth. And so what if there was no theory—instead there were pi-quanta at superaccelerations, pi-quanta accelerated to near-light velocities, pi-quanta that aged ten, a hundred times more rapidly than was laid down by classical theory. To circumnavigate the entire visible universe in ten or fifteen subjective years and return to Earth a year after takeoff. Overcome space, break the chains of time, make his generation a gift of alien worlds—except that that damned doctor had taken him off acceleration indefinitely, damn him to hell!
“There he lies,” said Panin. “Only he’s depressed.”


“He’s in a bad way,” said Gurgenidze. “They won’t let him train,” Panin explained.
Sergei raised up his head and saw that Tanya Gorbunova, a second-year cadet from the Remote Control Division, had walked over to him.
“Are you really depressed, Sergei?” she asked.
“Yes,” said Sergei. He remembered that Tanya and Katya were friends, and he began to feel uneasy.
“Sit down by us, Tanya old girl,” said Malyshev. “No,” said Tanya. “I have to have a talk with Sergei.” “Ah,” said Malyshev.
Gurgenidze shouted, “Hey, guys, let’s go get the kibitzers!”
They got up and left, and Tanya sat down next to Sergei. She was thin, with lively eyes, and it was remarkably pleasant to look at her, even if she was Katya’s friend.
“Why are you mad at Katya?” she asked. “I’m not,” Sergei said gloomily.
“Don’t lie,” said Tanya. “You’re mad at her.”
Sergei shook his head and began to look off to the side. “So you don’t love her.”
“Listen, Tanya,” said Sergei, “do you love your Malyshev?” “I do.”
“Well, there you are. If you had a fight, I’d try to get you back together.” “You mean you had a fight?” said Tanya.
Sergei was silent.
“Look, Sergei, if Misha and I have a fight, then of course we make up. Ourselves. But you—”
“We’re not going to make up,” said Sergei. “So you did have a fight.”
“We’re not going to make up,” Sergei said distinctly, and looked straight into Tanya’s lively eyes.
“But Katya doesn’t even know you and she have had a fight. She doesn’t understand anything, and I feel just terrible about her.”
“Well, what do you want me to do, Tanya? Look at my side of it. The same thing has happened to you, I’ll bet.”
“It happened once,” Tanya agreed. “Only I told him right away.” “There, you see!” Sergei said happily. “And how did he take it?” Tanya shrugged. “I don’t know,” she said. “But he survived.”


She got up, brushed off her skirt, and asked, “They’re really not going to let you pull Gs?”
“Really,” Sergei said, getting up. “Look, it’s all right for you—you’re a girl—but how am I going to tell her something like that?”
“You’d better tell her.”
She turned and walked toward the four-dimensional chess fans, where Misha Malyshev was shouting something about mindless cretins. Sergei called after her, “Tanya…” She stopped and turned around. “I don’t know —maybe this will all blow over. Right now I haven’t got my head together.”
He knew it wouldn’t blow over. And he knew that Tanya realized this. But Tanya smiled and nodded.
After everything that had happened, Sergei wasn’t a bit hungry. He reluctantly dipped his cookies into strong, sweet tea, and listened as Panin, Malyshev, and Gurgenidze discussed the menu. Then they set to eating, and for a few minutes silence reigned at the table. They could hear someone at the next table assert, “These days you can’t write like Hemingway. You’ve got to write concisely, provide maximum information. Hemingway lacks precision.”
“And a good thing, too! Precision belongs in technical encyclopedias.” “In encyclopedias? Take Strogov’s Road of Roads. Have you read it?” “‘Precision, precision!’” said someone’s bass. “You yourself don’t even
know what—”
Panin put down his fork, looked at Malyshev, and said, “Now tell us about the insides of a whale.”
Before school, Malyshev had worked in a whale-butchering complex. “Hold it, hold it,” said Gurgenidze.
“I should tell you instead about how they catch cuttlefish off Miao-lieh Tao,” Malyshev proposed.
“Cut it out!” Sergei said irritably.
Everyone looked at him and fell silent. Then Panin said, “This can’t go on, Sergei. Get a grip on yourself.”
Gurgenidze got up and said, “Right! Time for a little snort.”
He went over to the buffet, came back with a decanter of tomato juice, and said excitedly, “Hey, guys, Phu Dat says that on the seventeenth Liakhov is leaving for Interstellar One.”
Sergei at once lifted up his head. “When exactly?”


“The seventeenth,” Gurgenidze repeated. “On the Lightning.”
The photon ship Khius-Lightning was the first manned ram-scoop in the world. It had been two years in construction, and for the last three years the best spacemen had been testing it within the System.
This is it, it’s begun, thought Sergei. He asked, “Do you know the range?”
“Phu Dat says one and a half light-months.”
“Comrade spacemen!” said Malyshev. “We must drink to the occasion.” He ceremoniously poured the tomato juice into their tumblers. “Let us raise our glasses,” he said.
“Don’t forget the salt,” said Panin.
All four clinked glasses and drank. It’s begun, it’s begun, thought Sergei. “I’ve seen the Khius-Lightning,” said Malyshev. “Last year, when I was
interning on the Astericus. It’s enormous.”
“The diameter of the mirror is seven hundred meters,” Gurgenidze said. “Not all that large. But on the other hand the span of the scoop is—get this —six kilometers. And the length from edge to edge is almost eight kilometers.”
Mass, one thousand sixteen metric tons, Sergei recalled mechanically. Average thrust, eighteen megasangers. Cruising speed, eighty megameters per second. Maximum rated acceleration, six G’s. Too little. Maximum rated intake, fifteen wahrs… Too little, too little.
“Navigators,” Malyshev said dreamily, “that’s our craft. We’ll ship out on ones like that.”
“Over the sun from Earth to Pluto!” Gurgenidze said. Someone at the other end of the hall shouted in a ringing tenor,
“Comrades! Did you hear? On the seventeenth the Lightning is leaving for Interstellar One!”
Noise broke out all over the hall. Three cadets from the Command Division got up from the next table and rapidly took to voice.
“The aces are right on course,” said Malyshev, following them with his eyes.
“I’m a simple man, a guileless man,” Panin said suddenly, pouring tomato juice into his glass. “And what I still can’t understand is who needs these stars, anyhow?”
“What do you mean, who needs them?” Gurgenidze asked in surprise.


“Well, the moon is a launching pad and observatory. Venus is for actinides. Mars is for purple cabbage, the atmosphere project, colonization. Wonderful. But what are the stars good for?”
“Do you mean to say you don’t know why Liakhov is going to Interstellar?” Malyshev asked.
“A freak!” said Gurgenidze. “A victim of mutation.”
“Listen,” Panin continued. “I’ve been thinking about it for a long time. Here we are, interstellar spacers, and we go off to UV Ceti. Two and a half parsecs.”
“Two point four,” said Sergei, looking into his glass.
“We travel,” Panin continued. “We travel a long time. Let’s even say there are planets there. We land, we do research, see the seven sails, as my grandfather says.”
“My grandfather has better taste,” Gurgenidze put in.
“Then we start back. We’re old and stiff, and arguing all the time. Or at least Sergei isn’t talking to anyone. And we’re already pushing sixty. Meanwhile on Earth, thanks to Einstein, a hundred and fifty years have gone by. Some bunch of very young-looking citizens meets us, and at first everything is very nice: Music, flowers, and shish kebab. But then I want to go see my home town, Vologda. And it turns out nobody lives there any more. You see, it’s a museum.”
“The Boris Panin Memorial Museum-City,” said Malyshev. “Chock full of memorial plaques.”
“Right,” Panin continued. “Chock full. Anyhow, you can’t live in Vologda, but on the other hand—and will you like that ‘other hand’?—there’s a monument there. A monument to me. I look at myself and inquire why there are horns growing out of my head. I don’t understand the answer. It’s clear only that they aren’t horns. They explain to me that a hundred and fifty years ago I wore a helmet like that. ‘No,’ I say, ‘I never had any such helmet.’ ‘Oh, how interesting!’ says the curator of the museum-city, and he starts making notes. ‘We must inform the Central Bureau for Eternal Memory of this immediately,’ he says. And the words ‘Eternal Memory’ have unpleasant connotations for me. But how can I explain this to the curator?”
“You’re getting carried away,” said Malyshev. “Get back to the point.” “Anyhow, I begin to understand that I’ve ended up in another alien
world. We deliver a report on the results of our expedition, but it gets a


curious reception. You see, the results have only a narrow historical interest. Everything has already been known for fifty years, because human beings have been to UV Ceti—that’s where we went, isn’t it?—twenty times by now. And anyhow, they’ve built three artificial planets the size of Earth there. They can make trips like that in two months. You see, they have discovered some new property of space-time which we don’t yet understand and which they call, say, trimpazation. Finally they show us the News of the Day film clip covering the installation of our ship in the Archaeological Museum. We look, we listen…”
“How you do get carried away!” said Malyshev.
“I’m a simple man,” Panin said threateningly. “Now and again my imagination runs free.”
“I don’t like the way you’re talking,” Sergei said quietly.
Panin immediately became serious. “All right,” he said, also quietly. “Then tell me where I’m wrong. Tell me what we need the stars for.”
“Wait,” said Malyshev. “There are two questions here. The first is, what use are the stars?”
“Right, what?” asked Panin.
“The second question is, granting that they do have some use, can we exploit it in the present generation? Right?”
“Right,” said Panin. He was not smiling any longer, and he looked steadily at Sergei. Sergei remained silent.
“I’ll answer the first question,” said Malyshev. “Do you want to know what’s going on in the system of UV Ceti?”
“All right, I want to,” said Panin. “What of it?”
“Well, I myself want to very much. And if I go on wanting for my whole life, and if I go on trying to find out, then before my death—untimely, I hope—I will thank the nonexistent God for creating the stars and filling up my life.”
“Ah!” said Gurgenidze. “How beautiful!”
“You see,” said Malyshev, “we’re talking about human beings.” “So?” asked Panin, turning red.
“That’s all,” said Malyshev. “First a creature said, ‘I want to eat.’ He wasn’t yet human at that point. But then he said ‘I want to know.’ Then he was a human being.”
“This human being of yours,” Panin said angrily, “still has no clear idea of what’s under his feet, and he’s already snatching at the stars.”


“That’s why he’s a human being,” Malyshev answered. “That’s the way he is. Look, don’t go against the laws of nature. It doesn’t depend on you. There’s a law: the aspiration to find out in order to live inevitably turns into the aspiration to live in order to find out. You, you’re just afraid of acceleration.”
“All right,” said Panin. “So I’ll become a teacher. I’ll plumb the depths of children’s souls for the sake of everyone. But for whose sake are you going to find out about the stars?”
“That’s the second question,” Malyshev began, but here Gurgenidze jumped up and started yelling, with eyes flashing, “You want to wait until they invent your trimpazation? So wait! I don’t want to wait! I’m going to the stars!”
“Bah,” said Panin. “Quiet down.”
“Don’t worry,” Sergei said without raising his eyes. “They won’t send you on a starship.”
“And why not?” inquired Panin,
“Who needs you?” shouted Gurgenidze. “Go sit on the Moon run!” “They’ll pity your youth,” said Sergei. “As for whose sake will we find
out about the stars… for our own, for everyone’s. Even for yours. But you won’t take part in it. You’ll make your discoveries in the newspapers. You’re afraid of acceleration.”
“Hold on, guys,” Malyshev said anxiously. “This is a purely theoretical discussion.”
But Sergei knew that another moment and he would start swearing and would try to prove that he wasn’t a jock. He got up and quickly left the dining hall.
“Had enough?” Gurgenidze said to Panin.
“Well,” said Panin, “in a situation like this, in order to remain a human being, you’ve got to act like an animal.”
He grabbed Gurgenidze by the neck and bent him in two. There no longer was anyone in the dining hall, except for the three aces from the Command Division, who were clinking glasses of tomato juice by the counter. They were drinking to Liakhov, to Interstellar One.
Sergei Kondratev went straight to the videophone. First I’ve got to straighten things out, he thought. Katya first. Oh, what a mess it’s all turned out to be! Poor Katya. Poor me, for that matter.


He took the receiver off the cradle and stopped, trying to remember the number for Katya’s room. And suddenly he dialed the number for Valentin Petrov. Until the last moment he was thinking about how he had to talk with Katya right away, so he was silent for a second or two, looking at the lean face of Petrov which had appeared on the screen. Petrov too was silent, arching his sparse eyebrows. Sergei said, “Are you busy?”
“Not particularly,” said Petrov.
“I have something to talk about. I’ll come over right away.”
“Do you need Volume Seven?” Petrov said, squinting. “Come on over. I’ll call someone else. Maybe we should invite Kan?”
“No,” said Sergei. “It’s too early. Just ourselves for now.”






Part Two: Homecoming
W