9. Homecoming
S 


ergei Kondratev returned home at noon. He had spent all morning at the Minor Informatoreum—he was looking for a profession. It was cool, quiet, and very lonely at home. Kondratev walked through all
the rooms, drank some Narzan water, stood up in front of his empty desk, and set to thinking how he could kill the afternoon. Out the window the sun shone bright, some sort of bird was chirping, and a metallic rattle and clicking came from the lilac bushes. Obviously one of the efficient multilegged horrors which deprived an honest man of the opportunity to work at, say, gardening, was puttering around out there.
The ex-navigator sighed and closed the window. Should he go see Evgeny? No, he would be sure not to catch him at home. Evgeny had loaded himself down with the latest model dictaphones and was rushing all over the Urals; he had thirty-three things to worry about, not counting the little ones. “Insufficiency of knowledge,” he would declare, “must be made up through an excess of energy.” Sheila was a wonderful person who understood everything, but she was never home except when Evgeny was. The navigator dragged himself to the dining room and drank another glass of mineral water. Perhaps he should eat dinner? Not a bad idea—he could dine carefully and tastefully. Except he wasn’t hungry.
He went over to the delivery line cube, tapped out a number at random, and waited curiously to see what he would get. A green light flashed on over the cube—the order had been filled. With a certain wariness, the navigator opened the lid. At the bottom of the spacious cube-shaped box lay a paper plate. The navigator took it and set it on the table. On the plate were two large fresh-salted cucumbers. If only they had had cucumbers like that on the Taimyr, toward the end of the second year… Maybe he should go see Protos? Protos was one in a million. But of course he was very busy, kindly old Protos. All the good people were busy with something.
The navigator absently picked a cucumber up off the plate and ate it. Then he ate the other one and put the plate in the garbage chute. I could go out and hang around with the volunteers for a while again, he thought. Or go to Valparaiso, I’ve never been to Valparaiso.


The navigator’s ruminations were interrupted by the song of the door signal. The navigator was glad—he did not get many visitors. Evidently the great-great-grandchildren, out of false modesty, had not wanted to bother him. The whole week that he had been living here, he had only been visited once, by his neighbor, a sprightly eighty-year-old woman with an old-fashioned bun of black hair. She had introduced herself as the senior technician at a bread factory, and in the course of two hours she had patiently taught him how to punch the numbers on the control panel of the delivery line. They had somehow not gotten into a serious conversation, although she was doubtless an excellent person. And a few times some very young great-great grandchildren, quite clearly innocent of any feeling of false modesty, had arrived uninvited. These visitations were dictated by purely selfish considerations. One individual had evidently come to read the navigator his ode “On the Return of the Taimyr,” of which the navigator had understood only individual words (Taimyr, kosmos), since it was in Swahili. Another was working on a biography of Edgar Allan Poe, and without any particular hope he asked for any little-known facts about the life of the great American writer. Kondratev told him the conjectures about meetings between Poe and Aleksandr Pushkin, and advised him to apply to Evgeny Slavin. Other boys and girls appeared for what Kondratev in the terminology of the twenty-first century would have called autograph hunting. But even the young autograph hunters were better than nothing, and consequently the song of the door signal gladdened Kondratev’s heart.
Kondratev went out into the entryway and shouted, “Come in!” A tall man entered, wearing a full-cut gray jacket and long blue sweatsuit-style pants. He quietly closed the door behind him and, inclining his head a bit, started looking the navigator over. His physiognomy seemed to Kondratev to bear a very lively resemblance to the photographs he had once seen of the stone idols of Easter Island—narrow, long, with a high narrow forehead and powerful brows, deep-sunk eyes, and a long, sharply curved nose. His face was dark, but fair white skin showed unexpectedly from his open collar. This man bore little resemblance to an autograph hunter.
“You wish to see me?” Kondratev asked hopefully. “Yes,” the stranger said quietly. “I do.”
“Then come on in,” said Kondratev. He was moved, and a little disappointed, by the sad tone of the stranger. Looks like an autograph hunter after all, he thought. But I must receive him a little more warmly.


“Thank you,” the stranger said still more quietly. Stooping a little, he walked past the navigator and stopped in the middle of the living room.
“Please, have a seat,” said Kondratev.
The stranger was standing silently, looking fixedly at the couch. Kondratev, with some worry, looked at the couch too. It was a wonderful folding couch, broad, noiseless, and soft, with a springy light green cover that was porous like a sponge.
“My name is Gorbovsky,” the stranger said quietly, without taking his eyes off the couch. “Leonid Andreevich Gorbovsky. I came to have a talk with you, spacer to spacer.”
“What’s happened?” Kondratev asked in fright. “Did something happen to the Taimyr? And sit down, please!”
Gorbovsky continued to stand. “To the Taimyr? Not at all. Or rather, I don’t know,” he said. “But then the Taimyr is in the Cosmonautical Museum. What could happen to it there?”
“Of course,” said Kondratev, smiling. “After all, it won’t likely be going anywhere.”
“Nowhere at all,” Gorbovsky agreed, and also smiled. His smile, like that of many homely people, was kind and somehow childlike.
“What are we standing for?” Kondratev exclaimed brightly. “Let’s sit down.”
“You… I’ll tell you what, Navigator Kondratev,” Gorbovsky said suddenly. “Could I perhaps lie down?”
Kondratev choked. “P-please do,” he muttered. “Don’t you feel well?” Gorbovsky was already lying on the couch. “Ah, Comrade Kondratev!”
he said. “You’re like the rest. Why does a man have to be feeling bad to want to lie down? In classical times practically everyone used to lie down —even at meals.”
Kondratev, without turning around, groped for the back of his chair and sat down.
“Even in those days,” Gorbovsky continued, “they had a multistage proverb the essence of which was, ‘Why sit when you can lie down?’ I’m just back from a flight. You yourself know, Navigator Kondratev—what sort of sofas do they have on shipboard? Disgustingly hard contrivances. And is it only on ships? Those unspeakable benches in stadiums and parks! The folding, or rather self-collapsing, chairs in restaurants! Or those ghastly rocks at the seaside! No, Comrade Kondratev, any way you like,


the art of creating really comfortable things to lie on has been irretrievably lost in our stern era of embryomechanics and the D-principle.”
You don’t say! thought Kondratev. The problem of things to lie on presented itself to him in an entirely new light. “You know,” he said, “I started out at a time when what they called ‘private companies’ and ‘monopolies’ were still in business in North America. And the one that survived the longest was a small company that made a fabulous fortune on mattresses. It put out some sort of special silk mattress—not many of them, but frightfully expensive. They say billionaires used to fight over those mattresses. They were splendid things. On one of them your arm would never get pins and needles.”
“And the secret of them perished along with imperialism?” Gorbovsky asked.
“Probably,” Kondratev answered. “I shipped out on the Taimyr and never heard any more about it.”
They were silent a while. Kondratev was enjoying himself. Protos and Evgeny were splendid conversationalists too, but Protos liked to talk about liver operations, and Evgeny was usually teaching Kondratev how to drive a pterocar, or scolding him for his social inertia.
“And why?” said Gorbovsky. “We have splendid things to lie down on too. But no one is interested in them. Except me.” He turned onto his side, rested his cheek on a fist and suddenly said, “Ah, Sergei old fellow! Why did you land on Blue Sands?”
The navigator choked again. The planet Blue Sands hung before his eyes with horrifying vividness. Child of an alien sun. Itself very alien. It was covered with oceans of fine blue dust and in these oceans were tides, ferocious gales and typhoons, and even, it seemed, some sort of life. Round-dances of green flame whirled around the buried Taimyr, blue dunes shouted and howled in various voices, dust clouds crawled across the whitish sky like giant amoebas. And human beings had not solved a single one of Blue Sands’ mysteries. The navigator had broken his leg on the first sortie, they had lost every last cyberscout, and then in the middle of a total calm a real storm had set in, and good old Koenig, who had not had time to get back to the ship, was thrown along with the hoist against the reactor ring, was crushed, was flattened, was carried hundreds of miles into the desert, where among the blue waves gigantic rifts showered billions of tons of dust into the incomprehensible depths of the planet.


“Well, wouldn’t you have landed?” Kondratev said hoarsely. Gorbovsky was silent.
“You’re in fine shape today on your D-ships. One sun today, tomorrow another, a third the day after tomorrow. But for me, for us, this was the first alien sun, the first really alien planet, do you understand? We had gotten there by a miracle. I couldn’t refuse to land, because otherwise… what would it all be for then?” Kondratev stopped. Nerves, he thought. Got to be calmer. It’s all behind me now.
Gorbovsky said thoughtfully, “The first one to land on Blue Sands after you must have been me. I started down in the landing boat and began with the pole. Ah, Sergei, what a time that was! For half a month I went around and around. Twelve probing runs! And all the machines we lost there! A quintessentially rabid atmosphere, Sergei. And you threw yourselves at her from the equator. Without reconnaissance. And in a decrepit old Tortoise. Yes.”
Gorbovsky put his hands behind his head and stared at the ceiling. Kondratev could not figure out whether he was approving or condemning their action. “I couldn’t do anything else, Comrade Gorbovsky,” he said. “I repeat, that was the first alien sun. Try to put yourself in my place. It’s hard to think of an analogy you might understand.”
“Yes,” said Gorbovsky. “No doubt. Still, it was very audacious.” Again, Kondratev did not know whether he was approving or
condemning. Gorbovsky sneezed deafeningly and quickly sat up, taking his feet off the couch. “Pardon me,” he said, and sneezed again. “I’ve caught another cold. I lie one night on the shore, and I’ve got a cold.”
“On the shore?”
“Well, of course, Sergei. There’s a meadow, grass, and you watch the fish swimming to the factories—” Gorbovsky sneezed again. “Pardon me… And the moonlight on the water—’the road to happiness,’ you know?”
“Moonlight on the water…” Kondratev said dreamily.
“You don’t have to tell me! I’m from Torzhok myself. We have a river there—small, but very clean. And water lilies in the fish farms. Ah, marvelous!”
“I understand,” Kondratev said, smiling. “In my time we called that ‘pining for blue sky.’”


“We still call it that. But by the sea… So yesterday evening I was sitting by the sea at night, a wonderful moon, and girls singing somewhere, and suddenly out of the water, slowly, slowly, comes some bunch or other wearing horned suits.”
“Who!”
“Sportsmen.” Gorbovsky waved his arm and lay back down. “I come home a lot nowadays. I go to Venus and back, ferrying volunteers. Great people, the volunteers. Only they’re noisy, they eat a godawful lot, and they all, you know, are rushing off to some suicidal great deed.”
Kondratev asked with interest, “What do you think about the project, Leonid?”
“The plan is all right,” Gorbovsky said. “I was the one who made it up, after all. Not by myself, but I took part. When I was young I had a great deal to do with Venus. It’s a mean planet. But of course you know that yourself.”
“It must be very boring to haul volunteers on a D-ship,” said Kondratev. “Yes, of course, the real missions of D-ships are a little different. Take
me, for example, with my Tariel. When all this is over, I’m going to EN 17 —that’s on the frontier, twelve parsecs out. There’s a planet Vladislava there, with two alien artificial satellites. We’re going to look for a city there. It’s very interesting, looking for alien cities, Sergei.”
“What do you mean ‘alien’?”
“Alien… you know, Sergei, as a spacer, you would probably be interested in what we are doing now. I made up a little lecture especially for you, and if you like, I’ll give it to you now. Okay?”
“It sounds fascinating.” Kondratev leaned back in the chair. “Please.” Gorbovsky stared at the ceiling and began, “Depending on tastes and inclinations, our spacers are usually working on one of three problems, but
I myself am personally interested in a fourth. Many consider it too specialized, too hopeless, but in my view a man with imagination can easily find a calling in it. Even so, there are people who assert that under no circumstances will it repay the fuel expenditure. This is what the snobs and the utilitarians say. We reply that—”
“Excuse me,” Kondratev interrupted. “What exactly does this fourth problem consist of? And the first three, while you’re at it.”
Gorbovsky was silent for a while, looking at Kondratev and blinking. “Yes,” he said finally. “The lecture didn’t come out right, it seems. I started


with the middle. The first three problems—planetological, astrophysical, and cosmogonic research. Then verification and further elaboration of the D-principle, id est, taking a brand new D-ship and driving it up against the light barrier until you can’t stand any more. And finally, attempts to establish contact with other civilizations in space—very cautious attempts, so far. My own favorite problem is connected with nonhuman civilizations too. Only we aren’t looking for contacts, but for traces. Traces of the visits of alien space travelers to various worlds. Some people maintain that under no circumstances can this mission be justified. Or did I already say that?”
“You did,” said Kondratev. “But what sort of traces do you mean?” “You see, Sergei, any civilization must leave a great number of remains.
Take us, the human race. How do we treat a new planet? We place artificial satellites around it, and a long chain of radio buoys stretches from there to the Sun—two or three buoys a light-year—beacons, universal direction-finders… If we manage to land on the planet, we build bases, science cities. And we don’t exactly take everything along when we leave! Other civilizations must do likewise.”
“And have you found anything?” asked Kondratev.
“Well, of course! Phobos and Deimos—you must know about that; the underground city on Mars; the artificial satellites around Vladislava… very interesting satellites. Yes… that’s more or less what we do, Sergei.”
“Interesting,” said Kondratev. “But I still would have chosen research into the D-principle.”
“Well, that depends on tastes and inclinations. And anyhow, now we’re all ferrying volunteers. Even proud researchers of the D-principle. Now we’re like the streetcar coachmen of your time.”
“There weren’t any streetcars left by my time,” Kondratev said with a sigh. “And streetcars were driven not by coachmen, but by… they called it something else. Listen, Leonid, have you had dinner?”
Gorbovsky sneezed, excused himself, and sat up. “Hold it, Sergei,” he said, extracting an enormous multicolored handkerchief from his pocket. “Hold it. Have I told you what I came for?”
“To talk spacer to spacer.”
“Right. But I didn’t say anything more? No?”
“No. Right away you got very interested in the couch.”
“Aha.” Gorbovsky blew his nose thoughtfully. “Do you by any chance know Zvantsev the oceanographer?”


“The only person I know is Protos the doctor,” Kondratev said sadly. “And now I’ve just met you.”
“Wonderful. You know Protos, Protos knows Zvantsev well, and I know both Protos and Zvantsev well. Anyhow, Zvantsev is dropping by shortly. Nikolai Zvantsev.”
“Wonderful,” Kondratev said slowly. He realized there was an ulterior motive lurking around here somewhere.
They heard the song of the door signal. “It’s him,” Gorbovsky said, and lay down again.
Zvantsev the oceanographer was enormously tall and extremely broad-shouldered. He had a broad copper-colored face, close-cropped thick dark hair, large steel-blue eyes, and a small straight mouth. He silently shook Kondratev’s hand, cast a sidelong glance at Gorbovsky, and sat down.
“Excuse me,” said Kondratev, “I’ll go order dinner. What would you like, Comrade Zvantsev?”
“I like everything,” said Zvantsev. “And he likes everything.”
“Yes, I like everything,” said Gorbovsky. “Only please, not oatmeal kissel.”
“Right,” Kondratev said, and went into the dining room. “And not cauliflower!” Gorbovsky shouted.
As he punched out the numbers by the delivery-line cube, Kondratev thought, They had some reason for coming. They’re intelligent people, so they didn’t come out of simple curiousity—they came to help me. They’re energetic and active people, so they scarcely dropped by to console me. But how do they plan on helping? I need only one thing…. Kondratev narrowed his eyes and stood still for a moment, with his hand braced against the lid of the delivery cube. From the living room came:
“You’re lying around again, Leonid. There’s something of the mimicrodon in you.”
“Lolling is an absolute necessity,” Gorbovsky said with deep conviction. “It’s philosophically unassailable. Useless motions of the arms and legs steadily increase the entropy of the universe. I would like to say to the world, ‘People! Lie around more! Beware the heat death!’”
“I’m surprised you haven’t yet taken up crawling.”
“I thought about it. Too much friction. From the entropic point of view, locomotion in the vertical position is more advantageous.”
“Blatherer,” said Zvantsev. “Get up, and now!”


Kondratev opened the lid and set the table. “Dinner is served!” he shouted in a violently cheerful voice. He felt as if he were facing an exam.
There was noise of horseplay in the living room, and Gorbovsky answered, “I’m being brought.”
He appeared in the dining room, however, in a vertical position. “You must excuse him, Comrade Kondratev,” said Zvantsev, who
appeared close behind. “He’s always lying around. First in the grass, and later, without even cleaning himself up, he lies on the couch!”
“Where’s the grass stain? Where?” Gorbovsky shouted, and began looking himself over.
With difficulty, Kondratev smiled.
“I’ll tell you what,” Zvantsev said as he sat down at the table. “I see by your face, Sergei, that preambles are superfluous. Gorbovsky and I came to recruit you for work.”
“Thank you,” Kondratev said softly.
“I am an oceanographer and am working in an organization called the Oceanic Guard. We cultivate plankton—for protein—and herd whales—for meat, fat, hides, chemicals. Doctor Protos has told us that you are forbidden to go offplanet. And we always need people. Especially now, when many are leaving us for the Venus project. I’m inviting you to join us.”
There was a moment of silence. Gorbovsky, not looking at anyone, assiduously ate his soup. Zvantsev also began eating. Kondratev crumbled his bread. “Are you sure I’ll be up to it?” he asked.
“I’m sure,” said Zvantsev. “We have many former spacemen.”
“I’m about as former as you can get,” said Kondratev. “You don’t have any others like me.”
“Give Sergei a little more detail about what he could end up doing,” said Gorbovsky.
“You could be a supervisor on a laminaria plantation,” said Zvantsev. “You could guard the plankton plantations. There’s patrol work, but for that you need special qualifications—that will come with time. Best of all, there’s whale herding. Get into whale herding, Sergei.” He laid down his knife and fork. “You can’t imagine how fine that is!”
Gorbovsky looked at him with curiosity.
“Early, early in the morning… quiet ocean… reddish sky in the east. You rise up to the surface, throw open the hatch, climb out onto the turret


and wait and wait. The water below your legs is green, clear; up from the deep rises a jellyfish—it turns over and goes off under the minisub… A big fish swims lazily past… It’s really fine!”
Kondratev looked at his dreamy, satisfied face, and suddenly, so unbearably that he even stopped breathing, he wanted to be on the ocean, in the salt air, instantly.
“And when the whales move to new pasture!” Zvantsev continued. “Do you know how it looks? In front and in back go the old males, two or three to a herd—they’re enormous, bluish-black, and they surge forward so evenly that it seems that they’re not moving, it’s the water rushing past them. They go in front, and the young ones and pregnant females after them. We’ve got the old males tamed—they’ll lead wherever we want, but they need help. Especially when young males are growing up in the herd—they always try to split it up and take part off with them. That’s where we have our work. This is where the real business begins. Or all of a sudden grampuses attack.”
He suddenly came to himself again and looked at Kondratev with a completely sober glance. “To put it briefly, the job has everything. Wide-open spaces, and depths, and being useful to people, and having good comrades-and adventures, if you especially want that.”
“Yes,” Kondratev said with feeling. Zvantsev smiled.
“He’s ready,” said Gorbovsky. “Well, that’s a spacer for you. Like you, I want to be on the turret… and with the jellyfish
“That’s how it is,” Zvantsev said in a businesslike manner. “I’ll take you to Vladivostok. The course in the training school there begins in two days. Have you finished eating?”
“Yes,” said Kondratev. Work, he thought. Here it is—real work! “Then let’s be on our way,” said Zvantsev, rising.
“Where?”
“To the airport.” “Right now?”
“Well, of course right now. What is there to wait for?”
“Nothing,” Kondratev said confusedly. “Only…” He recollected himself and quickly began clearing away the dishes.
Gorbovsky helped him while finishing a banana. “You go on,” he said, “and I’ll stay here. I’ll lie down and read a bit. I have a flight at twenty-one


thirty.”
They went out into the living room, and the navigator looked around. The thought came distinctly that wherever he would go on this planet, he would find at his disposal the same sort of quiet little house, and kind neighbors, and books, and a garden out the window. “Let’s go,” he said. “Goodbye, Leonid. Thank you for everything.”
Gorbovsky had already oozed onto the couch. “Goodbye, Sergei,” he said. “We’ll be seeing a good deal of each other.”






Part Three: The Planet with All the Conveniences
W