AN ENDING SERVING AS A BEGINNING




The last time Eko saw Luoying was three days after Luoying’s performance, which was also the day before the departure of the Terran delegation. She was still in the hospital under the care of Dr. Reini.


The Terran delegation had dismantled their displays for the world’s fair, and everyone had already packed for their impending departure. Eko took advantage of a brief break during the morning to go to the hospital to visit Luoying.


Mars City was sending off the Terran delegation in style. Balloons in the colors of the two planets hung over the streets, and the Expo Center was strewn with colorful streamers. The empty Grand Hall was being prepped as the site of the farewell banquet, and large screens lining the streets played congratulatory messages from leaders of both worlds. The superficial warmth disguised the tense crisis below the surface.


Luoying’s suite, being far from the bustle of the city, was unbuffeted by these crosscurrents. A quotidian quality permeated the air. Bright sunlight limned the white lilies in gold, relaxing music played, and time seemed to stop.


Eko sat down next to Luoying’s bed. He thanked her solemnly, which Luoying brushed off as nothing. He had come to her aid twice when she had fallen, she reminded him—once in virtual space, another in actual. Eko apologized for his earlier rashness, and she smiled, telling him not to worry about it. Eko explained that he had a small gift for her.


“What is it?” she asked, curious.


He took out a chip from his bag and inserted it into a pair of holographic glasses.


She put them on and entered a space at once familiar and strange. It was as though she had arrived on the other shore of time. She saw the Grand Theater, the audience, and herself. She was watching herself dance. The music was familiar, as were the steps, and she even recognized the feeling of the humid air. Her figure was in the middle of the stage, the focus of everyone’s attention. Her observing self was just another member of the audience.


Slowly, step by step, she approached the dancing self, so close that she could reach out and touch her. She wanted to reach out, but in the end she restrained herself. She knew she wasn’t really there.


In this drama the audience was the protagonist. Even though everyone around her was watching her dancing self, she understood that the observing self was the true center. She watched her other self. The other self had not seen herself, while the observing self had. She thought the other self was dancing so that the observing self could see. She was like a transparent soul standing with all the others around the stage, watching until the music was over. She was comforted. The performance was complete, at least once.


Luoying took off the glasses. Eko sat next to the bed, calmly looking at her. She had to take some time to adjust to the bright sunlight.


“How do you like it?”


“It’s wonderful. Thank you. Really, thank you.”


He smiled. “It’s nothing. I’m glad you liked it.”


“I’ve never seen myself like that.”


“Me neither.”


Both let the silence linger.


Eko was thinking about Theon’s hint about Luoying back on Maearth. Theon had suggested that he manufacture some romance involving Luoying. A scene at the end involving a parting of lovers, combined with her identity, her beautiful, lovelorn face, and a translucent dress, would have guaranteed successful sales on the web, an instant classic.


He had failed to carry out Theon’s instructions. Yet, he somehow managed to put her in a position where she had to claim she liked him. The whole thing was absurd. He didn’t want to tell her any of this, but he was glad he had given her an authentic film that she would treasure.


Luoying, on the other hand, was thinking about memory. She had been feeling weak the last few days as she lay recuperating, but now she found a spark of strength. She was beginning to reevaluate the meaning of memory. Many had told her that, with a film of herself, she could possess the past. Anytime she wanted, she could study it, remember it, live in it. She had once also believed that memory was a way to return to the past.


But today, when she saw her holographic self, she suddenly realized that the point of memory was in fact to close off the past. Once her memory had been entrusted to something tangible, she could go on to be a different person without worrying about change, about losing the past, about negating her yesterday. Her past self had found its separate existence, and she was free to go on her own way.


They looked at each other, neither able to find a way to speak of the thoughts occupying their minds. And so they said nothing.


In the end Eko smiled. “All the footage I shot of you is on there. I’m not taking any of it with me. You don’t need to worry.”


Luoying wasn’t sure what he meant by saying that she needn’t worry. But she saw the sincerity in his face. She smiled back.


They spoke casually about the world’s fair. It was a friendly conversation but not very deep. Luoying’s long, dark lashes contrasted with her pale face, while Eko’s curly hair covered his forehead and made his sunken eyes seem even more angular and dark.


“You’re leaving first thing tomorrow morning?” she asked.


“That’s right. I have to be at the press conference this afternoon and then the banquet tonight . . . so I probably won’t have a chance to visit you again.”


“Safe travels!”


“Can we stay in touch after I go back?”


“I don’t know,” said Luoying. “Grandfather told me that they were still discussing the terms for interplanetary communications.”


“I think there must be many things about Mars that I misunderstood. I hope to have a chance to ask you more questions.”


“I’d like that. There are many things I don’t understand either.”


They said goodbye to each other, neither mentioning the fact that they might never speak again. It was a warm and bright morning, and they both refrained from disrupting that warmth. Eko nodded at her from the door of her suite before leaving. Luoying watched as he strode down the corridor resolutely, like a sailing ship heading into the boundless sea.


*


The next morning Luoying went to the skydeck of the hospital to watch the departure of the Terran delegation. Rudy accompanied her and sat with her in the brightening dawn.


Sunlight, almost parallel with the ground, divided the red soil sharply with shadows. Half of the land was a dark brown, and the other half bright gold. The straight edges of the shadows slid inch by inch over the rough rocks like curtains being pulled aside to reveal sculptures. In the distance the edges of cliffs and mountains glinted sharply.


The peaceful air made them both forget to speak.


At length Luoying broke the silence. “What was the final result of the negotiations?”


Rudy laughed lightly. “It’s very favorable to us.”


“How so?”


“Well, first, two hydraulic engineers will be staying behind to teach us the technology for the sluice gates. And . . . we didn’t have to give up much.”


“They didn’t demand nuclear fusion engines?”


“No. They gave up on that.”


“Why?”


Rudy’s smile was sly. “Because our fusion technology requires advanced technology for fission waste products and seawater processing. On Earth, nuclear energy development is most advanced in Europe, but the best seawater processing tech is controlled by the Americans. Neither wants to share their technology with the other, worried about their profits in the future. If the Chinese and the Russians were willing to cooperate, they’d probably be able to master it as well, but they can’t stand each other . . . Delegates from the smaller countries especially didn’t want the big countries to get fusion engines, since they were worried it would end up becoming a threat to them. In the end, the whole delegation gave up the request.”


“So what did they ask for instead?”


“Two things: the magnetic moment walls in the Grand Theater, and the tube trains. They’ve been after the tube trains for a while, and it was part of the last two rounds of negotiations as well. Earth is full of skyscrapers, and tube trains would be a very efficient way to get between them compared to airplanes and cars. As for the theater walls, it was mainly the result of private contact between me and a man named Theon.”


“Theon?” Luoying seemed to realize something. “So the theater visit that day—”


“Yes, I arranged that.” Rudy looked very pleased with himself. “Though I think war is nothing to be afraid of, Grandfather is against it, and so I had to think of a scheme. Even I was surprised that it worked. Theon is even more influential than I thought. I almost underestimated him as merely an entertainer, but it seems that the economic crisis on Earth has a lot to do with him. Anyway, we made out like bandits by giving them the technology for the theater instead of fusion.”


Luoying looked thoughtful. After a moment she asked, “What about Uncle Juan?”


“For now, he has to put his plans for war on hold.” Rudy smiled enigmatically. “But as you know, in matters of foreign policy . . . Never mind.”


Rudy was in a plain cotton shirt instead of the uniform that he had been wearing throughout the Terrans’ visit. He put both his hands on his knees and tapped one foot as though following the beat of some inaudible music.


Luoying felt the distance between them. Her brother was no longer the boy she had known, and she was no longer the girl he had known. She wasn’t sure if that sense of distance between them wasn’t her biggest loss after her vagabond life on Earth. Politics clearly was where Rudy belonged, but she didn’t know where she would feel at home.


*


Meanwhile, Eko had just buckled his seat belt on the shuttle. Outside, the rough, flat landscape reflected the sun’s golden rays, and craters and rubble stretched all the way to the horizon. On one side of the shuttle, the slender skybridge connected the fuselage to Mars City. The bridge’s frame consisted of elegant curves made up of neatly fitted metal girders, and the glass between them shined brightly in the sun. The shuttle port was a marvel of mechanical precision, and skybridges extended in every direction as aircraft and spacecraft of every description lay in silent slumber.


The shuttle began to taxi. It lifted off, and the last connection between him and the city was broken.


Eko took a last peek at the terminal. He saw Janet Brook’s figure through the glass in one corner. She hadn’t come with the official Martian farewell delegation but was by herself. Eko saw that she was in a loose white dress, perhaps even the same one she had worn when she had watched Arthur Davosky take off a decade ago.


Eko tried to imagine Davosky’s mental state at that moment. Maybe he, like Eko, had sat next to the window and waved at Janet, thinking about his next visit. Maybe Davosky had been full of ambitious dreams, like Eko himself at this moment; and maybe Eko, like his teacher, would never return. He began to understand the complicated feelings his teacher had harbored for this planet. The more he was plunged into the despair of never being able to return, the more he yearned to return, to hope.


Janet had helped him lay his teacher to rest. After that, Eko never entered the central archive again. He didn’t know if Davosky’s membody was doing well and whether, like Ronen, he was joyfully carrying out his eternal watch in the tower of wisdom. Maybe he would even get to chat with Janet from time to time. Eko wouldn’t witness any of that, but he hoped it would all come true.


Theon, who sat next to Eko, was occupied with some documents on a screen. Eko knew that Theon considered himself one of the greatest beneficiaries of this round of negotiations. The magnetic walls of the Grand Theater would enhance the Dreamscape parks in twenty cities immensely, giving guests an even greater sense of immersion. He had hesitated between Gielle’s Mystify and the theater technology, and in the end settled on the latter.


“Why did you choose to deal with Rudy instead of his sister?” Eko asked. He knew his own interference had nothing to do with it.


Theon smirked. “Because I could tell what he wanted. He was responsible for the magnetic walls, and if a deal with Earth could be made, he would have many years of stable research funding and a growing staff under him. I could tell the kid was ambitious and wanted to climb up the ladder as quickly as possible. Dealing with that kind of person is easiest, since we both get something out of a good deal. Luoying, on the other hand, is like a black box. I couldn’t tell what she wanted at all.”


For Theon, someone who didn’t seek to maximize their own profit was literally incomprehensible. He was knowledgeable about all kinds of economic utility functions, but all sought to maximize some kind of profit. He was skilled at reading moods and emotions, but he had to confess that he couldn’t understand Arthur Davosky or Luoying Sloan. That was all right. He wasn’t bothered by it. There were many people he couldn’t understand, so he sought only to understand those he could. He had found the best doctors for Arthur, bought him the best house, visited him as a best friend, but never bothered to understand him.


Eko knew that he shouldn’t blame Theon. Theon was a man who did what he believed was good at the moment, who calculated the price of everything with precision, who computed possibilities and optimized the result. He didn’t believe the world held any ideals higher than that, and so he didn’t try to understand those who pursued ideals.


There was one thing Theon had said that Eko had to agree with. When the results of the negotiations were publicized, Theon told him with a laugh that mutual suspicion was the foundation of stability. As it turned out, he was right. The Terran delegates were so obsessed with making sure that no one else got a better deal that they all ended up caving in to Theon’s demands. Theon was how they crafted their images for the public, and images were what mattered to the electorate. The fall in IP stocks was a major blow for buyers and speculators and creators in every country, but Theon escaped unscathed. He was simply there to provide a platform for buyers and sellers, and collected his commission. He had long predicted such a market correction, and he foresaw that, after the fall, the governments of every nation-state would become even more reliant on his services. The trip to Mars was proving to be a golden business opportunity. From the start, he had settled on the strategy of allying himself with the Martians to keep the Terran delegates in a stable state of mutual suspicion, despite Professor Jacques’s absurd idea that the Terrans should band together against the Martians.


Other than Theon, there was yet one more member of the Terran delegation who was very pleased with the trip: Peter Beverley. He had been promised the role of global ambassador for the Thales Group’s next generation of theme parks. These new parks would be based on Mars and green living. Beverley would also spread his image across the globe as a result of this trip. He didn’t really understand how it had happened. He and Theon had both maximized their own utility, unaware of how narrowly they had averted war.


Eko wasn’t interested in any of this. He understood that the ethics of business had its own calculating philosophy, and the world was founded upon such a philosophy. His attention was elsewhere. He wanted to gather all the mirrors in the world and piece together the broken light. Davosky’s memories were at rest, but his teacher’s legacy needed to be carried on. There was still a spiritual ideal in the world that waited for his approach, waited for him to collect. He observed the shrinking city through the shuttle porthole and silently said goodbye. This was a planet he had first seen when he was fifteen and was seared into his memory at age twenty-five. He was sure he would never forget it.


The golden land stretched endlessly below him. He thought he could hear the music of bagpipes.


*


“Rudy, look!” Luoying exclaimed to her brother.


Rudy stood up and turned to look where she was pointing. The sky was a dark blue, and the gigantic silvery shuttle was climbing up along a curved course. It was flying so fast that the reflection of its wings swept overhead like a meteor that was falling from the ground into the sky, heading for that invisible ancient spaceship.


Luoying’s mind went blank. She knew that all her connections to Earth had been cut off at that moment. From now on, Earth would only be a memory. One portion of her life had come to an end, and another portion was just starting. She didn’t know what the future held or where to seek her life’s purpose. The stars shone in the sky, and the wide-open land was all silence.