RUDY




Time for a coffee break.


The door to the Boule Chamber opened, and Rudy was the first to emerge. He strode to the wall, filled a glass with cold water at the drinking fountain, and gulped it down.


The chamber is too small, he thought. So stuffy and cramped. What were they thinking when they built it? It lacks natural lighting and good air circulation, and the chairs are as hard as corpses. It’s impossible to sit in them for a whole morning without being put into a horrible mood. The building has been in use for thirty-five years at least, hasn’t it? Why don’t they renovate it? The idea that it’s a historical memorial is just bureaucratic nonsense. The right way to commemorate history is to turn the place into a museum and build a new capitol. They’re always resisting change. Look around here: everything is old. Old building, old drinking fountain, outdated A/V system . . . Everything smells musty.


He had to concede that this last bit was effective. To squeeze so many people into such tight quarters is a great way to slow the mind down. Infected by the musty smells, it’s no wonder that everyone starts to think like the aged. All the uncles and aunties are the same: forever cautious, forever hesitant, never able to decide on anything. Everything is in Mars’s favor right now, but they’re still hesitating! To be so conservative, so resistant to change . . . we’ll never get anywhere. How can we possibly explore the depths of the universe like this? I should have been blunter earlier. I’m still too conciliatory, too diffident.


The cold water did him good. His whole body felt refreshed. Rudy stood up and let out a long breath, and the tips of his burning ears felt a bit cooler.


The legislators exited the chamber by twos and threes. Coming up to the long table of refreshments, they munched on snacks and drank coffee as they chatted. For the legislators, coffee breaks were often even more productive than actual sessions, since this was when alliances could be formed and the trading of votes attempted. Legislators Chakra and Richardson passed by Rudy without a glance and headed for the lounge at the other end of the hall, whispering to each other. The dark gold veins in the floor seemed to form a carpet. The two soon disappeared down the hall.


Rudy watched their retreating figures and wondered if he had been too arrogant in the council chamber earlier. When Richardson had tried talking to him, he had turned away, pretending to be listening to Souza. Maybe he had overdone it and offended Richardson. At the time the gesture had come almost unconsciously, and he hadn’t meant a deliberate insult. But thinking back on it, it did seem too disrespectful. He didn’t like Richardson, a stubborn Wader who had neither the sense nor the sensibility to appreciate the importance of overcoming nature. He had mocked Rudy’s enthusiasm and radicalism, and Rudy had never forgotten those insults.


I’ll patch it up with him later, he thought. After all, he’s an elder, and to be so disrespectful to him in public was a mistake. He didn’t so much fear reprisal from Richardson as despise himself for losing control. Richardson, if he minded what had happened, was just one man, but his lack of control would cost him the support of many. Smile even when you’re fighting, he repeated to himself.


He drank another glass of water and felt much better and calmer.


Legislator Franz stopped next to him and greeted him with a smile. A bald and rotund man in his forties, Franz seemed to get along with everyone. But Rudy knew how politically astute the man was. By never clearly expressing support for either the Climbers or the Waders, he made sure that his vote became something both sides fought over. Rudy felt a trace of anxiety.


“What did you think of the discussion?” Franz asked him.


Rudy tried to be cautious. “Er . . . I think there are multiple ways to look at it. If I were an optimist, I’d say that both sides understood the other side’s position well and there’s no misunderstanding. If I were a pessimist, I’d say that both sides have long understood each other’s position well, perhaps too well.”


Franz chuckled. “How long have you been at the Boule now?”


“About two and a half years.”


“I listened to your new proposal. Interesting. Very interesting.” Rudy’s heart sped up but he kept his voice even. “Thank you.


Glad to hear it.”


“Do you have time for a few questions?”


“Of course. Happy to elaborate on anything you want to know.”


The smile disappeared from Franz’s face. “The point of your proposal is to make vertical movement easier, isn’t it?”


“Yes. The biggest inconvenience of the Climbers’ plan is how to move between elevations.”


“And you think the solution is magnetic tube cars.”


“The cars will rely on magnetic levitation, but there won’t be any tubes.”


“What’s so different about your plan compared to previous proposals?”


“Well, there’s no need to dig tunnels. That’s probably the biggest difference. It’s like how our houses are all independent. The cars will also move independently. It will be much cheaper to build and easier to control their routes.”


“But if I’m understanding this right, your plan requires a strong ground-based magnetic field. That’s not going to be cheap.”


“I’ve looked into this. It turns out that the rocks of Martian mountains have strong magnetic fields. After quarrying, if we just regulate the fields with some circuits, the material will be perfect for building what we need for the transportation system. It’s not clear where the magnetic field is coming from—maybe it has to do with how the rocks were formed. Anyway, that’s why I support the Climbers: we can greatly reduce the cost by using materials on hand in the mountains.”


“How does your plan compare to elevators? Surely going straight up and down is the most efficient path.”


“Elevators will require multiple shafts, and each shaft will have to be hundreds of meters long. Drilling through solid rock isn’t trivial.”


Rudy took Franz to a terminal and logged in. He navigated to his home directory and brought up several hand-drawn diagrams. They showed a tall mountainside from multiple angles. Along the steep incline were strings of caves, each equipped with walls and doors much like existing houses in the city—it was as though the city had been lifted up and then embedded in the side of the mountain. Between cave and cave—or between dwelling and dwelling—was strung a network of rails that covered the mountain face from foot to peak. Hemispherical cars, suspended from the rails like ski lifts, glided between the dwellings like pearls on strings.


This was an elaboration on the basic plan of the Climbers. The Climbers wanted to pick a crater near the equator and reuse the caves that had once housed people before the war. The floor of the crater would be turned into a lake; people would live on the rim wall. The water would be trapped within the crater to form a closed cycle of rainfall and streams, with the walls covered in lush vegetation to build a complete ecosystem. Rudy’s drawings made the whole plan more vivid and provided room for imagination to roam. Each dwelling, for instance, was surrounded by a garden, and the magnetic cars moving through the jungle made the scene come alive.


As Rudy explained, he paid attention to Franz’s face, which showed no expression. Rudy actually found the lack of response a good sign. Franz was one of the few people Rudy admired. As the author of numerous political essays, the man was influential despite being relatively young. As a junior legislator in the Boule, Rudy had few opportunities to make speeches or direct big policy decisions, but he had prepared detailed dossiers on all 160-plus members. To have the support of a heavyweight like Franz would do much to advance the Climbers’ plan.


Franz said nothing as he flipped through the detailed proposal on the screen.


Rudy’s mind spun while he observed the man. He knew that by this point the competition between the Climbers and the Waders was no longer a matter of different philosophies and theories but was focused on practical problems such as power distribution grids, transportation of goods, neighborhood organization, and detailed budgets for each step. Technical advantages and resource-use efficiency were far more persuasive than any values or principles. When both sides were arguing that their plan would bring the greatest benefit to the largest number of people, only numbers could convince. Rudy understood that any opportunity to show how his technology helped a plan was also an opportunity for the plan to help him.


Is he going to support me? he wondered. Is he going to bring more votes to my side?


It was a time of alliances and pacts. In the Boule, the sizes of the extreme radical and extreme conservative factions were both small. Most legislators remained neutral, unsure which plan to back. Based on numbers, the conservatives, who preferred the Waders’ plan of staying put in the city, had the upper hand. But of the neutrals, a significant portion leaned toward the more radical migration plan of the Climbers. The radicals gambled that they’d win most of them. Rudy was merely a foot soldier for the Climbers, but he was radical in every sense. He gazed at Franz while Franz gazed at the screen. The longer the senior legislator stared at the screen, the more hope grew in Rudy’s heart.


The wait was tense, but it didn’t last forever.


Having read through the entirety of Rudy’s design document, Franz looked up. “Can you take me to see your simulations?”


“Now?” Rudy struggled to keep the excitement off his face. “Of course. Anytime.”


*


In the evening, after he came home, Rudy went straight to Hans Sloan’s study.


His grandfather stood before the window, browsing through a thick book. Behind him, thick hardcover books with gilded pages filled the bookcase like some monument. Rudy didn’t dare to make much noise, knowing that Hans disliked being disturbed while reading. From childhood he understood that the books meant quietude; they were the true protectors of this room. The words were high ideals, principles, his grandfather’s understanding of human nature. On Mars, because paper was so expensive, few books were printed, and even fewer citizens could keep so many frozen words. Rudy took pride in the books, but he knew he had to respect them as well.


Hearing Rudy come in, Hans turned around and set down the book.


Rudy remained at the door. Softly he said, “I’m back, Grandfather.”


Hans nodded. “Did you leave the afternoon session early?”


“Yes. I brought Legislator Franz to see some simulations.”


Hans’s voice revealed neither praise nor criticism. “What did he think?”


“He was very interested. He thought my plan was feasible. Other than the advantage of low costs from eliminating the tunnels, it also utilizes energy more efficiently. The magnetic rails could draw power from solar panels placed on the mountainside, and eventually they could even tap into hydropower from the downflow. Also—”


Hans broke in gently. “I understand. I’m familiar with your plan.” After a pause he added, “You move fast.”


Rudy looked at his grandfather’s face, trying to see if he meant something deeper by that. But Hans’s expression was placid, revealing nothing. The silence became awkward.


The night before, Hans told Rudy that the decision would be made with a Boule vote. The decision to bring Ceres here and to engage with Earth had both been made by the Boule, so he would continue the tradition this time. Hans explained that the vote was only going to pick an engineering plan based on feasibility and potential, but no permanent decision about the future lifestyle of Mars would be made.


Rudy understood, however, that the engineering plan would essentially determine the lifestyle. He said nothing at the time, but instantly he began to plan the best way to take advantage of this knowledge. Hans was referring to his quickness of mind.


Rudy tried to break the uncomfortable silence. “Grandfather,


I’m sorry to be so direct . . . but are you against leaving Mars City?” “Why do you ask that?”


“I think you know that if you were to submit the decision to a plebiscite, most of the younger generation would choose to move so they’d be given a chance to shine through this historic opportunity. The Boule, on the other hand, is full of elders whose best accomplishments are already behind them. Naturally they’d lean toward preserving the status quo. To submit the decision to a Boule vote is to . . . maximize the chances of staying in Mars City. Am I right?”


“The reasoning you’ve described . . . is that also the basis for your own decision?”


Rudy hesitated for just a moment. “Yes. I’m not ashamed to admit it. I think most people think as I do.”


“Perhaps you’re right,” said Hans. “But I don’t think it’s going to influence the final result.”


“Why not? I think it will.”


“As you saw today, even with a Boule vote, your side has a good chance of winning.”


Rudy tried to find signs of disappointment or mockery in Hans’s expression, but again he came up with nothing. Hans looked back at him as though reading a book, focused, observant, but revealing no emotion. For some reason Rudy began to fear his grandfather. He had the sense that while Hans knew every step of his plan, he couldn’t make out what Hans intended at all.


Rudy suggested that Hans extend the period of debate. Hans acknowledged the suggestion but didn’t say if he would implement it.


Rudy left the study and stood in the hallway alone. He was anxious, and he didn’t know if his grandfather was also anxious. Even in his own mind, he had been trying to avoid the real reason he was so enthusiastic about migrating. He had imagined so many futures, and in every one of them he stood on top of the mountains, directing others to do his bidding as the new city rose around him. He could no longer accept the possibility that none of these scenes might come true. He felt ashamed for such naked ambition. When he was a little boy, he thought he would grow up to be publicspirited, making all his decisions based on what was objectively good for the collective. Today was the first time he had ever opened himself up to reveal his true desires. He wasn’t sure if it was the result of the exciting success this afternoon or some power exerted by his grandfather’s quiet words.


As he struggled with his conflicting emotions, he heard the crisp laughter of two girls at the other end of the hallway. The sweetness of their voices contrasted strongly with his long shadow on the floor, as crude as a rusted iron club. In the last rays of twilight, he couldn’t tell who, he or the girls, was more out of place. He really had no interest in conversation right now, but out of habit he went toward Luoying’s room.


He saw Gielle through the open door.


“Rudy!” she called to him happily.


Rudy nodded at her. He turned to Luoying. “How are you feeling?”


He saw that Luoying’s hair was a bit messy and her forehead was sweaty. She had just come home.


“I’m good,” said Luoying, smiling. “Great, even.”


“Liar!” Gielle tugged on her arm and grinned at Rudy. “She’s acting strange all the time. I think she’s in love!”


Gielle giggled. Though she was talking about Luoying, her own face flushed.


Rudy found Gielle’s theory not implausible. Luoying was at just the age to be obsessed with romance. To be honest, he had been concerned with her odd behavior lately. Sometimes she would sit by herself next to the window, her arms around her drawn-up knees, doing nothing and not answering anyone. Sometimes she disappeared for hours without telling anyone where she had been. It had been more than a month since she had come back from her adventure, and he was worried about her. He was almost glad that everything could be explained by her being in love.


“There’s nothing of the sort going on,” Luoying said to Gielle.


“Don’t gossip.”


But her denial was perfunctory, as though she lacked the interest in making it convincing.


“Oh, I don’t think it’s gossip.” Gielle turned back to Rudy. “You’d better interrogate her. Look at how she’s always busy working on that big project. I bet it’s a gift for her boyfriend!”


Rudy looked where Gielle was pointing and saw a pile of random materials by the window: cardboard, metal frames, ribbons of various colors. Some were cut into odd shapes and already pieced together. He couldn’t tell what she was making, but it was obviously something quite large. He had never noticed these things before.


“I told you, it’s not a gift,” said Luoying. “Then what is it?”


“Just something to publicize an event.”


“What event?”


“Something for the Mercury Group.”


“I thought you guys are under isolation.”


“Just for a month. It’s almost over.”


“Hmm . . . Who’s organizing this?” Rudy asked.


Luoying looked him straight in the eyes. “It’s not a boy. Really, don’t listen to Gielle. Chania wanted to host a salon, that’s all. And this really isn’t a gift.”


“Is Chania that girl I met at the hospital?” asked Rudy.


“That’s her.”


“Isn’t she a gymnast? What kind of salon is she hosting?”


“Yes, she’s a gymnast, but she’s always been interested in classic essays and papers.”


“What sort of classics, exactly?”


“Oh, you know—”


Gielle interrupted: “Rudy!”


Luoying and Rudy looked at her, but she blushed, as though suddenly losing the courage to say what she had been about to say. “Um . . . I guess it’s late. I should go home.”


“You’re welcome at our home anytime,” said Rudy, not really paying attention to her.


But Gielle didn’t get up right away. She pointed to the side. “Can you help me carry that?”


Rudy saw that she was pointing at a gigantic planter with some flowering plant inside. The plant seemed familiar, but he couldn’t recall the name.


“It’s from our garden,” Luoying explained. “Gielle likes it, so I’m giving her some.”


Rudy was annoyed but tried to hide it. He picked up the planter and walked down the stairs with Gielle. He had been hoping to seize this opportunity to have a good talk with Luoying, but now the moment was gone, as impossible to recover as dissipating smoke.


He wasn’t so self-absorbed as to not understand that Gielle liked him, but in his mind he was thinking only of Chania. Few girls left such a vivid impression after just one meeting. The corners of her eyes lifted up like the wings of a bird, and he liked the proud way she held herself. She was beautiful in an unembellished way. He wasn’t so much interested in what she had to say or read, but he was curious about her. Normally, he wouldn’t have talked to Luoying about a girl as he had just done.


Outside the door of the house, Rudy looked up and saw Luoying gazing at the horizon, lost in thought.


“I heard that you’re promoting your magnetic car technology,” Gielle said.


“Uh-huh.”


“That’s wonderful.” Gielle smiled sweetly. “I was thinking . . . maybe you could make the seats dangling from the rails shaped like the letter C, with a colorful veil draping over the front.” “I guess I could,” said Rudy noncommittally.


“Could you also hang a small platform below the seat and fill it with flowers?”


“Uh, sure.”


“How about adding a waiting area in front of every house?”


“What’s the point of that?”


“So a boy could wait there as his date arrives by magnetic car, of course.” Gielle grinned at him. “Maybe there’s no ‘point,’ but life would be so boring if everything has to have a point. You have to have some creativity, right?”


Creativity. Rudy looked at her helplessly and sighed inside.


He thought he had finally figured out what the greatest invention on Mars was. It wasn’t the central archive or the fusion engine but the mini-maker. Programmable and easy to use, the mini-maker was capable of assembling small objects out of raw materials. By changing the programming, it was easy to get a mini-maker to output variations on the same basic object. These machines had been invented at first for isolated outposts, but other inventors had extended their capabilities. Galiman had used them in the construction of houses, and Tyler later used them for garments.


Women always think of creativity in terms of how something looks, thought Rudy. Here they’ll change the color; there they’ll add a bow. Or maybe they’ll make a seat look like an eggshell. And then they think they’re “designing.” But they don’t care about the concept, the idea! Good thing we have the mini-maker to keep them busy all day tweaking appearances.


We always have to keep women busy somehow, lest they make a mess of the world.


*


At half past eight, after his daily walk after dinner, Rudy arrived at Don Juan, a bar favored by many of the legislators lately. He pushed open the pseudo-classic style door and surveyed the inside. Richardson, Ward, Franz, and Juan were all there. He felt good. They are all here.


Don Juan was pretty cramped, but it was so popular because it had long tables. Most bars had small tables placed far apart, but at Don Juan it was possible for a large crowd to all gather around a long table. The long and angled bar along the walls provided another place for patrons to stand and talk. The place wasn’t well lit and the drink menu wasn’t impressive, but the decor gave an alluring sense of possibilities, making everyone bolder in the dimness.


Rudy found a place at the side of the long table and poured himself a drink. Soon he was drawn into the flowing conversation. He leaned back in his chair, one leg propped against the table, laughing at the racy stories being exchanged. A red-faced, balding, middle-aged man sat next to him, stuttering a bit. On the other side of the table he saw Franz engaged in a whispered conversation with another man. Richardson was at the bar, glancing at his watch from time to time as though waiting for someone.


Rudy saw Juan making his way through the crowd toward him.


His dark round face glowed from alcohol, and he guffawed loudly as he joked with the others and slapped them forcefully on the shoulders. He looked meaningfully at Rudy, and although Rudy caught his look, he pretended not to notice. Satisfied, Juan looked away.


“You asked for cod! I remember it like yesterday,” Juan shouted at a man who appeared already inebriated.


“No way!” replied the man, laughing. “I haven’t eaten cod in more than two years.”


“Want to bet? We can go ask Lucy. She was there.”


“What do you want to bet?”


Rudy continued to converse with the balding man, but he wasn’t really listening. Holding his tumbler, he looked about, absorbed in his own thoughts. Amid the noise of clinking glasses and laughter, he reviewed every step he had taken during the last two years and his recent plan.


After being a member of the Boule for two years, he had complicated feelings regarding the body. He had dreamed of making an impact right away, but once he was inside, he realized that no one cared about what he had to say. No one cared that he had graduated early at the top of his class or that he was the grandson of the consul. No one was going to deviate from established procedure because he was so exceptional; indeed, no one even thought he was exceptional. All the legislators had their own proud histories of accomplishments and issues they cared about, and none paid much attention to a junior member. For the first time in his life, he was ignored. During his first year in the Boule, he had had the sensation of having fallen from the apex of life to its nadir.


But Rudy was adaptable. Soon he adjusted to the reality of his station as the most insignificant member of that august body. He spent hours in the central archive gathering background on every legislator: curriculum vitae, research, past proposals, voting records, feedback from the public, history of complaints, political leanings, and political styles. In his mind, the structure of the Boule was like a three-dimensional model of the landscape, gradually becoming clearer as he added more details. He could now see patterns in the conversation groups at the bar and deduce the general goals of each conversation partner. He had begun to manipulate in a way that he had once thought was never necessary. He told no one of these developments, not even his own grandfather.


They say I’ve never suffered a setback, he thought, but that’s because no one knows my setbacks. So many mope about all day, hanging their heads as though they’ve suffered the worst fortune has to offer, but in reality it was nothing. They think not passing a test is a big deal. So absurd. The only setback worth thinking about is the distance between one’s ideals and reality. Someone with no ideals has no right to talk of setbacks.


He raised his chin and drained his tumbler in one gulp. When he set the glass down, he saw that Juan had slipped into the seat next to him. Still laughing at some joke, Juan draped an arm over his shoulder and raised a glass, just as he did with everyone he met at the bar. Rudy felt the weight of Juan’s arm, but he strained to smile easily and clinked glasses with him.


“Good thing you’re here tonight,” Juan whispered. “I just got a piece of important intelligence.”


Rudy laughed exaggeratedly, as though he had just heard some great joke. Then he lowered his head and whispered with his lips barely moving, “What is it?”


Juan looked to the side and laughed some more. “Earth has confirmed plans to build new defensive bases on the Moon.”


“So they suspect something is going on.”


“Definitely.”


“What do you want to do, then?”


“We have to hurry. It will be too late if they complete the bases.”


“I understand. Is there anything you need from me?”


“Just wait. I’ll be in touch.”


Juan pulled away and laughed, slapping Rudy’s shoulder as though he had just told some lewd joke. Rudy put on an awkward expression and blushed to complete the performance. Juan stood up and soon joined other conversations, his rotund body swaying as he slowly headed for the bar. He stopped next to a tall man and started to talk to him loudly about some unimportant matter. Rudy looked down thoughtfully, appearing to observers like someone drowsy from drinking.


The new engineering plan was about to take shape. Anyone could see that this would usher in a new era for Mars. Both the natural environment and the social structure would undergo complete change, like a machine being taken apart and reassembled into something new. Everyone had to think about their position in the new social order.


Rudy had no idea how future Mars would develop, but he knew they were making history. This would be the first attempt— not just in Martian history, but in the history of humanity—to terraform a planet. Everything was change and turmoil, while the future was full of possibilities and uncertainties. Rudy felt the rising tide of excitement infuse his body. He knew that it was possible that the future would deem him a villain for being part of this transformation, but those in the future would also regret not being able to participate. In a time like this, people needed powerful leaders. Whoever contributed the most would then stand at the center of the future political stage, just like his grandfather and his companions after the war. Rudy was ready for it.