THE SKYDECK




Luoying heard the raised voices inside her suite. Dr. Reini was pushing her in a wheelchair. She stopped him and listened. Soon the point of the argument became clear to her. The voices in the room were like hammers pounding on her chest. The corridor outside the suite was long and dark, and the dry and cold air made her shiver.


She could tell that Uncle Juan was trying to probe for details, to attack Eko and the other Terrans, to create confusion, to force Eko into confessing some kind of plot, to find the excuses needed to blow up into a casus belli. He had never given up the idea of going to war. But he couldn’t attack without a provocation, some reason that would make peace no longer tenable.


Details could be twisted into reasons. When the intent was to provoke a war, it was unnecessary to make every step of the deduction airtight. A small mistake committed by an individual could be the first link in a chain leading to war, and it wasn’t important who that individual was or what they had done. Fortunately, Eko had not sent any data to Earth—not yet—or else the appearance of a plot against Mars would be complete.


She gripped the arms of the wheelchair. Still feeling weak after the surgery, her hands lacked strength. With each accusation Juan made, her shoulders shook, as though Juan’s questions were missiles that struck her through the door.


She didn’t know what to do. She hated to see Eko being falsely accused, not just because his teacher was also her mother’s teacher, but because she hated to see any innocent person falsely accused.


A hand landed on her shoulder, warm and full of strength. She felt calmer. She looked up gratefully. Dr. Reini’s face, a kind presence against the dark corridor. An idea took shape in her mind. “Dr. Reini,” she said, “I need your help.”


“Of course.” His voice was gentle and powerful.


“Can you carry me in? Carry me high so they can see me.”


The doctor nodded without asking why. He crouched down and lifted her out of the chair until she was sitting on his right shoulder. Wrapping an arm around her lower legs to steady her, he stood up. Luoying felt a steadfastness in his arm that she could rely on.


Dr. Reini wasn’t very tall, but he had broad shoulders and strong arms. Luoying didn’t feel scared at all as he stood up. She hadn’t been carried like this since she was a little girl. After her father died, no one had carried her like this. She sat on the doctor’s shoulder and let her feet dangle. Her right foot was still numb from the surgery, while her left foot felt chilled. The tips of her toes trembled in the cold.


Carefully, she pushed open the door to the suite, suppressing a rising sense of panic. The adults in the room stared at her. She felt stiff and held her breath, trying to remain calm. The expressions of the people in the room were complicated—some solicitous, others confused—and, like searchlights, they all focused on her face.


She said what she had planned to say, and as she expected, she saw many more questions in the faces.


“I understand,” she said. “I’m very serious.”


“What were your reasons?” said a frowning Rudy. “Did you know Eko from before?”


“Yes, I knew him.” Luoying blushed, as though embarrassed by her confession. “I know Eko and . . . I like him. I’ve liked him from when I was on Earth. I like his films; I like his writing. And so . . . once we came back to Mars, I had him visit my personal space and took him to see the tower. My mother brought me to the tower when I was little, and I always dreamed of taking someone I like there. That’s what happened. You can review the system logs. I was at the tower with him, and I went there from my mother’s personal space. That’s the whole story.”


The adults looked at one another awkwardly, their clothes rustling in the silence. She deliberately put on a serious mien to disguise the far more serious truth. She had made up a tale of girlish passion to dissolve the potential damage of a made-up crime. The adults could not speak, uncertain how to deal with a girl obsessed with her idol. Juan’s dark face glowed redder as he struggled to make sense of this sudden shift. Luoying looked at him expectantly. She knew from the time she was a little girl that he could never resist her puppy-dog eyes.


Juan cleared his throat. He mumbled something about how everything was in the system and there was no need to jump to conclusions.


Since he was the one who had been most insistent on the theory that Eko was a spy, his retreat allowed everyone else to back away. The gathering of prominent individuals from both planets broke up as they departed the suite one by one, all looking preoccupied. Hans and Rudy wanted to stay with Luoying, but Luoying complained of exhaustion, asking that they return to visit her the next day. Eko said nothing but threw her a grateful look as he left.


Luoying still sat on Dr. Reini’s shoulder, stiff and unmoving. Only when everyone had left and the room was empty again did she suddenly collapse, as though she had been struggling to hold up a heavy load and finally ran out of strength. Dr. Reini caught her and gently set her down.


*


The corridor was long and empty, enveloped in a comforting darkness. At the end was a curved wall of glass through which blue lights in the distance could be seen. Dr. Reini pushed Luoying along. Luoying said that she wasn’t sleepy, so they decided to take a walk together. The wheels creaked in the dark passageway.


“Thank you,” said Luoying.


“It’s nothing,” said the doctor. “Where do you want to go?”


“Doesn’t matter. Anywhere is fine.”


He pushed her wheelchair, and they rode up one elevator and then another. He never asked her any questions. They followed a curving hallway past a break room and a storage room filled with instruments as strange as monsters until they came to an arched door.


Reini opened the door and pushed Luoying through.


For a moment Luoying thought she was back on Maearth. She was under the stars, adrift in the infinite welcoming space.


They were standing on a broad skydeck. The deck was covered by a glass dome that rose out of the solar panels, leaving them with the illusion of being exposed to space directly. The hospital was located near the edge of the city, and the skydeck towered above surrounding buildings so that their view was unimpeded. Looking toward the horizon, beyond the low buildings, the vast emptiness of Mars spread out as far as the eye could see. There were no dust storms, and distant mountain ranges undulated like sleeping beasts. The skydeck was smooth and open, with a shallow pool winding past their feet. Luoying looked up at the stars and took a deep breath, not expecting to find such a space in the hospital.


“We’re at the city’s southernmost point. From here you can see Big Cliff directly south.”


Dr. Reini’s slow and gentle voice was a perfect match for the night.


Luoying gazed through the glass wall and didn’t speak for a long time. Big Cliff was like a black sword in the distance. As she was enveloped by night, her anxiety gradually calmed. It was as though she were back on the dance stage. The sky above was the ceiling of the Grand Theater, and the stars were real stars. On one side was green-blue Earth, and on the other red-orange Mars. The two planets, so close in distance, felt so far apart in other ways. The stars shone around her, bright but also dark, and she danced alone in the center of the cosmos.


Luoying closed her eyes and let her worries dissipate into the night. She leaned against Dr. Reini. She had forgotten this feeling of being able to rely on a parental figure, like a tree in autumn, restrained but powerful, at peace. His movements were always steady and reassuring, like a sharpened paper cutter, simple and precise.


Finally she spoke. Her voice was like a candle’s flickering flame against the vastness of the skydeck.


“Dr. Reini, will I have to stay here for a long time?”


“I don’t think so.” Reini sounded confident. “The broken bones will heal soon.”


“Will I be able to walk?”


“Of course.”


“What about dancing?” Luoying rushed to ask before she lost her nerve. She noticed a moment of hesitation before Reini answered.


“It’s too early to say right now. We have to see your progress.”


“What do you mean, exactly?”


Another moment of hesitation. “I’m not worried about the fractures as much as I am about the tenosynovitis. The inflammation is quite severe. It’s possible that you were overextending yourself. As for dancing . . . it’s possible that you can continue. But my suggestion is that you stop in order to prevent irreversible damage in the future.”


Luoying’s heart sank. Though Reini was trying to soften the blow, and he wasn’t trying to act like her father, his meaning was clear. As soon as she heard “tenosynovitis,” she knew the answer. She was never going to heal completely. For a dancer who relied on precise movements of the joints, such a condition was a nightmare. If she didn’t want to end up with a permanent disability, she had to stop dancing.


Reini’s diagnosis plunged into her heart like a lead ball sinking to the bottom of a pool. What she felt wasn’t shock; rather, it was swirling dust settling down as the wind died.


On Earth she had had trouble with her jumps. In a gravity field three times as strong as the one on Mars, her legs felt like they were weighed down by sandbags. She had wondered if a day would come when she would lose the struggle against gravity. She imagined two outcomes. In one case, she would have to stop dancing before she could go home; in the other, she would endure the hardships and return to Mars to take flight like a bird. But she had never imagined this outcome: she was home, but she could no longer dance. She had escaped from that weighty planet, and she was just growing used to the sensation of flight, but now she had to stop. She had gritted her teeth and endured hardships motivated by hope, and now she was never going to enjoy the fruits of her labor. The curtains had fallen, and her performance was over. Sparks had come to life between the stars briefly, and now they were gone, leaving only darkness and silence. She strove to overcome the unbridgeable distance, but she failed in the end. She would never reach the sky, never touch both planets at once, despite using all her strength. In the end she fell; she had to give up. Gravity could not be overcome, and neither could distance.


She didn’t even get a chance to finish her performance properly, to take a bow. Luoying looked up at the Milky Way. I would have accepted any outcome, but you didn’t even let me finish. Tears spilled from her eyes and glided past her ears. The drops felt warm against her stiff neck. I have nothing to strive for anymore, she thought.


Reini knelt down next to her, his eyes compassionate and understanding through the round spectacles. He lifted Luoying’s leg, cradling the boot woven from thin metal filaments.


“The boot not only secures your foot; it also contains sensors and electrodes to decode the neural impulses sent to your foot, allowing you to walk. You’ll need to adjust to it over a few days. Be careful.”


Luoying tried it out. She lifted her right leg and tried to flex her ankle. Although she couldn’t feel anything, she saw the boot flex and bend, obeying her will.


“Feeling all right?” asked Reini.


“Yes, I can control it.”


“Good. It takes most people longer to get used to it.”


Luoying smiled bitterly. Who knew training as a dancer would have such a benefit? The key to dancing was control, not mere strength. It was about positioning the toes at the right angle at the right moment, about mastering every muscle so that it was neither too tense nor too relaxed. She stared at the skin-tight boot, feeling the metal filaments wrapped around skin and muscle, faithfully translating every neural impulse into movement. Reini continued to kneel by her side, not rushing her or asking questions.


As she continued practicing moving the boot, she asked, “Do you specialize in neurology?”


“In a manner of speaking.”


“I’ve never been sure: Are there more stars in the universe or neurons in a human being?”


Reini smiled. “The stars win that contest. A person has a little more than ten billion neurons, while there are three hundred billion stars in the Milky Way alone. And there are hundreds of billions of galaxies in the rest of the universe.”


“If each star were a neuron, and the whole galaxy were a whole brain, wouldn’t it be much more intelligent than a human?”


“That would require stars to be able to communicate with one another, to send messages back and forth like neural transmitters. That’s not easy to achieve. The stars are very far apart, separated by vacuum.”


Reini’s words echoed in the empty skydeck like a mystical oracle.


“Dr. Reini, may I ask how old you are?”


“Thirty-three.”


“Do you remember what happened on Mars eighteen years ago, when you were fifteen?”


“Let’s see, that would be year 22 of the Martian calendar, yes?” “Yes.”


“That was a pretty eventful year.” Reini’s voice was pregnant with meaning.


“Do you remember what happened?”


“Everyone who went through that time remembers. It was the year 2172 by Earth reckoning, the beginning of what we think of as the détente.”


“The détente?”


“Back then, Earth and Mars had been completely isolated from each other for some time. During the first two decades of the war, Terrans held on to some bases on Mars, and Martians used to raid the supply convoys to those bases. Later, as Terrans pulled out of their Martian bases and began to conduct the war solely through space bombardment, Mars was completely cut off from Earth. At that point, everything Martians needed had to be produced on Mars: food, water, clothing, and so on. It was an incredibly difficult feat. Without the success of those early revolutionaries, we wouldn’t be here.


“During the first decade after the conclusion of the war, there was no contact between Mars and Earth at all. Many of the leaders of the early republic argued that we must not show weakness to the Terrans by begging for aid. But Garcia insisted that we could not sacrifice our long-term future over pride. He was only thirty-three at the time, and essentially appointed himself our chief diplomat. I don’t know how he managed it, but he succeeded. In year 10 of the Martian calendar, Garcia took over Maearth, and two years later he negotiated the first trade deal between the two worlds. In exchange for a microchip technology, Earth gave us a shipment of nitrogenous chemicals, and our two planets reestablished contact.


“In the decade after that, we bartered technology for necessary resources, but each side distrusted the other. Everything happened on Maearth, and no Martian set foot on Earth, just as no Terran touched the soil of Mars. This state of affairs continued until year 22 of the Martian calendar, the start of détente. The central archive has a lot of material covering that time, as it was the end of one historic epoch and the beginning of another.”


“Was that when the first Terrans visited Mars?” Luoying asked.


“Yes. They came primarily to study technology. It was our decision to take the first step, to welcome them to learn about our advanced technology and to guarantee their delegates’ safety. It was a risk, since our only advantage against Earth was our technology. However, decision-makers felt that if we didn’t take the risk, ultimately we were the ones who would be harmed the most in a state of continued mutual isolation. Earth could survive on its own, but Mars could not. So eighteen years ago the first Terran delegates arrived. There were ten of them, focusing on five Martian technologies.”


“One of them was full-fidelity holographic filming?”


“That’s right. That was a key technology at the time. One of the Terrans decided to stay on Mars.”


That must be Mom’s teacher, thought Luoying, and also Eko’s teacher. He wasn’t a sculptor, but he talked about art with her parents. He reawakened their childhood dreams about art and brought Earth’s sense of limitless freedom, of a life of movement and flow. They discussed the history of ideas in her parents’ study, seeking a way to unify the different lifestyles of the two planets. The study would always contain memories of his presence, his images, his words. His coming coincided with her own birth, and that was why her mother spoke of her as light, as the coming of communication.


Without him, her parents wouldn’t have died. Without their deaths, she wouldn’t have gone to Earth. Without going to Earth, she wouldn’t have wanted to find out about the past. Everything was already written. Thirteen years after her birth, she was fated to begin this journey to discover her own past. It was her destiny, determined at birth.


She gazed at the stars, searching for that lonely, silvery ship. The captain was on that ship, alone between a group of twenty million human beings and another group of twenty billion, neither of which understood him. But the sky was too vast for her to find the ship, and she could only imagine it in her mind’s eye. She imagined Garcia shuffling alone through the passageways of the ship, his figure slowed down by age. She imagined him stopping at the bow of the ship, gazing down at the city he loved but to which he would never return.


She missed the carefree life on Maearth. On the ship she had also sat like this, embraced by the endless stars. Time seemed to have stopped. She and her friends ran across the ship, drinking Gio in front of the windows of the spherical observation deck, laughing at all the outdated equipment on Maearth. They tumbled and twisted and glided through the weightless gym, enjoying the freedom of unrestrained movement as game balls drifted by them. They kicked, turned, flew, wiped off their sweat, hugged each other, and partied without going to bed.


On the ship, she couldn’t wait to go home, thinking that once she was there, she would be away from all worries and doubts; but once she was home, she discovered that the ancient ship had been a haven of tranquility. Her life there had been simple and pure. There was no fear, no conflict between one human and another, between the individual and the world, between one world and another.


“Dr. Reini, do you know my grandfather well?”


“Well enough.”


“Then . . . can you answer a question honestly?”


“What’s the question?”


“Is my grandfather . . . a dictator?”


“Ah, did you hear that from the Terrans?”


“Yes,” Luoying replied, nodding. This was the first time she had shared this particular experience on Earth with anyone. “The first time I heard it was at a large international conference, the Symposium on the Future of Humanity. My friends and I were invited as guests of honor because we were from Mars. There were so many well-dressed men and women in a brightly lit hall. The hall had a long history, and we were told that, hundreds of years ago, revolutionaries had signed a document of great meaning there, proclaiming a new way of life. The ceiling was tall and stately, covered in religious murals, as though the gods were gazing down at us.


“We were all a bit intimidated, and we sat carefully in our seats, hoping to represent Mars well. The conference itself was quite boring. Expert after expert got up to deliver a talk, most of which we didn’t understand. Just as we were discussing ways of exiting politely, a professor started to talk about Mars.


“‘Everyone,’ he said, ‘despite the warnings of Orwell in 1984, of Huxley in Brave New World, of Kafka in everything he wrote, humanity seems hell-bent on realizing their dystopian visions step by step. Humans live in blindness, not unlike the poor souls in that ancient flat classic, The Matrix. An Age of Machines is coming. It’s no exaggeration to say that the System is going to rule over the human race. There is a powerful autonomous system taking shape, a system that treats human beings as so many fungible components. It’s pressing down upon us, devouring and assimilating each individual. It’s an expert at disguise, often showing itself as a beautiful, ideal garden. But whether it shows its true terror or conceals it with sweet deception, its true nature is the enslavement and extinction of human nature. Mars is our best example. Think about it, everyone: without the help of a system of machines to help him, how can a single dictator sustain his mad rebellion for so long? How can he take so many intelligent men and women and convince them to embrace betrayal, to give up survival, to march toward death?’”


Reini broke in. “Did he know who you were?”


“I think he did,” said Luoying. “I saw him glancing my way a few times, even smiling. He went on: ‘And so, honored guests, I want you all to remember this: we must be ever vigilant against those who would reduce humanity to components of a dictatorial system. The future of humanity lies only in such eternal vigilance. The tragedy of Mars must not be allowed to repeat on Earth.’


“I felt so cold at the time, and my lips must have turned white. Chania, who sat next to me, gripped me by the hand. Her hand was cold, too. As I looked over the audience, I thought I was looking at a featureless sea of human heads. The light was so bright, and his voice boomed at me from speakers in every direction. I was terrified, and I remained sitting only by force of habit. I think it was the longest day I could ever recall.”


Reini waited until she was a bit calmer before saying, “Don’t mind his nonsense too much. A man who would deliberately attack you like that is not someone whose opinion is worth listening to.”


“I’m all right now,” said Luoying. “After experiencing attacks like that a few times, I grew used to them. I think perhaps he wasn’t trying to attack me on purpose. Instead, the pleasure I sensed in his voice was the pleasure of speaking truth. I don’t care if he intended to hurt me; I only want to know if what he said was the truth.” She looked up at Reini. “Tell me . . . did my grandfather punish my parents?”


“Yes, he did.”


“Were they . . . convicted of treason against Mars?”


Reini didn’t answer her directly. He knelt down next to her and gazed into her eyes warmly. “That was in the past. The crime they were convicted of doesn’t matter. What matters is what your grandfather hoped you would learn from Earth.”


“What I would learn?” Luoying was surprised.


“Your grandfather . . . He in fact supported many of the things your parents said. But because he’s the consul, he couldn’t and can’t support such opinions.”


“Support . . . what opinions?”


“Economic freedom and freedom of careers. Your parents wanted these more than anything else, but he couldn’t possibly show any support. If he did, the entire unity of the central archive and the unity of our economy would collapse. He understood the necessity of ordering Martian life in this manner, but he also understood that the spiritual freedom of creation is often conditioned upon the freedom of the individual to direct their own life, their environment. Yet, as the consul, he couldn’t voice an opinion like that. Do you understand?”


“Which system, theirs or ours, does Grandfather believe is better?”


“It’s not a matter of which is better but a question of whether we could even choose. The only reason we won the war was centralization: we gathered all our knowledge into one space and made decisions based on total knowledge. The electronic space of the central archive is in fact older than our republic. All our arts and politics in peace have been built upon this foundation. It wasn’t a question of how to choose but what path was determined by history. And your grandfather knows better than anyone that we don’t get to choose our history.


“Five years ago, as the whole republic debated the question of whether to send you and the other students, your grandfather’s vote was crucial to the final passage of the proposal. Can you understand why? As the consul, he presided over a crisis during which those for and against were evenly matched, and his vote virtually determined the final outcome. Indeed, he was the one who chose the name for you and your friends: Mercury. He invoked the messenger of the gods, the god of communication.”


“Are you saying that my grandfather sent me to Earth . . . so that I could understand my parents?”


Instead of directly answering her question, Reini sighed. “I’ve heard him say several times how much you remind him of your mother.”


Luoying remembered the first dusk in her bedroom after her return to Mars. She felt a lump in her throat.


“What kind of man is my grandfather, really?” she asked.


After a long pause, Reini said slowly, “Your grandfather . . . is an old man with too much on his shoulders.”


Luoying could no longer hold back her tears. The doubt that had seized her heart for so many days was in those tears, as were the yearning and anxiety that had built up over one thousand and eight hundred days.


“Dr. Reini, do you make a study of history?”


“No,” said Reini. “But everyone knows something about history, something unique to their experience and understanding.”


“Can you tell me more?”


“It’s too late tonight. Perhaps another day.”


Reini hugged her and gently patted her shoulder. She held on to him, letting the tears flow silently. She had not cried like this for a long time. As she cried, she bid farewell to her doubts as she bid farewell to dancing, facing the deaths of the past as she had faced her injured leg. She looked at the sky, at the surface of her home planet, at the distant stars that she would never touch.


*


Reini waited until she was finally calm. “Time to sleep. Everything will be better tomorrow.”


They left the skydeck, bathed in a dark blue light like the bottom of an ocean, and Reini pushed Luoying back to her suite. The winding, deserted corridors, lit by faint white lights, seemed full of mysteries. The wheels of the chair spun, gliding past the laboratories, instruments, surgical wards, through the corridors, down the elevators, past rooms full of sleeping patients.


As they turned one last corner and approached Luoying’s suite, two shadows rose up.


Luoying screamed, and the two shadowy figures, shocked, screamed as well. Reini turned on the bright lights in the corridor, and as Luoying squinted, she made out Anka and Mira.


“What are you two doing here?”


“We came to visit you!” said Mira. “When we saw no one in the room, we figured you were still in surgery, so we waited.” “We haven’t been here long,” added Anka.


Luoying was moved. She gently chided, “Why didn’t you at least turn on the light?”


Mira grinned. “We were sharing stories from when we were kids. Stories always sound better in the dark.”


Anka said nothing. He and Luoying gazed at each other, and there was a warm glow in his blue eyes.


“You should eat this while it’s still warm,” he said, picking up a box.


“What is it?”


“Old Maury’s pudding.” Anka’s tone was light and casual. “I happened upon it not too far from my home, so I bought a few servings before I went to your performance.”


“You have no idea how hard it was to find a place to heat this up,” said Mira. “We went to several shops, and they had closed just before we got there, sometimes by just a couple of minutes.” He laughed heartily and held up his pinched thumb and index finger to show how close it was. His dark, round face looked adorable.


Luoying smiled at Mira. She turned and gazed into Anka’s eyes, but neither said anything. His eyes were as clear as she had always remembered them to be, and it didn’t matter that he said nothing. What was said wasn’t as important as what was remembered. She had mentioned the pudding once; he had remembered.


She reached into the box and took out a small dessert plate. She took a bite of the pudding, and the sweetness dissolved against her tongue. Laughing, she asked Anka and Mira to join her, but they tried to leave all the pudding to her by claiming to be on diets.


“No way,” she said. “I’m in charge today. You have to enjoy this with me.”


The boys each picked up a piece and ate it whole.


The night was smooth as water, and the bright light lit up laughing faces that had forgotten the time. The deserted corridor extended outside the suite, echoing with the sounds and flavors of home.