ANKA




Anka glanced at the hazy sky outside the glass wall. The horizon was clear and sharp one minute and then a blur the next. I guess the storm predicted in the weather forecast is coming, he thought.


He tried to optimize his packing one more time. He pushed the headlamp, survival knife, and compressed dried food packets into the side pockets of his backpack. He wrapped the extra oxygen tanks inside the sleeping bag. Setting the backpack on the floor, he knelt on it to squeeze out as much air as possible and tightened the laces until the backpack was a neat and crisp rectangle. He was still unsatisfied, but he couldn’t think of any other improvements. The provisions for this mission exceeded the standard allocation, and the backpack was clearly bigger than usual. He wasn’t sure if it would fit inside the provision cubby, so he tried to measure it with his hand: three and a half palm widths, just at the limit.


Carefully opening the door to his dorm room, he peeked into the corridor. Empty. He stepped out, a book in hand, and gently pulled the door shut. He walked toward the coffee lounge.


The sky had grown even hazier. There were about two and a half hours left before the sun sank beneath the western horizon. As he walked, he gazed up at the glass dome, trying to determine the wind speed based on the drifting sand. The wind came in gusts, with periods of stillness in between. The storm wouldn’t arrive for another few hours. The digital clock on the wall showed that three hours had passed since the escaped cargo shuttle had been forced to land. Based on the standard amount of oxygen and supplies on cargo shuttles, the passengers should be all right for another five to six hours.


The dark blue of the sky was hidden behind a layer of sand.


There were about four or five people in the coffee lounge. One of them was telling tall tales while a few of his friends listened. On the far side someone was reading an e-notepad. Captain Fitz was nowhere in sight.


Anka poured himself a cup of coffee and walked to a table on the far side. He put the book on the table and took out a notebook, pretending to be studying as he doodled. The man at the other table didn’t look at him, and Anka didn’t look at him either. Earlier, at noon, he had sat in the lounge and overheard the news. There were fewer people now, and he hoped he would hear more.


Captain Fitz had been gone for an hour already. If he was planning to come back to the coffee lounge, then this was about the time he should be returning. He would wait half an hour. After that he’d try something else.


Anka tried to read, but only fragments of sentences managed to make it into his turbulent mind.


Nos frères respirent sous le même ciel que nous . . .


What kind of news will Captain Fitz bring back? thought Anka.


He reread the bits of L’Homme révolté again. He liked the painful earth, the indefatigable navigator, the compressed nourishment, the harsh wind from the horizon, the ancient and fresh dusk. The words and phrases were as solid and simple as the Martian surface. He took a deep breath, and felt the chill in the air.


He had started reading this book last week. On the way here, he had grabbed it from the desk because it was easy to reach.


Though he was in no mood to read, the sentences he had read before jumped back into view on their own.


He calculated in his head. If he left the city right now, he should be back in less than two hours. Thirty minutes to get there, twenty minutes for changing vehicles, and another seventy minutes to get back with some margin for safety. Of course, this assumed everything went according to plan, a straight course with no complications. Only two and a half hours remained before dark, which meant that he had to decide whether to depart within the next thirty minutes. He disliked flying at night, which increased the chances of something going wrong. He preferred not to take such risks, especially on a day like this.


Once again, he reviewed the potential course he would take. The map showed that the site of the accident wasn’t far: at the edge of the cliffs, before the craters. A straight flight path ought to do it. He could rely on the autopilot or take the stick himself. He was certain that he could find the site without trouble.


Captain Fitz still wasn’t back, but Anka knew with growing certainty that he had to go on this trip.


The man who sat at the other table was familiar to Anka. His name was Berger, a lieutenant colonel and Captain Fitz’s commanding officer, which meant Anka also belonged to his command. Earlier that day, when Anka had lunch here by himself, he happened to run into Fitz delivering a piece of urgent intel to Berger. Fitz belonged to Berger’s inner circle, and their whole wing was commanded by officers Juan trusted and relied on. Intel that most had no access to would sometimes be spread via gossip in this coffee lounge.


When Fitz saw Anka, he hesitated for a moment. But Anka pretended to be absorbed by his book. In a low voice, Fitz then told Berger that the shuttle carrying the two escaped Terran hydraulic engineering experts had suffered a malfunction and was forced to land at a mountain pass on the edge of the cliffs. An SOS call had gone out.


Anka glanced at the clock. It was now past four. Three and a half hours had passed since then.


Fitz was back.


As soon as he saw Fitz at the entrance to the coffee lounge, Anka lowered his eyes to the book, straining to look like he had been there the whole afternoon.


Fitz strode quickly to Berger. Without sitting down, he said in a low voice, “The orders are to not rescue them.”


Berger nodded, as though that was the answer he had expected all along. He asked Fitz what steps should be taken. Fitz didn’t answer right away but cast a suspicious look Anka’s way. Anka felt his gaze, closed his book, and stood up as though he had just remembered some appointment. As he walked out of the coffee lounge, he looked back. Fitz was sitting across from Berger, and the two were absorbed in conversation.


Anka rushed back to his dormitory. Time to carry out his plan.


He was no more surprised by this result than Berger. It was entirely foreseeable. From the moment he first heard the news about the escape, he had the feeling that the situation would develop this way.


Those two fools, thinking they could pilot a Martian spacecraft, Anka thought. Couldn’t they sense a trap? And even if it hadn’t been a trap, how could they imagine they could fly it? If an outsider can so easily steal a cargo shuttle and get away, then why does the Martian Flight System bother with years of training for their pilots? To fly from the surface all the way up to Maearth is a maneuver cadets who have been training for a few years already can’t accomplish, let alone two Terrans who know nothing about these machines.


The reason for their escape, on the other hand, is obvious. For the last couple of days, rumors that war is imminent have been rampant within the Flight System. Even people in other systems and ordinary engineers have heard them. The two Terrans must have thought their lives were in danger and sought to escape to Maearth by sneaking onto a cargo shuttle.


And then they crashed.


Juan isn’t going to rescue them because they’re the perfect sacrifices. He’ll tell everyone that the two Terrans had stolen crucial intelligence against Mars and were trying to escape. The secret Terran conspiracy against Mars, thus exposed, will stir up popular anger against Earth, leading to easy passage of a declaration of war.


Even if that plan doesn’t work out, the deaths of the two Terrans will enrage people on Earth, forcing their governments to launch a strike against Mars. Mars will then have to go to war to defend itself.


Juan has been looking for a casus belli for a long time, and these two Terrans have been working hard to deliver him one.


They don’t respect flight. Anyone who doesn’t give flight the respect it demands will pay a price. To fly is to gamble with your life.


Anka changed into his flight suit, put on his backpack, and stepped out into the corridor. He took one more look around his room: still reasonably neat, with two shirts draped on the back of his chair and the pillow and bedding arranged for bedtime. He thought about taking the model airplane, a gift from Luoying, but after hefting it, he decided it was too awkward to carry.


He wondered if he should send a message to Luoying first to let her know of his plans. But after glancing at his watch, he decided against it. He was already tight on time, and besides, he knew that Luoying was part of that rally today; she was probably too busy to check her messages.


I’ll talk to her when I’m back tonight. Assuming I make it back.


He strode through the corridors, deliberately picking a roundabout route that he normally didn’t use to avoid bumping into any friends or acquaintances. There was no group training that day, so pilots were returning to the dorm by twos or threes. After the intense drills and missions of the last few days, most of the pilots just wanted to catch up on their rest. The corridors were deserted, with all the dorm rooms’ white doors shut.


His own footsteps sounded like the regular beating of a cold heart. He was thinking about Luoying and the others from the Mercury Group, wondering what they were up to. Their rally had started hours ago. He wasn’t a participant, but he was on the distribution list for their group messages and knew the plans. He never joined the discussions but observed from a distance.


He had no idea how to explain to Luoying his own feelings. She had asked him if he was going to participate, and he had answered ambivalently. It wasn’t that he didn’t care about what they were doing, but he didn’t believe in that kind of movement.


What are they hoping to accomplish? To change the system? And then what? To change the way people live? What’s the use? That won’t solve the real problem. Any lifestyle or system is going to have flaws, unfairness, prejudices. The solution isn’t to change the system. In the pursuit of perfection, humans have tried all kinds of systems, all of which have unfairness. The only difference is how those who benefit choose to sing their world’s praises. The real problem is human nature. If a man oppresses others, he will do so no matter what kind of system is in place. What’s the point of hoping for change? There is no hope.


The problems of human nature can be changed only through human nature, but there is no such solution. However, an individual’s problems can be solved by helping that individual. When there is a specific injustice, then it’s possible to confront that specific injustice. That is all we can do. Nothing else.


Even in the most perfect society, there will be children who die unjustly. All human effort can achieve is to reduce, like an arithmetic series, the infinite sufferings of the world.


Anka was walking quickly and calmly. He wasn’t nervous at all, though he was concerned. Nervousness did no good. It was his habit to focus on specific details to keep the instinct to panic at bay. He was concerned about the color of the sky. The pink had darkened, meaning the wind was rising. The dust storm was approaching. It was still far away, but it could speed up at any moment. He had to complete his mission before the storm arrived.


There was no one at the airfield. No one would be so foolish as to fly in weather like this. He approached his own fighter and popped the canopy. Around him, the other parked fighters looked like a school of white sharks resting at sea. On the sides of every fighter, under the cockpit, flame decals evoked the toothy grin of a shark. In the quiet of the airfield, some consciousness seemed to be breathing in its sleep. After the tumult of the military parade and intensive training of the last few days, the ferocious beast was at rest for the moment.


Anka opened the supply cubby and pushed the backpack in; it barely fit. He had brought enough food and oxygen for two extra people in case they had to spend the night outside the city. The tiny fighter could seat only two, and the cargo bay intended for emergencies was filled with the giant folded wings and the motor. There was no extra space. Anka checked to be sure he had enough solid fuel. He checked the air intake, the valves, the spark plug. Everything seemed fine.


Having repaired this fighter himself, he was as familiar with it as with his own body.


He had taken part in the drills the day before. The fighter had performed well—at least, it had kept up with the others, which gave him some confidence. He had not known that he had the skills to be a mechanic, though he had done it only because he refused to submit to Fitz, and he didn’t think open confrontation with Fitz was wise.


The drills had involved flying in tactical formations. Twentyfive fighters had flown in three different formations, attacking jet-propelled airships with laser cannons. The drills provided the commanders with valuable data on how well the fighters supported one another and how quickly they overcame their enemies. Anka enjoyed the drills. He had to admit that diving through the air, covering one’s brothers-in-arms and being covered by them, striking the target, and then glancing back at the arc one had made through the sky—this was the most thrilling experience one could have in the world. Even if he hated war, he liked the sensation of living on that speeding edge.


Everyone around Anka was talking of war, some in favor, some opposed. The discussions were fervent, like the impassioned debates about the Ceres project. It was the one topic that dominated all other topics. He could understand their fervor, though he was against it. After decades of ordinary life in peace, there was nothing more stimulating than the prospect of a real war. The fighter pilots normally were miners, either excavating and blasting ore themselves or serving as cargo camels. They craved combat, craved a battle in which they lived on the border between life and death, and in which survival required the devotion of all their intellect and strength.


Anka understood Juan. His speeches to the pilots had always been powerful and moving. He was not a man who fought for shameless self-aggrandizement but because he truly believed in the ideals he fought for. A man like him was particularly dangerous, and particularly effective. For the sake of the vision of victory, he could hold himself back for years, building up strength and waiting. Juan wanted a grand future for the humans on Mars, to initiate a new epoch of cosmic history. Because he was strong, he wanted all Martians to be strong. Anka didn’t despise Juan at all. Compared to some of the mindless bullies or yes-men who served under him, Juan was far better. Some said Juan was dictatorial, but based on Anka’s experience in the Flight System, Juan was not the worst by that measure.


The real problem with Juan wasn’t his dictatorial tendency but his dogmatism. Anka could almost agree with Juan’s views on nobility and baseness, strength and weakness—if he hadn’t been to Earth. He could have hated the evil Terrans as much as Juan did. But the fact was he had been to Earth and he had spent time among the Terrans. They were not the numb, worthless caricatures in Juan’s speeches, just as Martians were not the numb and worthless caricatures in Terran speeches. He couldn’t scorn all Terrans as a collective in the same way he didn’t want the Terrans to scorn all Martians as a collective.


Anka could not think the way Juan did. There was no such thing as a base or worthless people, only craven and base individuals. One could only solve one concrete problem after another concrete problem, not attempt to resolve all problems through one abstract collective warring against another abstract collective. That never worked.


Anka climbed into the cockpit and strapped himself in. He adjusted the seat and checked all the systems. Seven mirrors showed him the view in every direction. The wind speed and pressure gauges were all still. He initiated power to the propulsion system. Electricity charged the rails beneath the runway. The fighter began to glide along the rails. An electromagnetic beam sent the departure signal to the hangar gate. The fighter was moving along smoothly, its alloy fuselage feeling solid around him, giving him the confidence to trust it to keep him alive.


The fighter reached the hangar gate. Anka sent along his fingerprint and personal code, waiting for the system to verify his identity. The hangar gate was the only exit from the city that didn’t have human guards. The reason was simple: anyone who could pilot a plane out of here had to have the necessary permit. Technical skill was the best defense. Every pilot was allotted a certain number of opportunities to leave the city to practice on their own. Anka had been given five, and he had used up only two when he tried out his fighter after the repairs.


The hangar gate, an airlock, opened slowly. One set of doors, another set of doors, and a third. Anka took a deep breath, eyes on the empty, desolate land that appeared before his gaze. His fingers hovered over the instrument panel.


The fighter accelerated, at first propelled by the electrical current surging through the underground rails, and then its own engines took over. As the plane’s speed reached the threshold for takeoff, it began to burn solid fuel. Jets of accelerated air blasted out of the nozzles and the fighter lifted off, shooting into the sky. In the rearview mirror Anka could see the airfield shrinking. The jettisoned air precipitated into a white column of mist.


The fighter felt smooth and steady. All the indicators were within normal ranges, and the fuel combustion was optimal. As he gazed at the wide-open sky and ground before him, Anka felt his spirit open up in response. The sense of ease was not the same as happiness but transcended it. It rose and fell without cease like the arcing course of the fighter, and therefore it had neither sharp peaks of joy nor acute valleys of sorrow. He experienced this sense of ease each time he took to the sky, and only felt it in the sky. He flew for this sensation, for the endless view of the dark sky and the gray-yellow land.


He kept his hand steady on the stick. The fighter was flying very fast, and he carefully guided it along the red line on the navigation screen. His fighter remained in contact with the ground control center, and the coordinates of the stranded cargo shuttle had been transmitted to his navigation system. The spot he was aiming for was easy to find: about two hundred meters before the cliffs.


Those two Terrans aren’t complete fools. To manage to land their shuttle in such conditions is already quite an accomplishment. Sure, cargo shuttles generally have extremely stable landing systems, which were no doubt of great help to the two Terrans. If no one is injured, it’ll be easy to get them back to the city. Just a straight flight back.


No matter what, leaving two people to die in the dust storm is wrong.


Sand roiled on the horizon like rising flames. The storm appeared to be even stronger than the forecast had predicted. Though it was still unclear how fast the storm was moving, the swirling dust was like the sign of an ancient invasion from the horsemen of the steppes.


They’ll die if they are left where they are. That must not be allowed. There’s no justification for leaving two people out in the sand. Vengeance might be the one exception. But that’s different, for in vengeance it is one person righting a wrong committed against him personally. What Juan is doing, on the other hand, is to sacrifice these two for a goal, a very suspect goal. The storm is coming, and they won’t survive the night.


Luoying and the others talk about resistance. But this is the only kind of injustice that can be resisted. Look at the consequences of abstracting justice and injustice to collectives: it leads to confronting the Terrans as a whole. In order to overcome imagined evil, we are now committing evil first. That’s wrong. It’s shameful.


Glancing at the swirling sand on the horizon, his concern grew. The storm was coming faster and stronger than he expected. He accelerated, burning more fuel than planned in the hope of buying more time. Based on the progress of the storm, there was now a better-than-fifty-percent chance that he would be caught by the storm on the way back, far worse than he had anticipated.


What other choices did he have? One possibility was to land and try to survive inside the shuttle overnight. He had planned for this by bringing along extra supplies. But having seen the strength of the storm, that was unlikely to work. The storm was strong enough to bury them or to topple the shuttle, and larger rocks, which had in the past destroyed houses in the city, could be fatal. He estimated their chances of surviving the night inside the shuttle at less than twenty percent.


Another choice was to go to a cave inside one of the craters. But that would work only with a survival suit. He had one with him, but the Terrans probably didn’t have any on the cargo shuttle. Survival suits were precious resources and generally not part of the equipment of cargo shuttles. The last time they had been caught out, it was lucky that Runge had gotten them a mining ship. Mining crews often needed to perform extravehicular activities, which was why they had such suits. Without survival suits, the thin atmosphere would kill very quickly. To choose the cave was also to doom the Terrans, and his mission would be meaningless.


In the end, the best choice still seemed to be flying back tonight. The chances of success weren’t great, but it was worth a shot.


He asked himself if he had been too reckless, had underestimated the danger. But after pondering the matter a while, he came to the conclusion that he had foreseen the risks adequately. This surprised him. Before departing, he had thought he was going to be perfectly safe, but now, as he combed through his own thoughts, he realized he wasn’t shocked by the crisis. In his subconscious, he had in fact known this was a possibility, but in order to harden his own resolve, he had deliberately avoided the implications. To fly was to bet one’s life. He had always known this.


This is why I’m out here, right? In such weather, it’s impossible for anyone to survive without help.


He glanced at the rising sand twisters off to the side, and a fighting spirit rose in his heart, along with a smile on his face. Let’s race, then. I may still win.


The cargo shuttle came into view, exactly where the distress signal had been sent from. Apparently, the Terrans had stayed put after being forced to land. He guessed that the two were probably confident that Mars wouldn’t let them die, and they were probably, right at this moment, rehearsing an explanation for why they had taken the cargo ship.


Anka slowed down and circled above the cargo shuttle. He reduced the jets so that, with each turn, the fighter lost more altitude. At the same time, he raised the cargo shuttle on the comms, asking them to get ready. As his fighter neared the ground, the jets turned vertical and slowly set the plane down right next to the shuttle.


Anka extended the evacuation tube from the fighter’s tail and manipulated it until the other end locked onto the cargo shuttle’s airlock. He unbuckled himself, put on the survival suit, took the wings, and popped open the canopy. He climbed out, stood on the fuselage, closed the canopy, and put on the wings. He attached the motor to his lower legs and then tied a length of cable between his waist and the fighter’s tail.


He gestured at the two Terrans through the window of the cargo shuttle, explaining that they should open their airlock and crawl through the evacuation tube into the fighter. The two Terrans appeared to be overjoyed and followed his directions. Soon the two were seated under the fighter’s canopy, one in the front, the other in the back.


Anka knelt down on the fuselage and gestured to the person sitting in the pilot’s seat in front, teaching him how to press the buttons to initiate the takeoff sequence. It took multiple tries before he got it right. He looked perplexed, gesturing at Anka to ask him what to do next. Anka smiled at him, telling him to relax.


The fighter roared to life and lifted straight up into the air. The engines were at maximum burn. Vertical takeoff was the key to the agility and adaptability of the Martian fighter, but it was also the Achilles’ heel of its design. To accommodate this capability, the fighter had to be made very light and small, which limited the crew to two and constrained the amount of supplies it could carry.


Excitement overcame Anka’s anxiety. He crouched near the tail of the fighter like a sprinter at the starting line. As the fighter rose higher and began to accelerate forward, he could feel the wings on his back catch the wind, pulling him up. He tensed his muscles and waited as the force on his back built up. Then he pushed off with his arms and legs. After a brief moment of free fall, he felt the wings hold and lift him into the air.


The sensation was familiar. He was a banner flapping in the wind, a kite like the day he had flown with Luoying. Although he had set the fighter’s speed to cruising—about half as fast as he had flown here—it was still far faster than Runge’s mining ship. The fighter was on autopilot now, heading back to the airfield on its own. This was a capability shared by all Martian fighters so that in the event of the pilot’s death, the machines, like the horses of knights of old, would bring the bodies of their fallen masters back home.


Anka felt a kinship with those ancient knights. The roiling dust storm was now almost upon him, like an approaching horde whose faces could finally be discerned through the dust. He tensed his shoulders and back, trying to adjust the angle of the wings to avoid meeting the storm head-on. The wings were strong but thin, and if they were torn by the storm, he would be in trouble.


The light dimmed. Only half an hour before sunset. At their current velocity, the last part of their journey would have to be concluded in the dark. Anka wasn’t worried. They’d be safe enough if they got close to the city. He glanced at the horizon. The sun at dusk was no longer so bright, and the proud white glow had faded into a moody gold. The swirling sand sometimes covered everything so that the sun was no more than a hazy halo. The black sky and the golden land merged at the horizon, and the sand was like the tides, crashing again and again into the sea of the sky. The sand buffeted him, tossing him up and down. A few blows were so hard that he swung from one side of the fighter to the other, like a reed in the wind swaying between black and gold. The whole world tilted this way and that.


As he flew, a pride born of loneliness arose in his heart. There was nothing between the sky and the ground, and only he was warring with the sand. The loneliness felt solemn, and it gave him a sense of peace.


The sand slammed into him in waves, and instinctively he dodged and swerved, maintaining balance. He had to devote all his mental and physical strength to it. There was no choice but to trust himself. There was no support, no companions, no rescue—only himself. Without that faith, he would die. He was an army of one.


Pain chipped away at hope and faith, that was why pain was alone, devoid of explanation.


Anka believed in himself. He had told no one of this, but he thought he could trust himself. He disliked talk of salvation: saving a civilization, a planet, humanity. No, he didn’t believe any of that. There was no such thing as the salvation of humanity, and it could never be justice to let some die in order to save all. Those who proclaimed such things were either trying to deceive others or had already deceived themselves. There was only the saving of an individual. That was all.


“If they cannot all be saved, what is the use of salvation for one?” Dostoevsky said so in The Brothers Karamazov. But what was it that Camus said in response? “If a single individual cannot be saved, then what is the point of saving the collective?”


Anka was beginning to tire. His body felt sluggish even as the wind grew stronger. The wings, laden with sand, sagged. He struggled against the storm with his whole body, gazing into the distance as the light went out. There was still no sign of the city. He had flown for a long time already, but there was still a long way to go. He opened his arms, embracing the emptiness the way he would embrace hope. In a flash he felt the razor-sharp sand against his face. Sobered, he pulled his arms back protectively over his chest.


He thought of Luoying. The last time he had flown like this was with her, but now he was alone. He regretted not bringing the model she had given him or sending her a message. Perhaps he had subconsciously feared just such an outcome, which was why he had refrained from contacting her. But now he regretted it. She was the only one on his mind, the only one he couldn’t forget. She had asked him whether he believed in any love that lasted forever, and he had said no. He had thought Luoying would not, like other romantics, ask such questions. But she did ask, and she had been disappointed with his answer. It was true that he didn’t believe in forever. He believed only in the here and now. She was unlike anyone else. How many people could you fly with, side by side, in a lifetime? She was the only one. She would always be in his heart.


Darkness and sand overwhelmed him from every direction. He closed his eyes, feeling adrift in the waterless tides. He screwed up the last bit of courage, tensed his body, and held on to hope in the roaring, fierce storm. He opened his eyes. The blue city was ahead.