MEMBRANE




The morning before she was scheduled to be discharged from the hospital, Luoying visited another patient.


Pierre’s grandfather was at the same hospital, since he lived in the same district as Luoying. She looked up his room and went to the critical care unit on the second floor, among the most well-furnished wards in the hospital. Green leaf-shaped signs hung on the doors of the quiet rooms. The door to the room Luoying was looking for was open, and the walls of the spacious room were adjusted to be translucent. With sweet floral scents in the air, the place felt as peaceful as an ocean. It was almost possible to forget the depressing reality.


Pierre was sitting quietly by the bed. The sun lit up the side of his face, and his long bangs curled against his forehead, the tips of his hairs and eyebrows almost translucent. Sitting as still as a statue, it took him a while to notice Luoying. He got up in a hurry and pushed over a chair for her without speaking. Luoying sat down, and together the two watched the old man lying in a coma in bed.


Pierre’s grandfather’s silver hair was spread out on the pillow, framing his peaceful face, in which the wrinkles appeared smoothed out due to lack of muscle tension. Luoying wasn’t sure of his condition and didn’t ask Pierre. She simply sat quietly with him, watching the tiny instruments arranged about the head of the bed: graphs measuring the old man’s brain activity and other biosigns scrolled slowly across the screens. The numbers were not the same thing as life, but they indicated that life held on.


“Gielle told me about your grandfather,” Luoying said.


“Gielle . . .” Pierre’s voice was mechanical, as though simply echoing her words.


“Make sure you take care of yourself, too,” said Luoying. “Don’t worry about the Creativity Fair.”


“The Creativity Fair?” Pierre’s expression was unfocused. “Right. The Creativity Fair.”


Luoying glanced at Pierre, and her heart ached in sympathy. She knew that Pierre had been raised by his grandfather, and the two had only each other. Pierre had no siblings, and if his grandfather were to die, he would be all alone in the world. She recalled what he was like as a boy: scrawny, shy, quick to anger, hugging his grandfather’s thighs as he looked alertly at everyone. He didn’t play with the other children, but if he saw anyone being bullied on the playground, he would run over to defend the victim like a baby hedgehog with his back arched, waving his fists. He had always been a stubborn child. Even now, his gaze on his grandfather held that same heartbreaking stubbornness. His body was curled in on itself, holding his emotions tightly in check.


Luoying had seen Pierre only once since she had been back on Mars. All her memories of him were from five years ago, when he had been shorter than she was. She heard that he had turned into an excellent student, with multiple successful research projects the past couple of years—a rare accomplishment for someone so young.


After a while, Pierre suddenly turned to Luoying and said,


“Sorry. I should have gone to see you earlier.”


“Not at all. I’m all better now. I knew you were busy.”


“There’s not much for me to do here.” Pierre shook his head. “Tell Gielle that I’ll join you in a couple of days. I have to supervise the vacuum spraying myself. No one else can do it.”


Luoying was going to tell Pierre not to worry about it and to stay by his grandfather’s side, but, seeing his serious expression, she nodded. “All right. I’ll let her know.”


Pierre turned back to the bed and muttered as though to himself, “No one else understands. Silicon-based nanoelectronic membranes, silicon quantum dots, porous silicon integrated circuits, silicon oxide superlattices—they know the jargon, but they don’t really understand. Our light, our electricity . . . everyone knows how to use them, but no one really understands.”


Luoying wasn’t sure what he was going on about. Hesitantly she asked, “Gielle told me you invented a new kind of membrane?”


Pierre grinned at her, although melancholy remained in his eyes. “Not that new. I’ve long thought about integrating photoelectric properties into thinner, more pliable materials.”


Luoying nodded. She sat with him for a while longer to be sure there wasn’t something she could do and then stood up to say goodbye.


Pierre got up. “When will you be discharged?”


“This morning. I’m on my way out now.”


“Right now?” He looked surprised. “Then let me walk you out.”


“I’ll be fine.”


“I have something to discuss with you.”


“What is it?”


He hesitated. “Let’s wait. I’ll go visit you later at your home.” Luoying nodded. He stared at her back as she left.


Outside the door, she turned around to look back into the pale blue hospital room. Pierre was again sitting quietly, his thin figure leaning forward, his feet resting on the chair’s footrest. He was completely still, but all his muscles were tensed. The room was so quiet.


*


It was still early when she got back to her own room. Sunlight filled the room, and the lilies bloomed in perfect tranquility. Her bags were ready and waiting on her made-up bed. She sat by the window to have her breakfast.


Anka was the first to arrive.


He stood at the open door to the suite and knocked softly. The wind chimes over the door tinkled. Luoying turned around, and when she saw it was him, her spoon stopped in midair. Anka smiled at her without speaking. The bright sun struck his hair and made his whole body glow. Instead of a crisp uniform, he was dressed in loose sweats, which nonetheless showed off his muscular frame. Luoying didn’t know what to say, and the two stared at each other in the peaceful sunlight.


Mira, Sorin, and Chania appeared behind him. The still air was broken.


“How’ve you been?” asked a smiling Chania. “Getting plenty of rest?”


“Not bad,” said Luoying, shaken out of her reverie. “I’m fine now. I can even walk by myself.”


To prove it, she stood up and walked around the room, beaming as she showed them the metal filament boot and explained its principles. As she turned and strode, she also hid her face, not wanting her friends to see her embarrassed blush. She kept her eyes away from Anka.


Once she sat back down on the bed, Chania sat next to her. The two boys then leaned against the window as they all chatted. Chania inquired after Luoying’s leg and recovery, her sensations of pain and discomfort, and compared Luoying’s symptoms with her own. As they spoke, Chania lifted one leg of her pants to reveal a thick bandage wrapped around her ankle. Luoying felt a sympathetic pang and put a comforting hand on Chania’s shoulder. She knew that Chania was still training hard every day for her trip report performance next month.


Luoying asked her friends what they were up to, and after glancing at one another the trio gave the same answer: writing the reports for their trip to Earth. They also wore the same expression: seven parts derision and three parts helplessness.


“Oh, there’s plenty to write about,” said Mira. “But the format . . . grrrrr. I spent three whole days arguing with Granny Asala over the keywords for my report. She kept on insisting that the keywords I suggested were nonstandard, which would make it difficult for future researchers to find my report in the archive. I went through five drafts.”


“Why? Are they going to treat our reports like formal academic papers?” asked Luoying.


Mira shrugged. “Yep. All our reports must strictly adhere to the format of formal academic papers.”


Luoying’s eyes widened. “But I thought we were supposed to just write down how we felt and some notable memories.”


“I thought so, too,” Mira chuckled. “But remember, everyone’s hoping we’ve brought back useful knowledge. We were an investment, and investments must have returns.”


Luoying had lost all interest in even helping other students at the dance school with choreography or tutoring. If she didn’t return to the school, then no one could come after her for a report. Those who went about alone were also the freest. Mira’s smile was adorable, and his dark brown face glowed. In school, he had always been fun and undisciplined, preferring play to work. He used to sleep in all the time like a hibernating bear. Luoying always thought he would never be serious about anything, but he was serious now. Their world had changed. They could be willful for a time, but they were powerless against the demands of a lifetime.


“Oh, that reminds me,” said Luoying. “What about the matter we were discussing over group messaging?”


Chania smiled, her eyes giving off a proud air that was a mix of excitement, rebelliousness, and disdain for the serious and rulebound. With a hint of mystery in her voice, she said, “It’s been decided. We’re going to start a revolution. Remember you and I talked about what happened to your parents? No matter why they were punished, they set an example for us. They were brave enough to challenge the system, and so should we.”


“A revolution?” Luoying sucked in a breath. “What exactly do you have in mind?”


“The first thing is to get to the bottom of Runge’s accusation.”


“I was surprised by that,” said Luoying. “Why does he think that?”


Chania lowered her voice. “Do you remember what happened our third year—”


The wind chimes over the door tinkled, and Chania stopped talking. They turned to find Gielle and Rudy at the door. Rudy was in uniform, and he had a thick folder of documents under his arm. Gielle was holding a basket of fruit, her hair in braids. After the two of them entered the room, Pierre followed.


“How are you feeling?” asked Gielle excitedly.


“I’m fine,” said Luoying. “Just fine.”


Luoying accepted the basket of fruit and set it down on the nightstand. Gielle picked up an orange and gave it to Luoying, then she picked out two apples and handed them to Chania and Mira. Finally she gave Rudy another orange. While everyone else accepted the fruit, Rudy shook his head and refused. Gielle blushed awkwardly. Seeing her reaction, Luoying reached out and took the second orange as well. Rudy never paid any attention to Gielle but looked at Chania curiously.


Rudy gazed at Chania, Gielle gazed at Rudy, and Pierre, who stood at the back, gazed at Gielle. Luoying found the scene amusing. It was obvious that Rudy was interested in Chania, although they hadn’t spent much time together. Luoying saw that Rudy was looking at her with the same expression that he had when he found a research topic that really excited him. Chania, on the other hand, seemed not to notice Rudy at all as she chatted in a low voice with Sorin while biting into her apple.


The atmosphere in the room was peaceful. Other than Gielle, no one spoke much. The bright sun warmed the room, and everything seemed to be going according to plan: a friendly visit, affectionate kindness, bright light, the large, round bed, pale green floors, lilies in the walls. Rudy checked over Luoying’s luggage to be sure she hadn’t forgotten anything, and then waited. The room was as calm as a carefully maintained meditation pool.


“Pierre,” said Luoying, finally breaking the serene mood, “you mentioned that you had something to discuss with me earlier.”


Pierre had been standing next to the door, away from the others, a blank look on his face. Even after Luoying’s question, he didn’t approach the group. He surveyed the room with a distant gaze, his bangs plastered against his forehead. The other staring faces seemed to form a tunnel with him and Luoying at either end.


“During your performance that day,” said Pierre quietly, “did you notice anything unusual?”


Luoying thought back. “I . . . I think so.” As everyone turned to her, she continued hesitantly. “The whole time I was dancing, I felt lighter than usual and I just couldn’t get a good kick off the floor. It was hard to keep up with the music. I never felt like that during rehearsals.”


“Isn’t it good to feel lighter?” asked Gielle.


“No. The most important part of dancing is pushing off against the floor. If your body feels too light, it’s impossible to get the right leverage. I tried to compensate by using brute force, which threw me off balance. I suppose I practiced too much and wore out my legs.”


She looked at Pierre questioningly.


Pierre nodded as though she had confirmed some suspicion. “It’s not a matter of over-practice. The problem was your costume. The fabric was lifting you up like a big parachute.”


“How is that possible!?” Gielle sounded horrified. “What was wrong with the costume? I hope I didn’t cause your injury. But Luoying, you’d danced in that costume before.”


Luoying patted her hand, trying to comfort her. “I’m sure it’s not your fault. I rehearsed with your costume several times. The fabric was so thin that I can’t imagine it caused any issues.” But she saw Pierre’s odd expression.


“It wouldn’t cause any issues normally,” said Pierre, his voice cold. “But on the day of your performance, the magnetic field below the floor of the stage was turned on.” Luoying’s heart sank.


“Wait!” Gielle said, suddenly understanding the import of Pierre’s words. “Is your material affected by the magnetic field?”


“No.” Pierre’s tone was certain. “My material is unaffected by magnetic fields. I measured the magnetic moment to be sure. It’s zero.” He swallowed, and his Adam’s apple moved up and down like a drowning fish. “But someone sabotaged the costume.”


With growing unease, Luoying asked, “Are you sure?”


Pierre nodded. “That night I asked to examine the costume after you were brought into surgery. I was worried that something was wrong with the material, and I discovered that the costume had been coated with a thin layer of high-magnetic-moment material.”


He stopped again and looked at Rudy. Everyone in the room now understood the meaning behind his words, and even Gielle could see the suspicion in his eyes. Luoying felt as though Pierre’s introspective, soft voice were as loud as a roar. The air was suddenly awkward and tense.


“Are you accusing Rudy?” muttered Gielle.


Pierre didn’t answer but slowly turned to look at Gielle.


“What proof do you have?” Gielle shouted. She moved to stand protectively before Rudy. “The fault lies obviously with your material—with you! How dare you throw random accusations around?” Pierre stared at Gielle, and his brows furrowed in confusion. He clearly had not anticipated such a reaction, and he looked as though he had been punched in the stomach.


Luoying was so tense that she couldn’t breathe. The very air in the room felt suffocating. She gazed at Rudy, hoping he would say something. Pierre’s assertion unnerved her, not because she was being defensive about Rudy but because she knew Pierre’s accusation would turn Gielle against him. Gielle craved Rudy’s favor so much that Luoying’s heart broke for Pierre. She could see the disappointment and terror in Pierre’s eyes, and she felt sympathy for both him and Gielle. She wanted Rudy to clear the air by offering a good explanation. The injury to her leg had healed, and she didn’t care about it as much as she hoped that her brother would be honest and responsible.


“It’s not a random accusation,” said Pierre to Gielle.


“It certainly is!” said Gielle.


“It’s not.”


“It is! It is!”


Rudy finally broke in.


“He’s right.” He spoke slowly, keeping his eyes on Luoying, as though Gielle and Pierre didn’t exist. There was an awkward expression on his face as he continued to lean against the wall, his uniform crisp and neat. He kept his hands in his pockets and tried to purge the emotions from his face. “I’m sorry.” Gielle’s mouth hung open.


“I did it without telling you. It’s my fault,” said Rudy.


“But Rudy, when did you . . .” Luoying was at a loss for words.


“I took your costume for a routine inspection before the performance. When I was done, I coated it with a membrane that operates on the same principle as the chairs in the theater. It’s only a few nanometers thick and you can’t feel it, but it can generate a bit of lift in the magnetic field.”


He wasn’t looking at anyone else, and his voice was even more composed than usual. He struggled so hard to keep his face blank that it was as though he didn’t think this was a test of his honesty but of his control. His task wasn’t to offer an apology but to stay unemotional. After a pause, he added, “I’m sorry. I shouldn’t have tried to help.”


“Tried to help?” Chania broke in. “Do you understand what you’ve done?”


Rudy turned to her. “What do you mean?”


Chania laughed coldly. “Are you aware that Luoying may never dance again? She almost couldn’t walk again. How can you act like it was nothing?”


Luoying looked at Chania, who was staring at Rudy with distaste and rage. Luoying could tell that she was angrier about his composure and seeming nonchalance than about his error.


“I just wanted to reduce the weight holding Luoying down a little,” Rudy said.


“Reduce the weight!”


“Yes. I admit I was wrong. I thought she would be able to do her jumps better.”


“Are you an idiot? Dancing is not high jumping.”


“I thought it would be better if she could jump higher.”


“Really?”


“I thought so, yes.”


Chania’s lips curved up in a mocking smile, and she seemed to heave an inaudible sigh. Glancing around at others in the room, she took off her coat to reveal a light yellow top and cotton pants, her usual outfit for gymnastics exercise. She stretched to loosen her limbs, her bracelets clinking against each other.


“From the moment you sent us to Earth, all I’ve heard is the foolish sentiment of ‘jump higher.’ So you want to know how to jump higher?” She stared at Rudy. “I’ll show you.”


She ran a few steps and leaped into the air, spinning as she landed. “Is this high?”


Without waiting for an answer, she took another two steps and leaped, kicking her legs up until they were horizontal. She landed and asked again. “What about this? Would you consider this high?”


No one answered.


“Perhaps you don’t know this,” said Chania in a calm voice. “In fact, just now the height of my jumps wasn’t even at the level of beginners, young girls here on Mars. But since they’re not here, you can’t tell. You always say, ‘Higher, higher!’ You sent us to Earth so we could jump higher. But higher than what? A frog, a mosquito, or an alien from Andromeda? Don’t pretend to be ignorant. A human being simply needs to jump at the height of a human being.”


Rudy locked eyes with her. After a while he asked, “What are you trying to say, exactly?”


“I simply want to point out that you’ve only wanted us to jump higher. But have you thought about Luoying’s suffering? What she’s had to endure? To achieve the height you crave, is it worth ignoring the pain of others?”


Luoying sat on the bed, watching Chania’s face from afar, her heart pounding. Chania looked cold and sad, her feet firmly planted on the ground, her back and neck straight, like a lonely crane.


A complex wave of emotions overwhelmed Luoying. She knew this was no longer an argument about an accident, or even about her. Indeed, even without Rudy’s manipulation, she would have had to stop dancing sooner or later. She and the others from the Mercury Group had pushed their bodies beyond their limits in trying to adjust to the gravity on Earth, and her tenosynovitis was already very advanced, a legacy of years of overexertion. At first they had been driven by a sense of mission and hope, dedicated to the goal of reaching ever greater heights so as not to disappoint those back at home. But by the time they began to question their mission, their bodies had been injured beyond recovery.


Luoying knew that Chania wasn’t arguing with Rudy over the accident but over the repressed questions below the surface. Don’t pretend to be ignorant. A human being simply needs to jump at the height of a human being.


The air in the room felt heavy and oppressive. Chania was suppressing her pride, Gielle her wronged heart, Rudy his sense of failure. The air held down the tension. Luoying didn’t know what to do. They were fighting over her, but she didn’t want them to fight at all.


*


Reini entered the room. He nodded and smiled at the youths. When Luoying saw him, she sensed the arrival of a dependable source of strength. Reini’s gaunt face, clean-shaven chin, strong and steady hands, and frameless round spectacles seemed to form a steadfast presence from which she could seek aid.


“Dr. Reini, am I ready to be discharged?” she asked hurriedly.


“Of course,” said Reini, smiling.


“Don’t you need to examine me one more time?”


“There’s no need. I’ve see the scans from this morning, and you’re healing well. Just come back for your periodic checkups.”


“All right. Thank you. I guess we should go.”


Luoying got up and put on her coat, checking the room one last time for any stray possessions. The others got up as well and helped her with the luggage. Some began to clean up the room.


All at once, the confrontational air was replaced by purposeful busyness. Everyone had their own task. The room was filled with questions like Is this your cup? Soon everything was ready, and they filed out. Rudy was in the front, with Gielle following immediately behind. Pierre followed Gielle. The other four came after, with Luoying bringing up the rear.


The moment they stepped out of the room, Anka moved next to Luoying and gave her shoulders a squeeze. None of the others saw it. She looked at him, but he kept his eyes forward, a smile on his face. All of a sudden Luoying felt a sense of peace drape over her.


“This afternoon . . . ,” he whispered to her.


“Two o’clock, at station three.”


“All right.”


They parted. Anka joined Mira and the others on one side, while Luoying went over to Rudy.


Reini emerged from the room. He had sensed the awkwardness in the room from Luoying’s expression, and so he said nothing as he watched them leave. Walking up to Luoying now, he handed her an envelope.


“This is for you.”


The envelope was sealed with a metallic film with red markings. It was a personal identity seal, something akin to a wax seal in the age of quills, used only for the most formal and important documents, such as powers of attorney.


Luoying looked up gratefully at him. “Thank you.”


Reini nodded. “Be careful.” Then he stood at the top of the stairs as the friends filed away. Luoying waved at him from the bottom of the stairs, and he waved back.


Luoying cast one last look at the room that had been her home for the last twenty-plus days, reluctant to leave. She knew that outside the hospital was a world busy with demands and activity, and she would never again experience this secluded life like a hermit’s. The days in the hospital had been so peaceful, as though the last decade had dissolved into illusions, with dust settling and the surging currents turning placid. She didn’t know what kind of fate awaited her, but she knew she would miss this place. Only after a long while did she make her way down the stairs, swaying a bit unsteadily.


*


After he watched Luoying leave, Reini returned to his study and began a new project. He was writing a history of the city, of the city itself as an idea. A city began as a city, but often it would be remembered only as a stage for history. Very few paid attention to its history as a city.


Victor Hugo once said that, before the birth of the printing press, humankind expressed itself through edifices. Reini thought that, after the birth of the space rocket, humankind again expressed its thoughts through architecture.


Most of the habitable surface of the Earth had already been covered by buildings multiple times, and new structures had to find footholds in the existing foundations like needles searching for openings in an overpopulated pincushion. Even if large swaths of cities were demolished to be rebuilt, history meant that the new buildings were surrounded by the ghosts of the old. Like the custom of a people being impressed upon generation after generation of newborns, the past gradually tamed the new. To start entirely anew with a blank page was impossible. Construction paid for by demolishing the past would be tainted from the start with the smell of death, and upon completion was no longer pure and fresh.


On the other hand, architecture on Earth was growing ever more unmoored from the ground upon which it stood. New buildings were assaulted from all sides by existing edifices but became disconnected from the land. Most resources had been extracted from the ground and circulated countless times over the surface, scattered to all corners of all continents, rising and falling with currency and stock tickers, no longer reflecting the undulating forms of mountains and valleys. Most architecture on Earth tended toward one globalized style: towering skyscrapers in metropolises, carefully manicured gardens in suburbs, devoid of local character wherever you were. Buildings reflected class but not natural geography.


But space was pure vacuum, and all construction had to start from zero. In the two and a half centuries since humans first set foot in space, countless fantastic designs had been born in the dark void of space, resulting in floating gardens unimaginable on Earth. Their multitudinous divergent forms reflected complex and everchanging principles of operation.


These structures were nonetheless tethered to heaven and earth. They breathed air from the sky and absorbed strength from the ground. Since the resources of space were as yet underdeveloped, buildings were like wells drilled into the depth of nature. They relied on local materials and depended on local geography, molded by their environment. Ring-shaped cities orbiting in geosynchronous orbit, spider cities on the Moon, the crystal city and crater habitats of Mars—all were as inseparable from their environment as plants adapted to their niches.


After the religious worship of natural totems and the industrial ideal of the conquest of nature, humanity entered a third stage of the coevolution of human thought and architecture: the cosmic path of harmoniously fitting into nature. Buildings are flowers blooming from the sand. That was young Galiman’s most famous quote.


Mars City was the product of sand. Iron, glass, and silicon chips were the most abundant yields from the planet’s red earth. The first formed the skeleton, the second formed the flesh, and the last formed the soul. The whole city was refined from sand. With the rough exterior polished away, the crystal essence stood proudly, like a tide surging deep underground, erupting through thick layers of crust, emerging as springs over the surface.


As long as there had been human civilization, there had also been glass. The Phoenicians discovered glinting beads in sand, and the ancient Egyptians and Chinese made glass vessels millennia before the birth of Christ. In the Middle Ages, colorful stained glass was an offering to God, and the modern industrial age saw the rest of the universe through glass. Le Corbusier and the fashion of the twentieth century developed and refined various properties of glass as a construction material. Thus, rather than claiming Mars had developed a new heaven, it was more accurate to say that it continued a long tradition of human civilization.


However, there were differences in the way Mars used glass. It exploited the environment of Mars, used its harshness and poverty. The Martian atmosphere was thin and the temperature cold, and so the construction of houses took the form of blown glass. The semiliquid material was pumped up with air, and then the bubbles were allowed to cool in the sparse atmosphere, taking shape almost instantly without need for internal support. Details were then added via carving, engraving, inlaying, or finishing. All the techniques of glassmaking could be deployed to keep air and life within and cold and vacuum without.


The glass city was the crystallization of the ideal of humanity coexisting in harmony with nature. A house on Mars was as intimate as clothing, and the garden and the gardener were as close as water and fish. The air of each residence was mostly filtered by the plants in the garden, with the citywide air refreshing system as a supplement. The water of each dwelling was also recycled in its walls, and only a small amount of waste was piped into the centralized sewer system. Each glass bubble was a miniature ecological sphere, a unit of co-survival and cohabitation. The city began essentially as a single dwelling, and it later expanded like cellular division or crystal growth by duplicating basic but essential units.


Mars City in its current state encompassed a great deal of variation on a single theme. Most dwellings were inspired by the ideals of classical Chinese design in which living quarters were arranged around a central garden. With the transparent bubble on top, the enclosed space felt surprisingly spacious. The natural dome-shaped ceilings, on the other hand, were often decorated in the manner of classical Rome, with murals painted on the inside, or glass rods might extend down from the ceiling, fluted like Greek columns, an allusion rather than a vulgar imitation.


In Martian architecture, the concept of membranes was very important. The interiors of all buildings were coated, because by adding certain substances to the glass and augmenting them with different coatings, it was possible to give the walls and the ceiling different functions: the quarter-reflective membrane redirected all the infrared rays inside the rooms, keeping them warm; highresistance wires provided heat; optical membranes served as displays; high-magnetic-moment membranes moved objects. More than practical conveniences, these membranes were a lifestyle: the furniture and the house were one, and one needed not take everything with them as they moved about the house.


It was a modern interpretation of the pyramid, a vast edifice erected from the wasteland, pointing from the flat ground into the dark sky.


All these were parts of Galiman’s philosophy: to exploit all that nature offered and to turn poverty into jewels. The first house had been designed by him, and after it was accepted, endless variations upon the original proliferated. Led by him, a group of designers planned the city, starting with individual houses and building them up into neighborhoods. The history of the whole process was only five decades long, but for many it was the entirety of history. They were born in this city and grew up in this city. From the moment they opened their eyes, the city settled into its stable form, as though it had already been in existence for a thousand years, as though Galiman’s philosophy were a law of nature.


As the inhabitants of Mars City pondered whether to abandon it, Reini observed quietly from the sidelines, a melancholic mood taking hold of him similar to the feeling one got as curtains began to descend upon a stage. If, in the end, the people decided to abandon the city, he would not be surprised. Galiman had laid such deep foundations for the principles of architecture on Mars that those who came after simply needed to replicate his basic plan, changing unimportant details here and there. Without the need to explore, they also lacked the opportunity for breakthrough advances. This left them unsatisfied. The more they envied Galiman, they more they wanted to be like him. They also wanted to be famous, to have the citation ratings of their products rise ever higher, to carve their own names into massive stones. They thus sought new plans, wishing to demolish the old city and build a new one. This wasn’t quite the contest Hugo envisioned between the crowd and religion, between freedom and rules; rather, it was simply those who yearned to be great overturning those who were already great.