THE COFFEE LOUNGE




On Mars, coffee wasn’t real coffee but a synthetic substitute. It wasn’t as bitter as the real thing but was very fragrant. The drinker could choose the preferred roast and additives, including stimulating effects. Coffee lounges were open and airy, and there were no baristas or servers. Customers brewed their own beverages at machines embedded in the walls while bakers in the kitchen prepared pastries.


Since hotels and homes had their own coffee machines, people mostly came to coffee lounges to chat with friends or to discuss business. Thus, these spaces were specially engineered for audio isolation. Sound-absorbing boards hung from the ceiling; potted plants acted as partitions; the tables were set far apart from one another, ensuring a degree of privacy at each.


This particular coffee lounge was located at a busy street corner. A customer sitting next to the window could see the clothing store to the left, the framed-painting shop to the right, and the open-air theater surrounded by bushes across the street. The sides of the street were lined with statues of famous chefs through the ages because the street was dedicated to the culinary arts. On Mars, practically every street was named after a creative master: a scientist, an engineer, a painter, a chef, a fashion designer, and so on. Every street had its own collection of statues, some in formal poses, but many also portraying humorous moments. The statues of the great chefs along this street were especially vivid. Every one struck a different pose, surrounded by replicas of their signature dishes, preserving in a lasting manner the beauty of fleeting taste.


A group of children bounced past the coffee lounge to have a snack of fruits under an umbrella-shaped tree. In an empty space between the two lanes of the street, four youths played a string quartet. A few girls opened roadside display cases to put in dolls they had made—a part of their atelier internship program. Pedestrians streamed past the glass wall of the coffee lounge like hazy currents.


Janet had invited Eko here because it was close to the Tarkovsky Film Archive, and it was also where she and Arthur had gone on their first date. She didn’t touch her coffee. Her gaze was focused on some nonexistent place far away as she listened intently.


Eko finished his account.


“So he didn’t make any more films?” asked Janet.


“No.”


“Did he ever agree to be interviewed?”


“No. He was an enigma, confiding in no one.”


“Not even you?”


“Maybe a few hints here and there, but I was too young to really understand.”


Janet sighed. “Arthur was stubborn as a mule. He dedicated himself to the pursuit of his vision, regardless of how others viewed him.” She looked down at her hands. Softly, she added, “Did he at least explain himself to his family?”


“Family?”


“His wife and child.”


“No. He and his wife divorced a long time ago, and he spent the last ten years of his life alone.”


“Ten years? When did he get a divorce?”


“It was so long ago that I don’t even know the exact date. I think it was when he was thirty-two, thirty-three, something like that.”


“Before he had come to Mars, then.”


“Definitely. You didn’t know?”


Janet looked shocked. “No, I didn’t.”


It was Eko’s turn to be shocked. How could she not know after spending eight years with Davosky? Carefully he asked, “He never spoke of it?”


Janet shook her head absentmindedly. She was lost in her memories again, her gaze unfocused. Her elbows rested on the table, fingers interlaced. Twice she seemed about to speak but stopped herself.


Eko waited patiently.


Janet sighed again. “Arthur never mentioned it. I guess I never wanted to know—or didn’t have the courage to ask. I saw a photo he carried with him, a picture of him and a woman and a little boy. I asked him if that was his wife and son, and he said yes. I asked him if his family would worry that he was away for so long, but he told me they weren’t getting along. I didn’t pry, thinking it was something within the family. I told him that even if they weren’t getting along, he had to go home sometime. He said yes, eventually. And then . . .


“After we were together, I never brought it up, thinking that he would leave if I did. Sometimes he would say, ‘Janet, I have something I need to discuss with you.’ I would ask him, ‘Are you leaving?’ He would say, ‘No, I’m not leaving.’ I would say, ‘Then there’s nothing to discuss.’ Eventually, he stopped bringing it up.


“Arthur was like a rock, and even if you asked, you couldn’t be sure he would answer. I never asked. He was engrossed in his scripts and films, and I stayed with him. Year after year, I refused to let myself think about his life from before. But the whole time, I was afraid he was going to leave. I always had an instinctive feeling that he wouldn’t stay on Mars forever, and so I tried to delay that day as long as possible. When Arthur finally told me he was leaving,


I wasn’t surprised. I felt awful, but not surprised.”


“You thought he was returning to . . . reunite with his wife,” said Eko.


“Yes.”


“He never got back together with her.”


“I . . .” Janet’s eyes moistened. “I hoped he would return. He told me he needed to take care of some things on Earth, and I thought he meant his . . . marriage.”


Janet blinked to keep herself from crying. She tucked her hair behind her ear and took a deep breath, forcing a smile onto her face for Eko’s benefit. She didn’t want to look fragile, especially in front of someone who was just a kid in her eyes. She had tried to prepare herself for today, to stay detached. If she didn’t allow herself to feel uplifted, then she wouldn’t have to suffer the pain of tumbling back into emotional troughs.


Eko looked at her with respect. She looked a bit wan and pallid, with swollen eyes. But she was strong. Her hair was neatly combed and her clothes crisp. Eko saw in her the independence of someone who relied on herself, who took care of herself out of habit even when her mind was in chaos. She had not gotten married because she thought she would save a place for Davosky, a place that he never came back to.


“He wanted to come back,” said Eko.


He didn’t say it to offer some comfort to Janet, though he did want to comfort her. He simply told her the truth. Even unto death, Davosky pined to be back on Mars. The less he spoke of it, the deeper his yearning.


“He was trying to get better. For the last decade of his life, he fought against cancer, but in the end it spread.” Eko didn’t know if these facts would allay her sorrow in some measure. “I think the illness was the reason he returned to Earth. He tried laser and nanosurgery, chemo, everything. Maybe he found out about it on Mars but he didn’t want you to worry. He was trying to get better on Earth before coming back to you, since Terran medicine was more advanced.”


“I don’t believe that,” said Janet. “His last physical on Mars gave him a clean bill of health.”


Eko was surprised. “Are you sure?”


“Absolutely. He wouldn’t have been able to board Maearth if he had cancer. Cosmic radiation is very dangerous, even for the healthy. Had he been diagnosed with anything, we wouldn’t have allowed him to leave. I know he was healthy.”


Eko frowned. “Maybe the cancer was the result of the trip, then. . . . I guess we’ll never know.”


He thought he had found out why Davosky left Mars, but Janet had eliminated that possibility. He still knew nothing. He was hoping to find the answers from Janet, but she needed him to tell her what had happened. He and Janet had each offered reasons for Davosky’s departure that each thought made sense, but they had disproved each other’s theories. The mystery hung in the air, and he didn’t know if there were any more clues to be found.


The depressive mood silenced him. The sky was like an umbrella that covered him in scattered sunlight. The counter in the middle of the coffee lounge spun, displaying tasty treats. The piano played a melancholy tune, and the keys danced as though caressed by an invisible pianist. Through the swaying leaves of the potted plants, Eko had the illusion of seeing a tuxedoed pianist at the bench.


Abruptly, he was shaken out of his reverie. He still had not completed the most important task of his trip. “Oh, I almost forgot. My teacher had some things for you.”


He took out a package: a woman’s comb, a button with Davosky’s portrait and name, the electronic notepad that Davosky had always kept with him. He lined them up in a row on the table.


“That’s mine,” said Janet, caressing the objects in turn. “This was his Martian transportation pass, which I got for him. And this was his journal, which he had when he arrived from Earth.”


“I saw a picture of you in it,” said Eko. Then he added, “There was no photograph of his wife in it.”


Janet continued to run her fingers gently over the objects.


“One last thing,” said Eko, trying find the right words. “Right before his death, he had his neural patterns digitized onto this chip—that is, he stored his memories on here. He told me to bring it to Mars. I think I should give it to you. He didn’t say so, but I believe this is the way he wanted to be laid to rest.”


Solemnly, he cradled the chip in his palm and presented it to Janet.


Lips trembling, Janet held out her hands, trembling as well. Her fingertips brushed against Eko’s hand and pulled back, as though he were holding up a ball of fire. Her swollen eyes could not move away from it.


“Arthur . . . he just said to bring it to Mars? No further directions?”


“No. I don’t know what to do.”


“Did he suffer?”


Eko thought about it. “I don’t think he was in a lot of physical pain, but he had been weakening for so long that he couldn’t speak. During his last window of lucidity, he tried to write but only got one letter out: B, the beginning of your name.”


“B?” Janet’s eyes locked with his, and her lips stopped trembling. “Ah, that’s not me.” She shook her head with conviction.


There was no disappointment in her voice when she spoke again, only the peace of having figured out a puzzle. “I know now where he wanted you to bring him.” Eko listened intently.


“Let me tell you a secret about Arthur that no one else knows about,” said Janet. “Right before his departure, he went to the First Optical-Electrical Atelier, which was responsible for maintaining the central archive’s hardware. The central archive works on the principle of atomic storage, where each atom’s charged transitions are treated as zeros and ones. The information density is extremely high, allowing unprecedented capacity. Arthur obtained from the atelier the plans for the central archive and brought them to Earth.” Eko sat stunned. All of a sudden, everything made sense. He had found the last piece of the puzzle. This was the real reason Davosky had left.


And even Janet hadn’t understood everything. Davosky hadn’t just gone to the atelier to obtain the secrets of atomic storage as a last-minute impulse. It had been his plan all along. Davosky had stayed on Mars to obtain this technology.


He had hoped to construct a cave of information, a vast cave capable of holding all the wonderful thoughts of humanity, and to which all were welcome. Earth lacked anything comparable, and so he had begged and pleaded until he got the plans from the Martian researchers. The moment he did, he left. That was the business he needed to take care of on Earth.


Once back on Earth, Davosky denied all interview requests and lived a life away from the public eye in order to realize his dream without having the technology falling into the wrong hands; perhaps guarding the precious knowledge with care had been a promise extracted by the Martian researchers before giving him the treasure in the first place. He had hoped to return to Mars as soon as the archive was constructed, but he hadn’t planned for cancer.


The only question left was: What did Davosky do on Earth to build the archive?


The image of Theon came to Eko instantly. He was certain that Davosky had gotten in touch with the man. Theon and his teacher were old friends, and Davosky had collaborated with the Thales Group many times. Davosky likely thought of the Thales Group as the most appropriate executor of his plan, since there was no other institution on Earth with such coverage and influence or with so many resources at its disposal. In the second half of the twenty-second century, when the market of the web was vastly larger than the market of physical goods, the Thales Group was the biggest company in the world.


If Arthur wanted to realize his vision, he had no choice but to approach Theon.