THE HOSPITAL




Eko and Rudy sat on the sofa in the living room of Luoying’s hospital suite, waiting for her to return from her surgery. The suite was clean and neat, with soft blankets turned down in the bedroom. To help patients rest, the walls of the suite were adjusted to a milky white, and the metal pillars were painted in a soft green. Medical equipment remained out of sight in low cabinets, painted in pretty patterns to calm the patients.


Eko and Rudy didn’t talk. Rudy had thanked Eko for helping Luoying when she fell on the stage, to which Eko made no reply. After that, the two sat in silence. Eko gazed at the young man, a few years younger than himself, and could sense the waves of concern that came off him. Rudy sat still without fidgeting, but Eko could see that his hands were squeezing each other so tightly that the knuckles had turned white. He was worried about his little sister and acted almost like a parent.


Eko was worried as well. He was the nearest person to Luoying when she fell. He had seen her toes bend oddly as she landed, unable to support her. At least a few bones were broken, and he hoped that, after surgery, she would fully recover and not be affected as a dancer.


Time passed slowly, and the air in the suite grew repressive.


The door opened.


Rudy and Eko stood up together. But it wasn’t a doctor or Luoying who entered. Two officials in uniforms came in. The first recognized Rudy and nodded at him.


The official turned to Eko. “Mr. Eko Lu, I presume?” His tone was polite but his face was expressionless.


“I am.”


“I’m Carlson, Inspector First Grade, of the Security System. I’m charged with maintaining order and public safety in Russell District.”


Eko said nothing.


Carlson waited a beat before continuing. “I’d like to ask for your cooperation in answering a few questions.” Looking intently at Eko, he asked, “At the performance earlier tonight, why were you standing by the stage instead of sitting among the audience?”


“I was filming the performance and needed to be close to the stage to get a close-up.”


“Did you obtain authorization?”


Rudy broke in. “I gave him permission. I’m in charge of the onsite arrangements.”


Carlson glanced at him. Still stone-faced, he asked Eko, “Did you ever step onto the stage?”


“No.”


“Then what was the closest you approached the dancer? Was it within one meter?”


Eko frowned. “What is this about? Are you suggesting that I—”


“We suspect that you sabotaged Luoying’s performance in some way, leading to the accident.”


Carlson’s assistant scribbled in a notepad. Eko sucked in a breath. “I didn’t do anything! I was filming the entire time, and then I ran over when she fell.”


Rudy tried to defend Eko as well. “He really is a camera operator. I checked his equipment ahead of time. I’m sure this is a misunderstanding. There’s no reason for him to disrupt the performance or to harm Luoying in any way.”


Keeping his eyes on Eko, Carlson walked next to Rudy and whispered in his ear. Rudy’s expression changed, then he looked at Eko as though seeing him for the first time. He stopped talking.


Carlson faced Eko, cleared his throat, and continued. “I want you to think carefully about the answers you’ve been giving. Next, did you enter and browse the personal spaces of Luoying Sloan and Gielle Paylin?”


Eko knew then that the misunderstanding wasn’t going to be easy to clear up. He nodded. “I did.”


“What did you do in their spaces?”


“I read the public entries of their diaries.”


“What else?”


“Nothing. That was it.”


“Where else did you go in the central archive?” Eko clamped his mouth shut.


“How did you get an unlimited account for the central archive?


Terran delegates are supposed to have only hotel guest privileges.” Eko said nothing.


“Were you directed to steal technical information?”


Carlson lobbed question after question like darts that unerringly found their mark. Eko could not answer, because revealing how he obtained the account could have terrible consequences for Janet Brook. Without her permission, he couldn’t disclose the secret. He stayed silent and tried to find a way out.


Though he was anxious, he hadn’t lost his judgment. Things looked bad for him. Not only had he gone to Luoying’s personal space, but he had apologized to her on the record. To a neutral observer, this was evidence of a conflict between them. He had meant to apologize for what his teacher had done, but there wasn’t enough context to absolve him of suspicion. As for the accusation of espionage against Mars, he was in an even worse position. He had browsed Gielle’s technical designs and even gone to the heart of the central archive, the Tower of Babel. His motivation all along was curiosity, but that wasn’t a reason that would clear him. Even if Janet Brook explained what had happened, his actions would still look suspicious. His palms grew sweaty.


The door to the suite opened again. This time a group of people came in. In the lead was a short, rotund Martian official Eko remembered from the banquet—he had a booming voice and a ruddy face—followed by two lower-ranking officials. Then came Theon and Colonel Hopman. Bringing up the rear were Peter Beverley and Martian Consul Hans Sloan.


The living room of the suite was packed full. Terrans and Martians lined up automatically on two sides. The air was extremely tense.


Hans broke the silence. “Mr. Eko Lu, I believe you’re already aware of our suspicions.”


“I am.”


“Can you explain your activities?”


“I cannot.”


“Who gave you the account to enter the central archive?”


“I cannot reveal that.”


Hans waited, as though giving Eko a chance to change his answer. He stared intently at Eko; there was no threat in his gaze, only a kind of expectancy. Eko did not elaborate.


“Can you explain why you were wandering around our central archive?”


“I was . . . curious.”


“Only curious?”


“Only curious.”


“Why were you curious?”


Before Eko could answer, the red-faced short official to the side shouted, “Don’t waste time with him! How could you expect to get the truth from a spy? I told you from the start: he’s here to disrupt the vote.”


“Juan! Don’t jump to conclusions,” said Hans.


Eko was at a loss. “I don’t know anything about a vote.”


“Oh, please!” Juan’s face glowed even redder. “I’ve heard enough of your lies. You know that the people of Mars won’t agree to give you the technology for controlled fusion, so you wanted to manipulate the vote by infiltrating the central archive. You hypocrites!”


“Not at all!” Beverley was all smiles as he tried to make peace. “This is definitely a misunderstanding. We have no intention of interfering in your political process. Eko was acting on his own, and we know nothing about his plans and gave him no orders.”


Eko could see that Beverley was trying to say that he didn’t care what Mars wanted to do with Eko, so long as he and the other delegates weren’t dragged down with him. But he was too absorbed by other matters at that moment to be angry with Beverley. He knew controlled nuclear fusion was part of the negotiations, but now the words seemed to buzz in the air, and he sensed a sinister intent behind them.


Hans held out a hand. “Calm down, Juan. All his activities in the central archive have been recorded.”


He turned to Carlson, who nodded and presented the notepad from his assistant. Hans flipped through it quickly before handing the notepad over to Juan. After reading through the notes, Juan nodded reluctantly. Hans remained composed and in control.


“I take back what I said earlier,” Juan said, but his gaze was still mistrustful. “Though you haven’t gone to the voting site, I can’t rule out the possibility that you intended to. I suggest you tell us everything right away. I don’t want to escalate either. But if you continue to deny or keep secrets, and in the end we find out the truth, you’ll be punished severely. Let me ask you one more time: Did you intend to steal one of our technologies?”


“No,” said Eko. “I have no interest in acquiring any technology.”


“Even if you had no interest, one of the other delegates from Earth might be interested. Since you Terrans couldn’t get what you wanted at the negotiation table, you decided to steal it. Isn’t that true?”


“I don’t appreciate being accused with no evidence.”


“Did you send any information to Earth?”


“No.”


“But the system records show that you downloaded a great deal of data.”


“I downloaded films!” Eko strained to control his voice. “Go check the records! You’ve logged all my activities, right? Look through everything I downloaded using my account, and you’ll see they’re all films—films made by my teacher, Arthur Davosky. There’s nothing wrong with downloading the work of my teacher, my artistic hero.”


The relentless questioning had shaken him, and he couldn’t maintain his composure. He was naturally defensive about Davosky’s films. They weren’t some kind of political tool, though they were intensely political in origin. His head was filled with a chaotic jumble of words like “technology,” “negotiation,” “exchange,” and “fusion.” The explosive, suspicious air around him impressed on him the intensity of the conflict between the two planets. He recalled the words of Luoying: The problem isn’t whether someone should or shouldn’t make a profit; the problem is Mars and Earth.


Finally he understood Luoying’s mood and her worries. Thinking back on the last twenty-some days, his mind was a mess. Thus, he didn’t see Hans calling Rudy to him and whispering in the young man’s ear.


Juan was unmoved by Eko’s outburst. Like a cautious, prickly hedgehog, he paced around Eko. “We will review all your activities, that you may be sure of. But let’s move on to the next question:


What were you doing at the tower?”


“I was curious, as I’ve said already. I was curious.”


“Do you know the location of the tower?”


“Not really.”


“Oh-ho! What a humble young spy! ‘Not really,’ is it? Then how were you able to get to the tower without any trouble? I bet you prepared for that visit for days. It’s clear that you had a plan— perhaps under the direction of someone else—to infiltrate the innermost core of our central archive to commit acts of sabotage. Am I right?”


“You are spinning a paranoid fantasy. Not a single thing you’ve said is true.”


“Then why did you go there? Tell me!”


Juan’s shouting struck him like thunder. Eko felt his throat go dry, and his lips felt numb.


Like a ball of flames, Juan pressed his red face into Eko’s, their noses almost touching. “And you went twice! The first time you can claim you were merely curious. But what about the second time?”


Eko didn’t know how to explain. He had never revealed his teacher’s secret to anyone other than Luoying and Janet. The second time he went to the tower was to carry out the last wishes of Arthur Davosky, and Janet Brook had gone with him. To explain the details of his visit would necessarily implicate Janet, who had given him unauthorized access in the first place. Remembering what had happened to Luoying’s parents, Eko was terrified of getting her into trouble.


He looked at Hans, who was gazing back at him. It was clear that the consul was very interested in his answer to this question. The air in the hospital suite seemed to freeze as everyone waited in silence. Eko was surrounded by looks of mistrust. Theon stood to the side, saying nothing, while Beverley was standing by Hans with a frown. Juan’s burning eyes glowed like fire in the cold room.


The door opened again.


Everyone’s eyes landed on the figure of Luoying in the doorframe. She was sitting over the right shoulder of a doctor. Dressed in a white hospital gown, her face looked wan and pale. Her back was straight and she kept her head high. Though she looked frail, the moment she appeared, she seemed to exert a power over everyone in the room that couldn’t be ignored. On her right foot she wore a metal boot, while her left foot was bare. The doctor held her lower legs to secure her perch.


“I told him to go,” Luoying said. Her voice was soft but steady.


“You?” blurted Rudy.


“Yes, I did. I invited Eko to my personal space, and I gave him the link to the tower.”


“Why?”


“Reasons.”


“Luoying, do you understand what you’re saying?” Rudy’s voice was full of suspicion. “This is a serious matter.”


“I understand.” Luoying wasn’t looking at Eko or Rudy. Her eyes were locked on Juan’s. “I’m very serious.”


Her voice pierced the air like a needle. Everyone stared at her. Except for Eko, no one knew how to react. They waited for her to explain.