REINI




Reini watched Luoying leave and then returned to the Boule Chamber with Chania and Sorin. The debate was still ongoing. He had been gone for about an hour, but little progress had been made.


As an assistant archivist, he took the two youths with him to the observers’ seats. The automatic cameras, like strange predator fish of the deep, breathed and took in everything under the waves of language without anyone noticing. Chania and Sorin sat behind him, looking around, full of curiosity. He kept an eye on the two of them. Chania maintained a look of severe annoyance, as though she was still angry at everything but forcing herself to hold it in. Sorin, on the other hand, looked far more moderate but also worried, his gaze shifting between Chania and what was happening on the dais.


All the lights in the Boule Chamber were on. The podium on the dais was the focus of multiple lights, and the edges of the podium as well as the mic gleamed, drawing everyone’s attention. Spotlights above the bronze statues put a halo around every largerthan-life figure. Laser holographic projectors installed around the chamber combined to create three-dimensional scenes as visual aids in the middle of the floor, and everything—objects, buildings, people—looked as vivid as real life. The small raised platform upon which the speakers stood was illuminated by four spotlights; the effect was to make it seem as though the speakers were surrounded by blinking stars. Sunlight fell through the tall domed ceiling but was completely overwhelmed by the glaring artificial lighting.


All the speakers sounded impassioned; it was impossible not to be roused to such fervency under the gaze of so many eyes and lights. The person speaking now was an old man, a Wader as well as a founder of the republic. He spoke from history, recounting for everyone in vivid detail how the city in the desert had saved the nation of Mars, how the life of ease they now led in the crystal city was a paradise compared to the hardships of the past. He offered that the tranquility and leisure enabled by the city was the spirit of Mars, the perfect environment in which to conduct the search for truth, the Platonic garden at the base of Olympus Mons. To give it up was to give up their soul in the pursuit of an environment that didn’t belong to them, a display of hubris that would ultimately be punished by fate. Many of the elders and conservatives in the chamber interrupted his speech several times with wild applause. In fact, when he said “Platonic garden,” there were tears in many eyes and the mood in the chamber felt transcendent.


The audience reacted to the speeches in various ways. Some were completely in sync with the mood of the speaker; some showed no expression at all; some continued to whisper in private conversations, ignoring the speeches altogether; some rushed about on the ring gallery above the seats, preparing for the next speaker. Most legislators had long since made up their minds, and there were only a few votes still in play. Reini knew that while the defense session was formally the process by which legislators decided their votes, in reality the actual result was determined by the invisible maneuvers taking place behind the scenes, outside this chamber. Every time he came to a formal session of the Boule, he had the sensation of observing a performance, of witnessing some prophecy of the gods being fulfilled onstage.


Chania was very attentive. She leaned forward, resting her hands on the back of the seat in front of her, her eyes locked on the podium. She looked thoughtful, and from time to time, when something she didn’t understand was said, she whispered a question to Reini. Sorin, on the other hand, was not paying nearly as much attention. To be sure, he was also listening to the speeches. But rather than the content of the speeches, he was more interested in which parts excited Chania. Staring at her, his brows were furrowed with concern.


Rudy stepped up to the podium as the penultimate speaker for the Climbers. Based on his relative lack of experience and engineering achievements, he shouldn’t have been assigned such an important position. But Reini knew that Rudy had climbed up the career ladder at an astonishing pace. He had heard that many influential Climber legislators supported Rudy, including Richardson and Franz, famous for being harsh to newcomers. Reini had no idea how Rudy had done it, but he knew that the young man was politically talented. Rudy was now no longer just in charge of his magnetic project but also responsible for the communication and coordination between the various labs supporting the migration plan.


Rudy nodded at everyone in the chamber and turned to the side as a prepared holographic video played. He looked extremely confident as he smiled, his blond hair combed neatly. The holographic video showed a conceptual vision of cave houses on the slopes and magnetic cars. The images were optimistic and full of hope.


The video came to an end. Rudy cleared his throat.


“Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. I’m so pleased to be able to introduce the last two components of the migration plan: transportation and economic reform.


“As you’ve seen in the video, once we move to the crater, the freedom and convenience of the magnetic cars will be a key advantage of our new life. Magnetically controlled, the fast-moving vehicles will glide along rails built against the mountainside, solving the difficulties of vertical movement as well as providing everyone with a fun way to travel. The technology’s principles of operation are simple, and it’s well within our fabrication capabilities. Let me give a brief overview.”


He started another holographic video. This time, the audience was shown a cutaway view of a semispherical magnetic car, along with the magnetic coils embedded in the bedrock that propelled it along. Rudy began to explain, his voice smooth and confident. The speech had been carefully prepared so that it was easy for anyone to digest.


Reini saw Chania’s attitude change. Her fingers were interlaced tightly, and her eyes showed a combination of suspicion and sweet bashfulness. When the legislators clapped at some part of Rudy’s speech, she looked proud and pleased. Rudy was indeed speaking well, his voice infused with conviction.


The technology explanation over, Rudy shifted topics. “I also want to discuss the biggest improvement brought about by our plan: economic reform. Technology forms the background for life, while economics affects our lifestyle far more intimately. In our current city, each house is an integral part of the whole city, and each person is also a part of the city, without the right to choose their own territory. The primary reason behind this is technology. Since each house is based on blown glass for the structure and must be connected to the rest of the city, it has to be planned and added by the city. A single person or group cannot build their own house and cannot create other styles of housing. This is an insurmountable barrier for individual autonomy.


“Under the migration plan, we’ve come up with a solution aimed specifically at this problem. As Ms. Loke explained earlier, the caves in our plan are refinements of natural caves. The exterior walls and interior furnishing allow a wide variety of choices and styles, which means the establishment of many ateliers related to home construction, giving everyone the opportunity to create the home of their dreams. And if they’re unsatisfied with the location of the house, exchanges will be easy, achieving the goal of total housing autonomy.”


Reini felt Chania’s hand on his arm.


Her lips looked pale as she asked in a whisper, “Dr. Reini, what does he mean by that?”


Reini looked at her. “I believe he’s talking about a housing market.”


“To allow everyone to freely exchange houses?”


Reini nodded. “That’s one of the key points of their reforms.”


“Have they been planning this for a long time?”


“Not very long. I think this was added only recently.”


On the dais, Rudy continued to sketch his stirring vision. “If anyone doubts the significance of such autonomy, let me show you some facts. Since the implementation of the housing equalization policy, there have been three hundred and fifteen reports of dissatisfaction in the central archive, averaging to thirty-one instances per annum. This number, of course, does not include the many more instances of dissatisfaction not logged in formal complaints to the central archive, an extraordinary measure to take. Each individual should have the right to construct their shelter and decide where they live. This is a fundamental aspect of liberty.


“Even teenagers understand this truth. Today a group of passionate youths, motivated by a sense of social fairness, have congregated right outside this august chamber to rally for reforms to this policy. They reflect the voices of many. They cry out for systematic reform, and their ardor should motivate all of us to try to make our country better. Honored legislators, let’s heed their voices and take the opportunity of this historical migration to courageously and determinedly press ahead with social reform! This is a grand task worthy of Mars, worthy of each one of us.”


Chania whispered again. “Is he saying this to get more votes?”


Reini glanced at her anxious face. “I suppose he’s just adding one more reason for legislators to support his side.”


Chania’s hands trembled as she sat up ramrod straight in her seat. He could see how much tension was in her body. She stared at Rudy as he continued to orate, making no noise or movement. Sorin looked at her with concern and tried to talk to her. She didn’t respond.


She waited until his speech was over. Rudy came down off the dais and walked along the aisle between the seats. Abruptly, Chania got up and ran down until she was standing in front of him. Rearing back, she slapped him crisply across the face.


The loud snap elicited audible gasps from many in the room.


Saying nothing, Chania turned and ran out the door at the side of the Boule Chamber. A shocked Rudy stood where he was, a hand over his cheek. Sorin got up and ran out after Chania. Many of the legislators gazed curiously that way; others, however, continued with their whispered conversations or focused on their notepads. Reini sighed inside in sympathy. It had happened so quickly, and yet it also seemed preordained.


Reini could sense the reasons behind Chania’s rage. From the way she had been looking at Rudy, he could tell that the girl had treated everything between her and him as real. He had seen how devoted she was to their movement, and he understood the emotions coursing through her now. Reini had heard rumors about the Climbers’ plan for housing reform, but he had not anticipated that the youths would take their demonstration so seriously or that they would have so little understanding of the nature of politics. He recalled Chania’s expression as she ran out: disappointment, rage, the anguish of having been deceived leaving a scar on her alwaysproud face. He felt her pain.


Rudy remained in the aisle, his expression suspended halfway between humiliation and anger, as though wavering between chasing after Chania or staying in the Boule Chamber. His hand caressed his reddening cheek as he looked at the door through which Chania had run. He hadn’t anticipated her being here, and it seemed that his plans had been thrown into disarray. He took a few steps toward the door, stopped, then took a few more steps. But in the end he didn’t leave. Instead, he sat down in a corner of the chamber. He stared at the dais, but it seemed that his mind was elsewhere.


Reini gazed at him from afar. He could still see in Rudy’s face traces of the lively little boy he remembered: the same blond hair, the same straight nose. But on this older Rudy, he could no longer find the curiosity and adventurous spirit that had suffused the little boy’s every expression. Instead he saw restraint, control, a mask of elegance. Reini knew that he was trapped, although he didn’t realize it yet. Rudy had wrapped his will in adaptability, bought ambition with liberty. A person living for ambition had only one choice, and thus had no freedom.


Reini sighed and pulled his gaze back to the dais. He could not and would not interfere with the loves and hatreds of young people. The penultimate speaker for the Waders was about to wrap up his speech. Reini hadn’t been paying attention to the speech earlier, so he caught only the bare outlines: the possibility that the glasscovered river would provide a controlled environment for experimental biological organisms. The plan was not bad, and it was definitely feasible, but the speaker was unskilled as an orator and couldn’t stroke the imagination of the audience into sympathy with his vision. When he was done, the applause was perfunctory. After a whole day of speeches, everyone was tired.


Juan came on next as the last speaker for the Climbers. As soon as he approached the podium, everyone sat up as though a lightning bolt had flashed through the chamber.


Reini knew well that Juan possessed a forceful personality that commanded attention wherever he appeared. In contrast to Rudy’s refined elegance, there was always a wildness about him, and his unrestrained will was like a roaring hearth whose heat filled the room. He wasn’t tall or muscular, and his rotund figure brought to mind a chef who enjoyed his own cooking too much. But when he spoke, when he issued orders in his cold, hardedged voice, he seemed like a rumbling jaguar about to pounce.


For ten years he had led the Flight System, and his powerful presence and personal charisma had compelled the obedience of many proud and intractable generals.


Juan was the trump card for the Climbers. The Flight System was the foundation of the Martian Republic. Without their constant exploration and harvesting, many crucial resources for the city would be quickly exhausted.


As everyone listened, holding their breath, Juan spoke.


“The choice facing us today isn’t merely a choice about how to live. Our choice will determine the future of our race and the future of all humankind.


“Yes, we’ve already become a distinct race, both biologically and spiritually. We are taller than Terrans, more vigorous, more suited to high leaps and flight. We can tolerate harsher changes in temperature. It would be no exaggeration to say that we represent a more perfect step in the ladder of evolution. We are a brand-new type of humanity.


“In spirituality and wisdom, we far surpass the Terrans as well. Our race has inherited the best of human civilization and art, and our gaze pierces to the very edge of space and the end of time. Even the youngest child among us has a grander view of the world than any adult on Earth. We live as a unified whole, while Terrans have broken into fragments in their self-division. Shortsighted, selfish, they no longer remember the high ideals and values that humanity ought to possess. We are the true heirs of humanity, worthy of the name ‘the human race.’ We are Martians, the purest strain of humanity.


“What should humans fear the most? Is it storms, falling rocks, extreme cold and heat? Is it to struggle against difficulties? No! What we should fear more than anything else is rot and decline, that humankind’s powerful survival instincts devolve to weakness, cowardice, softness akin to the slime we crawled out of! But that is the direction Terrans are headed in. They have become a bunch of sickly, fat, wretched, timid weaklings, lost in their ever-expanding, never-satisfied gluttonous desires, their senses dulled with grease and drugs, devoid of any higher ideals. They treat mere cleverness as wisdom and shamelessly buy and sell what wisdom they stumble upon, not understanding that wisdom requires lasting exploration, not realizing that the greatest spirits crave sharing and giving. They’ve forgotten their planet as they luxuriate in artifice. Their understanding of the qualities of their own home reaches not even one half the depth of understanding of an ordinary resident of our fair city. They are traitors to their own history. We are ashamed to admit that we descend from the same ancestors, that we share their bloodline. Only in us, and not in those devolved beings squatting upon the face of the Earth, can we recognize the courage and pride that belongs to true human beings!


“It is our sacred mission to carry on the destiny of humanity, a duty that we dare not shirk. We stand at the frontier of humanity’s reach into the cosmos. We know what it means to explore the unknown; we’ve been strengthened by our harsh environment; we’ve built the Tower of Babel to call forth the storm of wisdom. In the foreseeable future, we’ll enter the opening act of a great drama: the spreading of humanity’s seed across the vastness of space in a new age of exploration. Humanity is fated to surpass itself, and must do so. We must learn to survive in new environments and must adapt new environments to suit us. All extreme environments are mere ferocious monsters of today—and our dear friends of tomorrow. Before we’ve learned to tame them, we may choose to compromise in measure, but we must never surrender!


“We must leave the comforts of home and step into the cold to maintain our edge. To stay in this city forever is to invite upon ourselves the fate of the Terrans: devolution, decline, rot. This is an inflection point in history, and the choice is in our hands. Whether you like it or not, the future is coming!”


Juan didn’t use and didn’t need any visual aids. His powerful, deep voice boomed like bass drumbeats, carrying the audience on waves of rousing emotion. He gestured very little, but there was tension in every inch of his body, like a balloon about to burst.


As he gazed at Juan, Reini felt a rising tide of fear in his heart. A premonition of danger grew stronger with each sentence. It’s coming, he thought. It’s finally coming.


Reini didn’t know Juan well, but he knew the archon’s history. Even as a child, Juan had shown an unusually strong personality. His parents died early, but he never seemed to be bothered by that fact. When his grandmother died as a result of Terran bombing, he had screamed and howled and cried his heart out, but that was the last time anyone could recall him shedding tears. He showed no signs of unsociability, self-pity, or even sadness; he never accepted anyone’s help. Growing up in the barracks of the Flight System, he knew aircraft better than he knew land.


At the time the war ended, Juan was sixteen. He refused to live anywhere except at the airport. Having lived a life in tough environments where he was used to doing everything himself, he stayed away from the kindness of the war orphans aid office. He refused all offers of help and rarely helped anyone else—with one exception: Hans Sloan.


Hans was older than Juan by fourteen years, and Hans was the only man he trusted or relied on. No one knew how their friendship had come about, but there were rumors that Hans had been the one who rescued Juan after his grandmother was killed by the Terrans.


Juan was someone who loved and hated with equal passion. There was no betrayal or forgiveness in his dictionary. Those he loved, he would be loyal unto death; those he hated, he would never forgive in a million years. He remembered his debts and slights with total fidelity. He had never forgiven the Terrans; even though Martians had started the war, Terrans were the enemy.


Reini knew that this was the source of Hans’s concerns. Though he had long tired of exercising power, he couldn’t retire. Hans feared that once he was no longer in charge, a cold flame that could not be repressed would erupt out of the tranquil sea to strike at another world with unforeseeable consequences. This was the biggest threat facing Mars. Hans saw clearer than anyone else that, compared to all the other flaws, the desire for conquest was the only true crisis. All the problems with the system could be improved: the feedback system in the central archive and the democratic institutions for policy making were relatively complete; all that was needed was patience. But the desire for conquest was different. It was the greatest threat for a nation that didn’t believe in heaven, that didn’t fear an afterlife, that possessed a concentrated dose of intelligence. A nation like this had strength and focus but had no imaginary hope; and thus it had no pride in itself but required conquest of the other to prove itself. Hans had been worried about this possibility for a long time. Martians devoted themselves to causes more easily than anyone else, and thus were most susceptible to the temptation of a sense of historical mission.


The day is finally here, thought Reini. The day Hans has tried to delay so many years is finally here.


Hans took the podium as the last speaker for the Waders. He and Juan passed each other, and Hans stood still in the center of the buffeting emotional waves left by Juan like a submarine slowly surfacing in tumultuous waters. He looked determined, at peace, and also very old. He swept his eyes across the room as though surveying the conclusion written long ago by fate. The chamber quieted.


Hans stood still a few moments longer and took the desert eagle badge from his shoulder. He held it up to show everyone before placing the two shining golden eagles on top of the lectern.


“Let me make something clear first. As consul, I’m not supposed to support either side in this debate. My role is to ensure the fairness of the process. But I want to speak at the defense session today to express my personal views. Therefore, I’m taking off the symbol of my office. In another month, the election for the new consul will be held. Since my term is almost over, I may as well resign now.”


A low murmur of shock filled the chamber, but Hans seemed to not notice.


“I’m going to describe some aspects of my side’s vision for the city, but I’m also going to present some objections to the migration plan. After comparing the two plans, we, the Waders, believe that humanity has not yet reached the technology level for living outside an enclosed environment.


“Under the continuation plan, city planning isn’t limited to merely replicating the existing model. We hope to expand upon our foundation of mature technologies and develop an endless series of new models and forms. With the water from Ceres and a river that we can design and control, we can build a string of cities along the course of the river and no longer be confined to one city.


“In these new cities, we’ll be able to experiment with different models. Although they’ll still be based upon a glass shell, we can develop different variations, including trials at living directly off the land. In this future, the construction of houses won’t be controlled by a single atelier and department of the government. We’ll open up the technologies, which means more talented groups will learn and develop the technologies and receive funding support. Each of the new cities will have its own independent boule to determine the best way to allocate the city’s resources and ensure its smooth functioning. Intercity transportation will be handled by ground effects vehicles—a technology we’ve been using for many years and is absolutely reliable. The city will be the basic unit of future Mars. Along the glass-enclosed river will be a strand of prosperous cities, each developing its own unique qualities.


“More importantly, in these sealed cities scattered across the plain, we’ll be able to run more scientific experiments to gradually adapt the human body to the environment, to lay a firmer foundation for the eventual day when we step out of the glass dome. Low-pressure environments, low-oxygen environments, highradiation environments—all these can be simulated in the laboratory over years of trials until our bodies, or the bodies of our descendants, have changed significantly from today, so that we can walk out of the sealed enclosure and into nature. Evolution is a long and unpredictable process. The humanity of today will be surpassed, but not right away.”


As Reini listened to the speech, he recalled the conversation between Hans and himself the previous afternoon.


*


Hans went to the Registry of Files to access some reference materials, and afterward, he went to Reini’s lounge to have tea with him. Reini thought he looked worried.


“Reini, I don’t know much about insects, but I’ve heard that it’s impossible for insects to grow to be very big. Is that right?”


Sitting across from Reini, Hans spoke in a low and slow voice, like a quiet river. Reini could see the signs of aging on his face. Hans’s face had always seemed to him as hard as an angular cliff face, and for thirty years he had looked the same. But he appeared to have aged quickly the last few days. Behind Hans, the clock’s pendulum swung through the air, marking the passage of time.


“That is true,” said Reini. “Insects breathe through their bodies, and if they grow to be too large, they’ll suffocate. Moreover, insects have exoskeletons, which can’t support very massive bodies.”


“So what would happen if an insect body were forced to expand and grow beyond its limit?”


“It would split apart,” said Reini.


“For certain?”


“For certain.”


Reini had often seen fantasy sketches of animals that were either much larger or smaller than in real life, as though the actual sizes in real life had been assigned by mere chance. But he knew that wasn’t true. Evolution constrained an animal’s size like the physics of music constrained the size of the violin. It wasn’t that it was impossible to deviate from the sizes seen in life; rather, it was because expanding or shrinking an animal’s body plan was certain to lead to less optimized results. Evolution was a bidirectional process that led to a compromise between the organism and the environment. A bird selected the site to build the nest, and the nest then selected the next generation of birds. At a certain point, the processes of selecting and being selected achieved a balance. This was a fact often ignored by people: the end of evolution wasn’t some extreme but a compromise that balanced all the opposing pressures.


Hans rested his hand on the cup, thinking, and nodded only after some time had passed. Someone unfamiliar with his habits might have suspected that he hadn’t heard. Reini refilled his cup, and they continued to sit and converse as the pale green curtain behind them drifted in the occasional gust of air.


“What do you think is the key to change?” asked Hans.


“To go slow,” said Reini.


Reini knew what was bothering Hans, though he neither asked about it nor mentioned it. They spoke in koans, posing fate’s riddles to each other.


*


The Hans on the dais now was more emotional than the day before. Instead of quietly pondering questions of destiny, he infused his arguments with his swelling emotions. Even his voice took on an air of lament, in contrast to his usual peaceful delivery. Perhaps he was treating this speech as the final monologue before the curtain fell on his forty-year political career. He put all of himself into it, and emotion broke through the cracks in his usual armor.


The choice facing Hans was difficult. He had thrown his support behind the continuation plan not only because of Galiman’s glass house but also because he distrusted blindly jumping into a new living environment. When he was younger, his father warned him often: An impulsive bout of courage is often mere recklessness.


He could still recall the hunger and cold of his youth. Those were the early years of the war, when the rebels had to pay a heavy price for their gamble. They had lost the supplies from Earth and lacked the ability to make the wasteland bloom. The impulsive insurgents were on the verge of being wiped out, and only an indomitable spirit and occasional victories due to luck sustained them.


To leave the crater for the glass house was their turning point. From that point on, they could plant and grow inside a sealed environment, possess air and heat, and keep death at bay. The first years after the war were almost as difficult as the years during the war. They repelled not only the enemy but also the only source of goods required for survival: transport ships from Earth. It was no longer possible to seize supplies; everything they needed had to be obtained from the desert, a practically impossible task. It took years of struggle before they managed to negotiate a peace with Earth and begin trading again. After having experienced all of these, having witnessed years of deaths and painful memories, he instinctively distrusted a rash departure. He couldn’t put his faith in such a move. They lacked too many things to believe that a strong will was enough.


“Let me ask a final question of our Climber friends.” Hans locked eyes with Juan, sitting among the audience. “Do you agree that humanity remains quite frail, so that, after years of trials in laboratory environments, our chances for successfully living in an open environment will be far greater?”


Juan stood up and faced Hans somberly.


“If we take that route, at that point in the future, we won’t have the water supply that we possess now.” Juan’s voice was resolute and decisive. “If we divert the water from Ceres into the ancient riverbed, then it will be impossible in the future to gather up all of it to deposit into the crater. Maintaining a large body of water and pocket of air on the open plain will be many times harder than inside a crater, and we won’t be able to capture another object with so much water then. If we don’t take this chance, we’ll never be able to build a truly open environment on Mars.” Hans refused to back down.


“Then let me ask you: In your plan, where will we obtain all the necessary materials?”


“From mining. Our extraction and refining capabilities have improved by leaps and bounds in recent years. We can also exploit more asteroids.”


“But you know as well as I do that we cannot obtain everything we need by mining.”


“We can get most of it.”


“No.” Hans shook his head determinedly with a hint of anguish. “You know this. To maintain air pressure, we must have nitrogen. Can we get all the nitrogen we need from mining? To build the cave houses in your plans, we need light metals, which cannot all be obtained from Mars. Aluminum, magnesium, sodium, potassium—all of these are rare on Mars, but your design requires lightness and flexibility. The city we have is constructed from glass, the only material we possess in abundance, a material you propose to abandon. You also propose to lay massive amounts of underground cables. But I must ask: Where will you obtain the necessary insulators? Plastics, rubber, organic materials—you need all of these, but where can you get them? We have small amounts of rubber and can trade for more from Earth, but the megaengineering project to modify a crater will require far more than can be supplied by these means.”


Juan was silent for a moment. “These are mere details.” “No!” Hans shouted.


Juan answered him with more silence.


“Look at me,” said Hans. “I think I know the real answer. You are thinking of obtaining these materials by force. Am I right?” Juan looked at him but made no answer. “Am. I. Right?”


Finally, Juan nodded.


“But that means war, don’t you understand?”


“No, I don’t understand.” Juan spoke in a deliberately casual manner. “We only have to maintain a certain level of control and deterrence. The threat is enough to force them to comply.”


“No, that isn’t possible.” Hans put every ounce of his strength into his aged voice. “Do you really not understand? It’s impossible to have what you want without resistance and bloody clashes. We will have war dragging on for years without cease.”


Juan remained resolute. “I don’t view that as a problem.”


“Have you not suffered enough?”


“We have!” said Juan. “That is why we must become powerful. We must go back and be victorious! We have the right to be strong. I see nothing wrong with that. Without us, the Terrans will kill themselves sooner or later with their self-destructive squabbles. We will eliminate the weak, save the soul of humankind from the frying pan of selfish profit. Earth should welcome us!”


“Utter nonsense!” Hans’s voice cracked. “These are mere excuses. You have the right to be strong, but you do not have the right to rob, to steal, to take from others what isn’t yours.”


“Without fighting, there is no survival.”


“No one is forcing you to choose that kind of life.” Hans finally said the words he had kept buried in his heart. “I will not allow war. As long as I’m consul, I won’t ever let you go to war.”


Juan paused, then pointed at the desert eagle badge on the lectern. “But you’ve already resigned.”


The chamber was absolutely silent.


Reini’s heart spasmed with pain. He saw how, during the exchange, Hans had leaned forward, his fingers pressed against the podium, his body shaking with emotion. This was the first time Hans had ever exposed his feelings like this in public, and it would likely be the only time. His brows knotted as the muscles on his face twitched; his eyes glared from under his white eyebrows, burning with helpless pain and resolve. Watching from a distance, Reini also felt the pain of helplessness. He was watching Hans struggle against an inevitable fate. He had seen its approach from years away, but he had no choice but to step forth and confront it now.


Reini understood why Hans was so persistent. As a little boy, Hans had seen his father, Richard, repent and regret in the middle of the night for his impulsive actions that precipitated the war. Richard was not a good war leader. The rebels made him their leader for symbolic reasons, but he hated it. In the grip of anger and grief, he murdered to avenge his wife, but he didn’t plan for everything that happened later. Many times, he told Hans, still a little boy then, that he did not want this, that he wished there were another way. As he sobbed and repented, the five-year-old Hans wiped away his tears.


Hans was born in an airplane and grew up on fighters. He had no fear of death. But the cries of the dead haunted his nightmares. When Richard died in old age, his last wish for his son was to stop the war. Hans gave Mars his all to obtain independence in order to achieve this last wish. He approved the Ceres project and Cerealia because he wanted to avoid having to fight with Earth for water.


Juan knew all of this and waited patiently for his chance. He was not a man who craved power for his own sake; rather, he was devoted to his philosophy the same way he was devoted to Hans, who had saved him. Hans and Juan were the rare pair who truly understood each other, which also made them rare opponents. To understand that two people who respected each other were often also the fiercest opponents was to understand the friendship and rivalry between these two.


Grateful to Hans, Juan had obeyed him through the years. Also grateful to Juan for his display of loyalty during the greatest crisis of his life, Hans had allowed him the autonomy he desired. Juan had not given in, but he was waiting for the right opportunity. Hans wasn’t fooled, but he understood that the root of the crisis lay in the spirit of the Martian nation, and if Juan didn’t express it, someone else would. Hans understood that Juan craved conquest, but he harbored the hope that if they could overcome their difficulties and maintain a good, independent existence, the desire for conquest would slacken over time. But Hans had been wrong. It was human desire that created life, and not life that created human desire.


In the past, Reini had always been able to keep himself from being invested in the events he observed, but now he felt the agony of the bystander for the first time. The recording equipment before him continued to whirl and capture the scene in full fidelity. The equipment took no side, taking in everything objectively. The objectivity was intolerably painful to him.


The Boule Chamber’s main door suddenly slammed open. A uniformed military captain strode into the chamber, located Juan, and walked right up to him. He leaned down to whisper in Juan’s ear, and Juan’s expression changed to shock before returning to normal. The captain didn’t leave, as though waiting for instructions. Juan glanced hesitantly at Hans.


“What happened?” asked Hans.


“It’s a matter within the jurisdiction of the Flight System.”


“Tell me what happened.”


“Nothing important.”


“Tell me!” Hans roared. “Even if you no longer recognize me as the consul, I remain a permanent director of the Flight System. I have the right to know and advise about the internal affairs of the system.”


After a beat, Juan answered in a quiet voice, “Two hydraulic engineering experts from Earth have escaped on a cargo shuttle.”


“What?”


“They ran away.”


“Why?”


“We’re not sure.”


“Then send people after them!”


“That’s not necessary,” said Juan, his voice cold and final. “I think that’s not necessary at all.”