AN ENDING BUT ALSO A BEGINNING




The flood would be the turning point of history. The past would be washed away, the lingering gaze frozen into statues. The ark was laden with the power of rebirth.


As the source of floodwaters descended, every singing voice paused. The audience gazed at the projected image upon the domed ceiling from different angles, holding their breaths.


In space, a long-wandering dwarf planet had lost half of its mass. A giant block of ice mixed with mud, in orbit around Mars, was being accelerated by fusion reactors. Like a giant torch, it was glowing as it approached the atmosphere. It had bid farewell to the planet of its birth and was descending to a new land. Many orbits later it would land in the middle of a crater.


Simultaneously a thin and broad sail unfolded in space. It stretched and extended, precisely and delicately adjusting itself to face the sun. Like a giant eye, it gazed down at the many eyes below. It directed sunlight down in a glowing pillar of light that enveloped the watching audience. Powerful machines waited in neat array in ancient caves; houses, still uninhabited, honeycombed the slopes; turbines and waterwheels were ready to spin, and elevators hummed the music of silence.


As everyone paused in preparation for the momentous occasion, Consul Laak delivered a speech from the Boule Chamber, his first major speech since he had taken the oath of office. In the empty chamber he looked ahead, letting his gaze penetrate the marble-patterned floor, the statues of the founders of the republic, the infinite distance outside the wide-open doors. He knew that his face was being broadcast to every room, projected on every window. He felt the importance of the moment, but he was also completely at peace.


“Today, let’s begin by remembering four people who have given so much to Mars, and to today. Without them, we wouldn’t be witnessing this historical moment.


“The first is Ronen. For decades he served as the connection between Mars and Ceres, and then accompanied the inhabitants of that planet as they headed away from the Solar System. He’s no longer with us, but Cerealia continues its journey toward Proxima Centauri. We will honor them with the gratitude of our entire planet. Without their courage, our survival would be in jeopardy.


“The second is Garcia. He was the captain of Maearth and our ambassador to Earth. Through his unrelenting effort, he won us the negotiation opportunities and the necessary technologies, including the hydraulic engineering technology that is key to today’s success. Though he won’t be able to enjoy our new home, we will honor him with the gratitude of our entire planet. There was no one who pushed further the limits of our frontiers.


“The third is Galiman. He was responsible for the glass houses with which we built our old city and which we’re about to abandon. He devoted his entire life to improving our living conditions and ecological systems. Seven days ago he lost his long battle against cancer. Even though we’re about to leave behind his designs, we will honor him with the gratitude of our entire planet. We will never forget that our civilization began in his city.


“The last is Hans Sloan, someone we’re all familiar with and love. He served as consul for the previous two terms and led Mars for a full decade. In his youth he was an active pilot who did much for the construction of early Mars. Later he presided skillfully over the contentious decision to capture Ceres for its water, and then to devote that water to the construction of a new home for all of us. Selfless, farsighted, honorable, he helped secure our prosperity and stability and propelled us onto the path toward this important historical change. Now he has taken over Maearth and continues to serve Mars as our ambassador. We will honor him with the gratitude of our entire planet. He has given all his life to Mars, and Mars will celebrate him with a new way of life.”


Inside the control room for the descent of the water source, Rudy looked up at the face of Laak in the suspended screen. Gielle, standing next to him, held his hand. Gently he withdrew it from her grasp and returned to the flashing numbers on the instrument panel. Gielle, red-faced, seemed about to fly into a rage but in the end held herself back. Pierre, passing by the control room, paused for a moment and then continued on his way, his eyes betraying his agony.


Next to a fountain, Chania looked up, her fingers caressing the water plants in the pool while holographic projections made the fountain look like a broad, beautiful lake. Next to her, Sorin sat with an arm around her waist. As they listened to Laak’s speech, they were also writing a letter to Luoying. From time to time Chania looked up at Sorin, happiness suffusing all her features.


Between the bookcases, Reini looked up at the image of Laak projected on the wall. Laak was gazing back into his eyes as well. A strain of music sounded; pages of books fluttered. He looked over at the door, where Janet smiled back at him. She waved, and he waved back. Neither said anything. The storm they had weathered together and the settling dust afterward had sealed their friendship.


At the training field of Fourth Base, Juan looked up, his face expressionless as he listened to Laak’s speech. Laak was not someone who would support Juan; he knew that. He didn’t like it, but there wasn’t much he could do. Still, he didn’t feel discouraged or demoralized. Instead, he continued to prepare for the military parade and inspection. Even with all the changes, no one could challenge the prominence and leadership of the Flight System. He was still strong and in charge. There would be plenty of opportunities in the future.


Laak paused. He looked around and seemed to see the shadows of many figures. The eight white pillars glowed with the pride of classical Greece, with the ancient dreams and worries of humanity. Laak had attended countless meetings and debates here, both as an audience member and as a speaker, including the debate that determined the fate of the Mercury Group. This was, however, the first time he spoke as consul, and he gazed around, making sure he remembered every detail of the chamber.


“We’ve evolved along with our planet. From the first day humankind set foot upon this land, it has been the foundation of our survival. We have grown our food here, lived in its extrusions, sculpted it with our machines, changed the atmosphere with our exhalations. From this day forward, our mutual dependence will deepen. We’ll have to slow down the wind erosion, thicken the air, warm the ground, improve the soil quality. Our planet will give us life, give us the possibility of breathing in the open. From this day onward, we will no longer be a species in isolation but will evolve together with our planet.


“We can be lazy, but we cannot lie to our planet.


“Ex-consul Hans Sloan once told me something Galiman had said, which I will now repeat for all of you. No words seem more appropriate to this occasion: ‘The sky is silent; let the land witness and weigh our soul.’”


The glowing torch of mud and ice now approached the surface of the planet, and the engines began to brake, to slow the descent. As everyone watched, a glowing wheel of light slowly approached the rim of the crater. It would collide with a plateau, melt in the subsequent explosion, and flow along the canyons into the bottom of the crater to form waterfalls, rivers, and, finally, a lake.


*


In various places on Earth, the same scene played out on various screens—though just a few clips lasting mere seconds, to fill in gaps in the financial news, a change of pace for exhausted nerves. Here and there, a few people glanced up from the noisy crowd, trying to imagine the fantastic myths being played out on another world. Stories of Mars would always be myths, even if they really happened.


Eko sat in his bedroom watching the computer screen, his mind ablaze. On the screen a fiery planet spun in space while a tiny rock, like a drop of water, circled it. Pride and a dreamlike sense of unreality came over him as he recalled that he had once set foot upon that world.


*


Maearth drifted in space, steady as always.


Hans and Luoying were both in the weightless gym at the stern of the ship, so that they could face Mars. Luoying lay on her back in the air, floating in the middle of the cabin. Her dress and hair drifted with her, like ribbons in a dance.


She was finally back here, the locus of joy and movement, the repository of the group’s best memories, the only stable place in the cosmos. She looked up at the curved ceiling, where Uncle Laak’s face was superimposed over the red planet. At the edge of the cabin, near the handholds, Hans stood in full dress uniform, saluting the screen overhead. Luoying thought her grandfather had never looked so handsome: the wrinkles in his face seemed carved by a knife, his white hair drifting with the air currents.


Maearth was heading for Earth. The empty quarters would soon be filled with trade goods. The photographs on the walls had been changed. They were still clean and neat, but the hands dusting them now belonged to a different old man.


Laak was nearing the end of his speech. His voice felt heavy and his gaze was like fire burning underwater. He seemed to see everyone looking back at him. They were all speaking to him, and he was speaking to all of them.


“We exist as momentary gatherings of dust, brilliant flashes of fireworks. Yet each of us carries in our atoms the history of the entire cosmos. Each of our gestures reflects the culmination of the movements of the eternal sky and sea over the eons. Our actions today will be seen by the sky, while our spirit will be etched into the soil.


“The sky is silent; let the land witness and weigh our soul!” In the bright sun the floodwaters fell from the sky.


One story was over and another chapter of history began. No one knew what the future held. Everyone looked up into the sky, and over the broad, vast land, silence reigned.










Acknowledgments




I would like to acknowledge Mr. Liu Cixin for giving me a lot of encouragement for the first version of this book and Ken Liu for the excellent translation. I’d also like to thank all my colleagues at Fangjing Sci-Fi, my studio, for supporting me throughout. Finally I’d like to thank my husband and parents for their love and care all these years.










Translator’s Acknowledgments




I wish to thank all the wonderful people at Simon & Schuster who made the publication of this book in English possible, especially but not limited to: Joe Monti (editor), Lauren Jackson (publicity), Alexandre Su and David Chesanow (copyediting), Christopher Milea and Benjamin Holmes (proofreading), Madison Penico (manuscript assistance). I also want to thank Nic Cheetham and his staff at Head of Zeus for bringing out the UK edition, Erwann Perchoc for a critical piece of translation assistance, and Russell Galen, my agent, for his ongoing support.


Finally, the greatest share of my gratitude goes to Hao Jingfang, who created this beautiful book and entrusted me with it.










About the Author








Hao Jingfang leads the new generation of Chinese science fiction writers. In 2016, she won the Hugo Award for Best Novelette for ‘Folding Beijing’ (also translated by Ken Liu) – the first Hugo awarded to a Chinese woman. With a Ph.D in economics, Hao works as a macroeconomics researcher at the China Development Research Foundation in Beijing.










About the Translator




Ken Liu, as author and translator, has won the Nebula, Hugo, World Fantasy, Locus Sidewise, and Science Fiction & Fantasy Translation Awards. His translation of Cixin Liu’s The Three-Body Problem was the first translated work to ever win the Hugo Award. He lives near Boston with his family.










An Invitation from the Publisher




We hope you enjoyed this book. We are an independent publisher dedicated to discovering brilliant books, new authors and great storytelling. Please join us at www.headofzeus.com and become part of our community of book-lovers.


        We will keep you up to date with our latest books, author blogs, special previews, tempting offers, chances to win signed editions and much more.


Get in touch: hello@headofzeus.com


         www.headofzeus.com


                         @headofzeus


@HoZ_Books


Head of Zeus Books