HOME




Sunlight made Luoying squint as she emerged into the shuttle port terminal.


Having been away from sunrise on Mars for five years, she had almost forgotten how different it felt. The sky on Earth was blue, and the sun was a gentle reddish orange. On Mars, black was black, white was white. There was nothing in the way, no filter.


After deplaning from the shuttle, the students rode the seated escalator down to the ground. After passing through identity verification, they arrived in the vast open space of the terminal, the first place that felt like home.


The terminal had been built during Luoying’s absence. She and her friends walked together, not speaking much. The walls, the hemispherical ceiling, and the ground were all constructed out of glass, like most things on Mars, though the floor was patterned to resemble marble. The walls were bare of ornamentation. Other than the steel girders, the only visible detail in the transparent walls was the pattern made by the insulation gas billowing between the two layers of glass, curling wisps.


Luoying walked next to Chania, and the pair smiled as they watched the confusion among the Terran delegates. The elegantly dressed Terrans, clustered after the Martian delegates but before the students, were clearly ill-prepared for navigation through the shuttle port.


The leader of the Terran delegation, Mr. Peter Beverley, strode confidently at the head of the group. But he paused in front of the fingerprint station, uncertain what to do. The retina scanner swung into his face from the side like a tentacle and made a light popping noise right in front of his eyes as it took a snapshot, which so shocked the man that he jumped backward, bumping into the radiation probe, which beeped loudly.


Everyone in the terminal turned to stare.


Red-faced, Beverley pretended to laugh and held out a hand to calm the still-beeping probe, but the probe only beeped louder in protest. His hand jerked back in surprise.


The Martian delegates ahead of him turned back, grinning, to help.


Luoying smiled and looked away politely. She pulled her luggage through the security line, easily navigating between the various probes that swung out from both sides, as though dancing a practiced routine or greeting the electronic sensors.


Beverley finally made his way through the probes as well. He held in his hand the diplomatic documents that declared his authority as the head of the Terran delegation. But there were no customs officials or passport checkpoints, and he stood in the middle of the terminal, uncertain who to show his papers to.


The terminal was shaped like a slice of pie. The narrow tip led to the shuttles, while the wide arc was where passengers boarded the tube trains for Mars City. Along the two straight walls were vending machines for gifts and snacks like fresh pastries and fruits. In the middle of the terminal floor stood a few glass boards that showed the complicated map of the tube train system, like a colorful tapestry that slowly changed. Between the entrances for the different tube trains hung small terminals. The Martian delegates were already at these, punching in the stations nearest their homes.


Luoying and Chania stood near the entrances, hesitating.


“We’re home,” said Chania softly. It sounded like a question for Luoying, or perhaps she was only talking to herself.


“That’s right.”


“How do you feel?”


“I don’t feel anything.”


“Really?” Chania turned to gaze at her.


“Really.” She nodded for emphasis. “Strange, isn’t it?”


“Not strange at all,” said Chania. “I don’t feel anything either.”


Luoying surveyed the clean, bright terminal. “Tell me, what makes the shuttle port here different from all the airports on Earth we’ve been to?”


“This is a shuttle port; those are airports,” said Chania.


Luoying looked at Chania’s messy hair affectionately. “Get some sleep. We’ve still got the banquet tonight.”


“You take care, too.”


The students said goodbye to one another and scattered into different tubes. They were used to partings and didn’t make a big deal out of it. The alcohol from the night before still lingered in their blood, and their minds were filled with memories of the spinning stars. The terminal was so bright that no one wanted to speak aloud.


Luoying was the last of the students to leave. She watched the Terran delegates clumped at the center of the terminal like a flock of lost sheep. Some were feasting on the snacks from the vending machines, unaware that their visitor accounts were being charged for each bite.


The door at the center of the curved edge of the terminal slid open, and a new group of people strode in. Luoying saw that the man at the head was her grandfather, Hans Sloan. He led a delegation of senior officials to the Terrans, stood facing Beverley, and held out his hand.


The two groups stood in two parallel lines, and hands shook as though reaching across the emptiness between two planets. The Martians, having grown up with less gravity, were much taller than the Terrans, which made the scene asymmetrical. The two groups examined each other as they went through the ritual of introductions.


This was no time to greet her grandfather, Luoying decided. She turned away from the tall, slender figure of the consul of Mars and punched in the coordinates for home.


*


Five years earlier, Mars picked the first group of students to go study on Earth.


The Boule took forever to deliberate on the matter. Three months of fact-finding were followed by three weeks of public commentary, which were followed by three days of nonstop debate in the Boule. Finally, the consul, the education minister, and the archons of all nine systems had to vote in the Boule Chamber of the Capitol, facing the bronze statues of the founders of the Martian Republic. To engage the whole citizenry and the most important governing organs of the state in the matter of the education of a few children was without precedent in the forty years since the conclusion of the war. The last time anything like it had happened was at the founding of the republic, when all the teachers had placed their hands on the name of Arsen, the great Martian educator, and swore to teach in order to create.


In the end, the vote was six for and five against. When the small gavel slammed down against the strike plate, the sound reverberated among the treelike columns situated throughout the black-walled Boule Chamber. The fate of these children became part of history.


To be honest, even those who voted in the final tally had no clear idea as to what the students would experience on Earth. The decision-makers had been born on Mars, and they had only heard accounts of the noisy bustle on Earth, legends of a previous generation. The entire Martian Republic consisted of a single city, a habitat enclosed in glass. Here the land was literally a thing of the people, managed for the commonweal. There was no private ownership in real estate, no smuggling, no buying on credit, no banking. No one knew how children who had grown up in such a place would react to the grand bazaar that was Earth, where commerce was the only rule, and advertisements would bombard the children day and night. Before their departure, the students sat through numerous lessons that tried to explain the system on Earth to them. But no matter how much the teachers tried to impress upon the children the severity of the challenges they faced, it was impossible to teach young hearts how to grow up in a classroom.


Luoying leaned against the transparent wall of the homewardbound tube train, deep in thought.


The scenery outside was tranquil and vivid. Through the bluetinted glass, sunlight struck the trees lining the tube, casting their shadows against her face through the glass ceiling. She was the only one in the car, and she saw no one through the wall. Everything was so quiet that it seemed unreal. The walls and floor of the car were clear as ice, and as the train glided over some houses, she looked down and saw the trees standing still in the courtyards.


The confusion she had tried to suppress for days now flooded her heart.


She didn’t know why she had gone to Earth. On Maearth, she had discovered that she was unqualified.


One night, as the students sat chatting next to a viewport, someone brought up one of the questions on the qualifying examination that had been used to pick members of the Mercury Group five years earlier. Others soon chimed in, and they pieced together the outline of the test from collective memory. Recollection of that shared rite of passage was joyful, festive.


But Luoying soon fell silent. Based on the answers the other students recalled giving, she soon realized that she couldn’t possibly have scored as high as the rest of them. She was ashamed, like a star dimmed by the bright full moon.


She wasn’t sure if her suspicion was true. If she was wrong, then everything ought to continue as before. But if she was right, then it meant that she was added to the Mercury Group because someone had interfered with the selection process. The conclusion was chilling, not only because it meant that she wasn’t as talented as she thought, but also because it meant that her life had been planned by someone else. She thought she had seized an opportunity, but the reality was that an opportunity had captured her.


My grandfather? He seemed the only one who could have had such influence. She didn’t know why he would have done such a thing.


She wanted to go home and confront her grandfather, but she wasn’t sure how. They weren’t particularly close; he had moved in to live with her and Rudy only after the death of their parents. He had given her whatever she wanted, but he rarely hugged her. The Terrans called him “the great dictator.” He always took walks alone.


Did she dare to ask him? Perhaps it would be better to ask Rudy for help. As the older brother, Rudy had always protected her and tried to cheer her up. But Rudy was someone who insisted on striving for the future. She didn’t know if he would understand why she cared so much about the past.


The train continued to glide silently through the glass tube, like a speeding memory. She passed by assembly halls, tree-lined promenades, the playground she had once frequented, a garden with a slide. The silence made everything seem to be a dreamscape. Occasionally she saw mothers chatting with each other, strollers temporarily stopped along the sidewalk.


Why do I care about this so much?


At first, she had felt a restlessness that she thought was driven by curiosity, but soon she realized that there was a deeper anxiety about fate. She had thought of fate as just a part of nature, something to be faced and borne, but now she realized that there was another kind of fate, a kind subject to manipulation by others, with hidden agendas and secret motivations, a kind that could be questioned and perhaps abandoned. This second kind of fate required her own participation and choice. Until she understood the truth, she couldn’t move forward.


Why did I go to Earth? She had asked herself this question many times, but this time was different. She had walked many roads on Earth—so many that she was no longer fazed by roads and choices. But she never knew why she had gone there in the first place.


Music played in the train car: a faraway cello and a piano near at hand. The music made the scenery feel even richer. Gradually her home appeared in the distance. She could see the small open window upstairs, its brown frame shining peacefully under the domed glass ceiling.


She had imagined the moment of her homecoming many times: trembling excitement, eye-stinging nostalgia, maybe a bit of anxiety. But she had never imagined that she would feel nothing at all, and that very apathy made her melancholic. After five years in the noise of Earth, she had returned to home’s tranquil harbor, but she seemed to have lost that primitive, heartfelt love of home permanently.


The tube train stopped precisely at the platform. Luoying gazed at the familiar red door of her house and cried.


*


The car door slid open, and bright, unfiltered sunlight spilled inside. Luoying squinted and shaded her eyes. The air seemed filled with golden sparkles, and she saw a gold-colored bench in front of her: smooth, gracefully shaped, and the rounded cushions and back gave off the sense that it was made out of balloons.


She looked up and saw Rudy waving at her from the second floor, looking like his usual assured self.


She smiled at him and sat down on the bench with her luggage. The bench rose into the air and flew up toward Rudy’s window. She glanced around: the garden shaped like a drop of water, fan-shaped flower patches, umbrellalike trees, the spherical dome overhead, the orange trapezoidal mailbox, the wide-open window upstairs, planters suspended from the beams. Everything looked the same as when she had left.


The bench stopped by the window. Rudy unloaded her luggage and held out his arms. She leaped gracefully into his embrace, and he set her down. The moment her feet touched the floor, she felt a sense of stability.


He was much taller than the last time she saw him. His hair, still blond, no longer curled as much.


“You must be exhausted,” he said.


She shook her head.


“Look at you,” he said, holding out a hand at waist level. “You were just this tall when you left.”


“You exaggerate,” said Luoying, grinning. “Are you suggesting that I managed to gain thirty centimeters in Earth’s gravity?” Her voice sounded rasping, unreal.


During the five years away, Luoying had grown only five centimeters. Upon arrival on Earth, she was taller than most girls her age there, but by the time she left, she no longer stood out. She knew very well that her body had been weighed down by that more massive world. Her growth had been stunted as her bones and heart were challenged. Every centimeter had been an effort at overcoming herself.


“How’ve you been?” she asked.


“Oh, I can’t complain.”


“What atelier did you pick?”


“Fifth Electro-Mag Atelier.”


“How do you like it?”


“It’s fine. I’m now a group leader.”


“That’s great.”


Rudy noticed her expression. “What’s wrong?”


Luoying looked down. “I don’t know.”


“As in ‘I’m fine, but I don’t know what to say about it’?” “As in ‘I don’t know.’”


“Then something is wrong.”


“No . . . I just don’t know how to describe how I feel.”


Luoying had lived in many places all over Earth, and the home in her heart had gradually fallen into ruin with each move.


In one of the great cities in East Asia, she had lived on the one hundred and eightieth floor of a skyscraper. The dance school she attended also trained in a studio in the same building. The building itself was a steel pyramid, like a mountain. Inside was a world complete unto itself. Elevators raced up and down the slanted edges, and people came and went like the surging tide.


In Central Europe, she had lived in an old, abandoned house in a suburb, where the metropolis met the open countryside. The land there belonged to a merchant who came there only once a year, and trespassers weren’t allowed. She had gone there in search of inspiration for her dance. The fields were full of swaying golden wheat and wild birds. Flowers bloomed and wilted like the coming and going of clouds.


In the open plains of North America, she had lived in the heart of an artificial scenic park surrounded by wilderness. Terran officials had invited all the Martian students to vacation at the park. There, the prairie stretched under the big sky like a song, and loneliness showed itself in every bare tree branch, every passing bird, every cold, glinting star. From time to time, billowing clouds raced in from every direction, and lightning bolts hung from them like tree branches while trees reached up from the earth like frozen lightning.


On a plateau in Central Asia, she had lived in a tent city at the foot of snowy mountains. There she joined Reversionist friends who had gathered there in mass protest. The mountains were pure white at the top where the peaks poked into the clouds. From time to time the clouds dissipated to reveal the golden glow of the sun against the snow. The tent city had been full of passionate youths from around the world who shouted slogans while linking arms, protesting against the system until the system crushed the movement. The tent city was wiped away in a storm of violence, but the snowcapped mountains shone in the sun, unmoved.


Before going to Earth, she had never seen any of these things. They didn’t exist on Mars, and perhaps never would. There were no skyscrapers on Mars, no countryside, no absentee owners of vacation villas, no lightning, no snowcapped mountains.


No blood from dragged-away protesters either. At least not in her memory.


She had experienced so much on Earth, but she didn’t know how to describe it. She had gained so many memories but lost her dream. She had seen all kinds of exotic scenery, but home now seemed out of place. She had no words for any of it, all of it.


She looked into her brother’s eyes, deciding to cut to the chase.


“There is something bothering me.”


“What is it?”


“I don’t think I should have been picked five years ago. I think I took someone else’s place. Do you know what happened?”


She waited for his reaction. Although he said nothing, she could tell he was trying to decide how to respond. The mood between them felt odd.


“Who told you that?” he asked.


“No one. I just had a feeling.”


“You can’t trust random feelings.”


“It’s not random. We had a discussion.”


“Who’s ‘we’?”


“The Mercury Group. On the way back, on Maearth, we talked about the exam. I figured out that everyone must have scored much higher than I did. They had solutions to problems that I had left blank. And all of them had been interviewed but not me. I remember how it happened. There was no notice that I was even being considered until all of a sudden I was told to get ready. It was so abrupt that I was shocked. I must have been switched in at the last minute. Do you know why?”


Rudy shrugged. She stared at him, but couldn’t read his expression.


“Maybe . . . someone backed out at the last minute.”


“Is that what happened?”


“It’s possible, I guess.”


In that moment, Luoying suddenly felt a vast gulf separating her and her brother. She had the feeling that he knew the truth but didn’t want to tell her. His apathy in the face of her suspicions was not at all normal. The deliberate attempt to downplay her doubts, to not seek clarification, showed that he was trying to hide something from her.


They had always shared everything, she and Rudy. As children, they had been allies against the adults, and he had taken her to places they shouldn’t have gone, to see things they shouldn’t have seen. He had never, until this moment, allied himself with the adults against her.


She felt utterly alone. She had thought she could at least count on the help of her brother if she couldn’t ask her grandfather, but she had lost Rudy, too. What else does he know? What else isn’t he telling me?


“Why was I chosen, then?” she persisted. “You knew about the switch, didn’t you?”


Rudy said nothing.


She screwed up her courage. “It was Grandfather, am I right?” Rudy still said nothing.


They had never spoken to each other like this. After five years of not seeing him, this was not how she imagined their first conversation at home would go. They each seemed to be waiting for the other to speak. The air was tense, like a taut bowstring.


Luoying sighed, thinking of giving up and changing the topic. But in a composed tone, Rudy asked, “Why do you care so much?”


She looked at him, forcing her own voice to betray no emotion. “Even a soldier discharged from the army deserves to know why the war was fought, don’t you think?”


“What’s the use if the war is over?”


“Of course it’s of use!”


She had drifted through so many places already and lost her faith. Didn’t she deserve to know why she had been sent on her journey?


Rudy looked thoughtful. “You were too young back then . . . and too emotional.”


“What do you mean by that?”


“You were always so sad after Mom and Dad died.” “Mom and Dad?” She held her breath.


“Yes. You took their deaths hard. So . . . Grandfather thought perhaps a change of scenery would lead to an improvement in mood.”


After a silence, Luoying asked, “Is that the real reason?”


“I don’t know. I’m just offering a possibility.”


“But . . . they died five years before the selection process.”


“Sure, but you were sad for all those years.”


She tried to remember her younger self. Five years ago she had been thirteen. She couldn’t even recall what she had thought or been obsessed with back then. It seemed a lifetime ago.


“Maybe you’re right,” she said. Her brother’s suggestion wasn’t unreasonable, and she decided she would accept the explanation provisionally.


They fell into an awkward silence again. Luoying gazed at her brother, at his broad shoulders, tall figure, and steady eyebrows, which no longer moved animatedly as she had remembered. He was twenty-two, an adult now, a group leader at an atelier. He would no longer run around with her, no longer tell her endless stories he made up about spaceships and rockets and war against aliens. He understood the value of being silent; he now spoke to her as one of the adults.


Rudy smiled. “Isn’t there something else you wanted to ask?


This is your chance.”


After a moment she understood. There was indeed something she had forgotten to mention. When they were little, he had always waited for her to say something specific after he had shown her something wonderful.


“The bench—how did you do it?”


Rudy snapped his fingers. “Simple! The bench itself is made from standard molded glass, but the surface has been plated with a nickel film with strong magnetic properties. As soon as there’s a sufficiently powerful magnetic field in the yard, the bench will float into the air.” He pointed outside the window to show her the circle of white pipes running around the yard—a simple electromagnetic coil.


“Oh, that’s fantastic,” Luoying said admiringly.


That was the line he had been waiting for. When they were little, these were the words that accompanied so many incredible new toys and inventions.


Rudy laughed and told her to get plenty of rest before leaving to go downstairs. She gazed at his back, knowing that he had deliberately tried to invoke their childhood, to ignore the break in time, to pretend that everything was the same. But nothing was ever the same, even if people always tried so hard to deny it.


Her brother gone, Luoying stood by the window and looked out again.


Under the bright sun, everything was outlined in golden light and long, deep shadows. Other than the white coil, everything looked the way she remembered: the flowers, the patio furniture, the tube train station. The flowers wilted and bloomed year after year, wiping away the invisible past. She saw her younger self running alone through the garden: pink shoes, a pair of pigtails, looking up and laughing a pure, carefree laugh—she gazed up at the window and saw right through Luoying, saw right through the gloom behind her.


The garden was at peace, and the passage of time could be discerned only in a few details. She saw that the conveyor belt behind the mailbox was empty, as clean as a newborn’s skin. Once, Rudy and she had secretly installed a round plate there, a sensor that allowed them to tell whether packages in the mailbox contained some interesting toy. The plate was gone now, and the curved, cylindrical surface behind the mailbox was smooth and empty, like her departure, like time’s arrow.


*


In the afternoon, after waking from her nap, she found Grandfather in her room.


He was standing by the wall and looking out the window, holding something in his hand. He didn’t hear her waking up. She gazed at his back. The sun was about to set and lit up half the room. Grandfather stood in the dark half, and his stiff, straight figure loomed like a stone tablet. This was a familiar sight to Luoying. She had thought of Grandfather many times on Earth, and each time she pictured him, she had imagined him in just such an ambivalent pose: standing next to the window, gazing into the distance, half of his body in shadows.


She sat up, hoping to ask him why he had sent her to Earth.


He turned at the noise, smiling. He was already dressed in a tuxedo for tonight, his silver hair combed neatly. The coat draped over his shoulders gave him the air of a soldier, not just of a man in his seventies.


“Slept well?” Hans sat down at the edge of her bed, his dark gray eyes staring gently into hers.


She nodded.


“You must be tired from such a long trip.”


“Not too tired.”


“Maearth is an old ship. Probably not very comfortable.”


“I slept better there than on Earth.”


He laughed. “And how are Garcia and Ellie?”


“They are well. They send their greetings. Oh, the captain asked me to bring you a message.”


“What is it?”


“‘Sometimes the fight over the treasure is more important than the treasure itself.’”


Grandfather looked thoughtful at this. After a while he nodded.


“What does it mean?” asked Luoying.


“Just an old saying.”


“Our relationship with Earth . . . it’s very tense right now, isn’t it?”


He waited a beat, then smiled. “Hasn’t it always been?”


Luoying waited for him to clarify, but he didn’t, and she didn’t ask again.


She wanted to ask the question that had been plaguing her, but the process of picking and assembling the right words was interrupted when she saw the object in Grandfather’s hand. It was a photo of her parents. Her mother’s hair was loosely tied back, and she held a sculpting knife in her gloved hands, streaks of clay and a relaxed smile on her face. Standing behind her, her father wrapped his arms around her, resting his chin against the curve of her neck. They both looked so happy.


Hans saw she was looking and handed her the photo. “You came back just in time. Tomorrow is the anniversary of their deaths. Why don’t we pray for them at dinner tomorrow night?” Luoying nodded, her heart heavy.


“You’re growing to look more like your mother.” Grandfather’s voice, deep and low, seemed to leave behind a silence that did not want to be broken.


Luoying felt a tangled web of emotions. The photograph in her hand felt warm, maybe from Grandfather’s hand or maybe because her parents were smiling so warmly. She had rarely seen her grandfather like this, a complicated anguish in his eyes. The four people in the room, two in the photograph, two outside, seemed to be holding a silent conversation. Her parents had been dead for ten years, and Luoying couldn’t remember the last time they had been together like this. The last rays of the sun winked out, and a gentle warmth, unique to death, connected her to her grandfather.


An urgent ringing.


The red light on the wall came on, indicating an emergency call. As though shaking off a dream, Hans got up and strode to the wall to press the button to connect. The wall flickered and then the face of Grandfather’s good friend Juan—Luoying had always called him Uncle Juan—appeared on the screen, his expression severe and cold.


Uncle Juan didn’t even bother to start with a greeting. “Can you talk? In person.”


“Before the reception?”


“Yes.”


Hans nodded, his face calm. He turned off the screen, exited Luoying’s room, picked up his scarf, and went downstairs.


Luoying remained sitting on the bed. The whole episode with her grandfather had taken no more than a minute or two, and the dream that had reunited her family was gone.


The door to her room gently swung shut by itself, the hallway beyond empty.


She knew that she couldn’t ask Grandfather the question directly; she had to find out the truth from others, a comparatively easier task. Grandfather was the flying warrior, perpetually in motion. He would always have secrets, and she didn’t know how to ask about them.


Staring at the photograph in her hand, she tried again and again to remember her self from five years ago and how she had felt after her parents had died.


*


The official reception for the Martian and Terran delegations, as well as the Mercury Group, was held in the Glory Memorial Hall, the site of Mars’s most important ceremonial functions. The hall was a long rectangle with sixteen columns in two rows. Between the columns were miniature models and informative displays of important events in Martian history. The murals on the ceiling and the walls were projections that could be changed for each occasion.


For tonight, the hall was brightly lit, decorated in a refined manner that did not tip over into luxury. Projected lilies covered the walls, the overall effect resembling green-and-white wallpaper. Four VIP tables were set up on the raised stage at the center, and sixteen more tables were arranged around it. White tablecloths covered them all. Since cotton fabric was rare on Mars, this was a sign of high respect for the guests. Pots of African violets served as centerpieces, and poinsettias sat atop pedestals at the sides. Glass strands dangled from the ceiling, glowing in different colors.


A buffet on a slow-moving conveyor belt was set up on one side of the hall. There were no waiters at all. One corner was set up to resemble a stall that might be found at a country market on ancient Earth, with piles of vegetables and fruits. This was meant to show off the triumph of Martian agriculture.


The Terran delegates were irked by the lack of waitstaff, which to them made the banquet a shabby affair. They were used to welldressed waiters at the ready, filling glasses with red wine as soon as they were empty and bringing out new silverware between courses, as though only through such pampering could the attendees demonstrate their elegance.


The semicircular conveyor belt, on the other hand, progressed at its own pace, neither too fast nor too slow, content to let the honored guests take care of themselves. Dishes emerged from the wall, carried on the conveyor belt until the guests had picked what they liked, and retreated back into the wall again. Wine flowed from spigots whenever guests held their glasses under them. To the Terrans, the whole setup reminded them of some third-rate country buffet, and they conversed loudly among themselves, describing how their own countries would have hosted such an important state dinner in style.


There were no waiters on Mars. Indeed, the entire service economy seemed absent. At most, one might find volunteers and interns, but no service workers, no servants, no tertiary industry at all. Everyone on Mars worked as a researcher affiliated with an atelier, and no one waited tables or took orders. The reception had been prepared and would be cleaned up by the hosts themselves.


The Martians didn’t bother to explain this background to their guests, and so the cultural misunderstandings grew. A few European delegates discussed the origin of modern etiquette among the aristocrats of Old Europe; a few East Asian delegates offered praise to the cultivated manners and rites of their ancient civilizations; a few Middle Eastern delegates then proudly explained that in their countries men were strong enough that women had the leisure to host grand parties in luxurious mansions and take care of the guests themselves. The Martians listened, smiling politely. Then they got up in threes or twos to go to the conveyor belt for another serving. The Terrans, confused by the lack of embarrassment on the part of their hosts, grew even more angry, whispering among themselves and shaking their heads.


The Mercury Group took up two of the tables. Luoying sat next to Chania and Anka. They were enjoying the tastes of home and chatting happily, glad to be free from the adults for the moment. The conveyor belt brought out desserts, and Chania brought back a large plate to share with the whole table.


“This is so delicious,” said Chania. “I’ve been missing real cooking.”


None of them liked the food on Earth. To them, it was all just sustenance.


“I wonder who made these,” said Anka.


Luoying took a bite. “I bet it’s from Old Maury’s. I love her pudding. When I was little, whenever I felt down, I begged Mom to go get some. It always cheered me up.”


The joyful mood of the students contrasted sharply with the tension in the air. Luoying could feel it. Their table was next to the VIPs’, and she was seated with her back right up against the stage. Snatches of conversation from up there drifted into her ears from time to time. Although she couldn’t hear what everyone said, Uncle Juan’s booming voice always stood out.


“Don’t you dare tell me ‘That didn’t happen,’” he was saying. “Let me tell you, I watched as my grandmother died in one of your bombing raids. One second she was trembling in her bedroom, praying for God to save her, and the next second she was a bloody smear across the rubble. No, I’m sure they didn’t teach you that in your schools. But that’s what you bastards did. You murdered civilians. You rank right up there with the worst butchers in human history.”


The person he was lecturing said something in a low voice, which only enraged Juan further.


“Oh, fuck off! I don’t give a damn about your ‘lack of involvement.’ I’ll toss your ass right out the airlock if you try to spew that legalistic garbage again.” He paused and then added, “You’ve never been outside on Mars, have you? Ha! If you’re out there with no protection, pop! and you’ll be dead like a swollen octopus.”


Luoying couldn’t help but laugh at the image. Discreetly, she looked behind her. The man sitting next to Uncle Juan was Mr. Beverley, the head of the Terran delegation. His expression was awkward as he dabbed at his mouth with a napkin.


Luoying was fascinated. On Earth, Beverley was a big star, well-known for his elegance and fine manners. Someone else might respond to Juan’s rage in kind, but Beverley couldn’t. He was dressed in a retro-style fashionable suit with velvet and gold trim and two rows of brass buttons, giving him the air of an aristocrat from centuries ago. He had to look serious and thoughtful, the image of the consummate diplomat. Rage, as a mode of expression, was forbidden to him.


For a long time no one spoke again, and Luoying turned her attention back to the food. The next time she heard Uncle Juan’s voice, he sounded even more excited than before. He stood up abruptly, his chair legs scraping against the stage. Everyone in the hall stopped and stared at him.


“No!” he shouted. “Absolutely not!”


The diners became agitated and whispers filled the hall, as no one was certain what had happened. Someone at Juan’s table tried to pull him back down, but he refused. A Terran delegate at the table tried to get up but was held down by a friend. Finally, Hans Sloan stood up. He put a hand gently on Juan’s shoulder, and the man finally sat down.


“Honored guests from Earth,” Hans said, and raised his glass. “Let me say a few words. First of all, we offer our sincere welcome to you. The past is the past, but in front of us lies a long road to the future. The goals of this world’s fair are our mutual benefit, mutual profit, and the pursuit of our separate goals. Exchange between our peoples will always be necessary.


“I believe that we’ll find a way for both sides to be satisfied. We will take your demands into consideration, but the final deal must be approved by all the citizens of Mars. For a decision this momentous, a democratic process is vital. Moreover, I believe the Terran delegation will also behave in a democratic manner so that the final deal will be approved by all the members.


“This is a beautiful night, and it’s far too early to jump to conclusions. Let’s set aside our differences for now and raise a glass to our first evening together in one another’s company.”


Everyone raised their glass. Chania asked Luoying what had led to Uncle Juan’s outburst. Luoying shook her head, saying she didn’t know either.


In fact, however, she did know. Grandfather’s toast was just another version of what Garcia had said: the democratic process among the Terran delegates was the fight over the treasure. Some vague outline of the situation was emerging in her mind, but she still didn’t understand the nature of the treasure the Terrans were fighting over. She ate silently, her mind churning over Grandfather’s ambivalent words.