A BEGINNING SERVING AS AN END




On the morning Reini left the hospital for the last time, Luoying came to the skydeck of the hospital, also for the last time.


Most of Reini’s belongings had already been removed, so he was only at the hospital to pick up a few last personal effects.


Luoying followed him about the office. Just like a few days before, she wanted to speak but couldn’t find the words. Reini handed her a few preserved specimens that he no longer needed. She took them without looking, completely at a loss.


“Dr. Reini,” she said. But when he turned to look at her, her voice weakened. “I . . . uh . . . never mind.”


Reini smiled at her. “You want to ask about my reassignment.”


“I’m sorry!” Luoying bowed to him again and again, her hair whipping up and down by the sides of her neck. “I’m sorry—”


“It’s really not a big deal,” said Reini. “Your grandfather once again allowed me to pick my new post. I’m perfectly content.”


“He told me that he called you on the day we left.”


“He did.”


“What . . . did he ask you?”


“He asked me if I knew you were planning such an expedition.”


“What did you tell him?”


“I said I knew.”


“But I didn’t tell you anything about our plans! Why did you assume the blame?”


“But I did know.”


Luoying stared at Reini, whose face remained serene.


Reini took Luoying to the skydeck. It was still early, so the deck was deserted. Bright light filled the space, and water gurgled through the pool, carefree.


Luoying stood at the wall, gazing at the distant cliff. Behind the narrow band of red, Luoying knew, there was a certain crater named after Linda Sais. It was no different from any of the other thousands of craters hidden among the mountains, peacefully asleep for millions of years. The wind had shaped it. It had witnessed soil mounds being leveled by the wind, water escaping into space, lava freezing into solid rock. And at this moment, it had become an eye into the heart of Luoying, a bright eye gazing up at the stars. Because of it, the mute and dark mountains were illuminated.


“I have one last question,” said Luoying, looking up at Reini’s broad forehead. “Why is it that some people are always around, but I don’t feel close to them? Why is that some other people are rarely with me, but I feel their warmth every moment?”


Reini pushed his glasses up the bridge of his nose. He pointed at the distant sky. “When you were out there, did you see any clouds?”


“Just one wisp. The morning of the second day.”


“A wisp is about all you’ll ever see on Mars. But that’s enough to explain everything.”


“How do you mean?”


“A cloud is actually made of liquids. The droplets are far apart from one another in the air, each moving independently. But because they’re similar in scale, they refract light similarly. That light connects them, and we see the whole constellation of droplets as one cloud.”


That’s how it works, thought Luoying. Yes, we’re at the same scale, and the light connects us. That’s how it works.


She had finally discovered the source of their commonality. During the three days after returning from their adventure, she had tried to tease out just why so many things she and her friends thought were natural were incomprehensible to others. She recalled the dark dance stage, the debates on the mining ship, the cave in the cold night, the orange-glowing wing tent, the bright laughter in the air; she seemed to see the very air over each youthful head shimmering with the endless search for answers and the refusal to compromise. She knew now that it was the mark left by the process of growth. The only solid support they could count on was that shared wandering through worlds more complicated than imagination. Their shared identity could all be sourced to that chaotic, common experience. It was a solid backdrop, a fact that needed no derivation from axioms.


She had found what she was looking for. There was no need for her to refuse to change, to abandon freedom, but there was also no need to worry about departures, about the lack of warmth. They had the same scale; they had the light between them.


Once, she had seen herself clearly, and that allowed her to bid herself farewell. Now she had seen her companions clearly, and she could bid them farewell as well without worry. She no longer feared the solitude of journeying afar, because they were a cloud, and light made them one. They were seeds borne by the same tree. No matter how far the wind scattered them, the same qi flowed through them.


The city was awakening in the morning light. Before the bright glass wall, Reini and Luoying were two silhouettes.


Looking at the side of his face, Luoying wondered just how much Reini understood her thoughts. Sometimes she felt he was only telling her the simplest facts, but other times she felt as though he always knew what she was trying to ask.


Reini was dressed casually today in a light green striped shirt and a gray cotton jacket. He stood with his hands in his pockets, at ease. His face, gazing into the distance, revealed little emotion at the corners of his mouth. Like the first time she had come here, Reini gave Luoying the impression of a tree. Without much movement, he kept himself upright. Even his voice was a tree: straight and gentle.


The silence and tranquility was abruptly broken. A mental patient broke in and beat his fists against the glass wall. Nurses and doctors rushed in and escorted him away. Comforting voices were interspersed with loud shouts. The whole noisy process was like a gust of wind that brought them conflict and cleaned away the story. The emptiness that remained seemed even more empty.


“Dr. Reini, will I be able to visit you in the future?”


“I’m not a doctor anymore,” said Reini. “My punishment also includes not being allowed to teach. But I don’t think anything in the decision forbids me from receiving visitors. You’re welcome at any time.”


Luoying smiled.


She looked outside the wall, knowing that one part of her life was over and another part had just begun. She didn’t know what the future held. The Martian landscape was vast and silent.