YINGHUO




The wind blew through her heart, and dust swirled over the virtual sand. Luoying looked at the sky, the endless wasteland, and the roiling clouds. Shock and grief wound around each other and throbbed like plaintive violin strings in heaven. She could not describe how she felt. For the first time she saw Babel, the tower of languages, the tower of worlds, the languages of different worlds, the worlds of different languages. Words and colors swirled up the side of the tower, a magnificent music of the spheres.


The tower spun in the air, rising from nothing, reaching into nothing. The light of the tower was indescribable: there was no part of the tower that emitted light, and yet it was bright everywhere. The tower itself was light, and the symbols that covered its skin were dim, glowing only by the illumination of the tower.


In that light, visions could be dimly glimpsed. Figures and scenery entwined with one another, appearing and disappearing between the letters and numbers, as though worlds were blending with each other.


At the foot of the tower, Luoying stepped over death. She saw Ronen’s smile as a winter sun. He will not die; he has already died; he will not die again. At the foot of the tower he had found peace.


He had guided her here so that she could understand him.


Care about the form of the world. Piece incomplete reflections together into the truth.


She didn’t fully understand what he meant, but she would remember his words, as she had remembered what he had told her when she was eleven.


Surveying the wasteland covered in sandstorms, she realized what Grandfather and his friends were defending. Grandfather, Ronen, Garcia, Galiman—they took off from the wasteland of Mars to defend this virtual tower, a tower that was more real than reality. Every world had its own myths, and Mars was no exception. When she was on Earth, she had read many myths, from the west and the east, from the arctic and the tropics. Having shuttled between worlds, she found that the myths of each world were unique to that world. In the east, the immortals came and went alone. In the west, the giants lived by tribe and race. At first, she couldn’t understand such differences in spiritual nature, but later, when she saw the stark cloud-shrouded peaks of the east and the broad grasslands and forests of the west, she understood why. The peaks were suited to lone wanderers, while the broad expanses were fit for warring clans. The myths were the gifts of Nature, and all the gods were guardians of their homelands.


The myths of Mars were generated by the endless red deserts. The myths had wings that took off from dust storms. They were rough, fresh, speedy, barren, devoid of the romance of verdant hills and babbling brooks, bereft of the mysteries of dark forests. All they had was striving flight, leaving behind dust, passing through swirling sand, dodging explosions to head for the sun, to embrace the desert, as hard as iron, as light as birds. Faced with the gigantic steel warships of Earth, the Martians were like moths plunging toward the flame, tragic and resolute. Grandfather and his companions were parts of this myth, and the tower in the wasteland was their spiritual spring.


Luoying cried tearlessly. A world was always the unity of its land and its gods. Only those who had wandered through different worlds could lose that unity.


*


The day of the performance arrived.


The lights in the Grand Theater dimmed. Row by row, the golden seats rose up along the curvature of the wall and stopped at different heights. The domed ceiling was as dark as the empyrean until silvery lights, starlike, peeked out. The whole theater seemed suspended in space.


At one end of the egg-shaped dome appeared the image of Earth, and at the other end was red Mars. Gradually both approached the audience, becoming clearer in their view.


One planet was blue and green, veiled in wisps of white clouds; the other was red soil and shadow-limned mountains. Two giant planets loomed at the two ends of the theater while the audience between them drifted like insignificant specks of space dust, floating on gravity waves. The whole theater was solemn and dark, and music filled the hall.


Luoying was backstage, preparing for her performance. Mars, Yinghuo, she repeated to herself.


Red land, home in the darkness.


Her first Mars was the glowing dot in the sky, glimpsed hazily from the ground. It was a form clear on the tongue but blurred in the mind, a childhood memory that could not be pinned down, each and every dusk devoted to remembering and to the suppression of those memories.


Her second Mars was the strange description in books, the odd world depicted in videos and images. It was blood exploding in vacuum; numbers; thunderous, continuous warfare. It was the tremble of fear in people’s voices, the curious questions of children and their fantasies of evil. It was the ancient god of war, an old enemy.


Her third Mars was the window that let in starlight and sunlight, the small plaza seen through the open shutters, the fanshaped lawn in the plaza, the white flowers on the lawn, the tube train speeding beyond the flowers, the glass houses connected by the tube train tunnels, the crystal city made from all the glass houses, the only republic in which the girls grew up, studied, dreamed, designed, created, married, made a home, chose a life. It was an ordinary life, a simple home.


Mars. Yinghuo. One thousand and eight hundred days of separation. Red land, home in the darkness.


Luoying stood backstage, just out of the audience’s view. She stretched out her arms, her wrists together before her chest, fingers splayed away from each other. In the darkness, the golden threads in her cuffs glowed faintly like the Milky Way across the night sky over a wilderness. Gradually, the dark theater was filled with a soundscape: howling winds, a distant clarion, cowhide drums, and singing zither. Elders telling legends from a thousand years ago by the sea, blood and glory trembling between teeth and tongue, dead souls dancing in the wind. The clarion faded as a bamboo flute began to play. Memory traversed space, and the show began.


It was such a familiar tune. Luoying remembered every rise and fall in the melody, every hidden embellishment. She could recite every myth and truth recounted by the music.


The flute stopped. Luoying leaped and landed on the stage with the first boom of the timpani.


This was finally her dance. The world had vanished, leaving only her. Scenes of both planets merged into her solo dance. She remembered every country she passed through. This was her fate, her soul’s journey. She could no longer live within the order that governed her homeland, but she would always remember her homeland’s dreams. She carved those dreams into her bones and packed all the countries into her self.


When she could no longer assimilate into any world, she wished she could live like her parents and their teacher, a vagabond at heart, gazing at home from afar.


*


The moment she fell, she heard a low cry. She couldn’t tell where it had come from or who it was. She only knew that as she landed against the hard surface of the stage, someone held her up by the shoulders from behind.


From the moment she had leaped onto the stage, she felt off. Her body felt too light, and she couldn’t exert force against the ground properly to propel herself. She seemed to be always behind the music by a fraction of a beat.


A drum section was coming up, and she knew that she had to leap into the air to spin seven times. She prepared herself and pushed off her toes.


In that instant she lost all feeling in her toes. After she spun through the air, as she landed, her right foot refused to obey her.


She crashed to the ground, and a sharp pain wracked her body.


Bright lights came on, blinding her. She saw Eko behind herself, holding her up by the shoulders. Many others were rushing onto the stage.