THE REGISTRY OF FILES




By the time Luoying and Chania sat down together atop the watchtower, stars had filled the sky. They were so bright that it was painful to look at them directly, to see the Milky Way cross from left to right like a belt in the empyrean dome. The view from the watchtower included most of Mars City, now brightly lit, and the two friends seemed suspended between two starry seas, one above, one below, with the lone metallic ladder of the watch-tower at their feet. They experienced the illusion of being far away from home.


“At first, I seized on the simplest explanation. Perhaps Grandfather thought the trip to Earth would be such a wonderful learning opportunity that he had to use his authority to give me the chance.”


“A wonderful learning opportunity?” Chania looked at her with a smirk. “If I had been the consul, my top priority would have been to make sure my granddaughter stayed as far from the Mercury Group as possible.”


Chania was a gymnast. The two were the only female athletes in the group. She understood the pain that Luoying had gone through on Earth.


Luoying shook her head. “It’s possible, isn’t it? Surely the committee didn’t know how hard it would be, and maybe they really hoped we’d learn something useful.” “I hope so,” said Chania softly.


Chania was never afraid of following logic to a cold, heartless conclusion, but Luoying was different. It wasn’t that she couldn’t think of terrifying possibilities, but that she didn’t want to. She didn’t know why; it was just the way she was. She saw it as a weakness in herself, the way she subconsciously avoided certain facts. She hated the idea that she was just a living experiment, a specimen. She lacked Chania’s strength to face the truth.


“But after I remembered that recording . . . I couldn’t think that way anymore. Even if the organizers didn’t know how difficult things would be on Earth, that wasn’t why Grandfather sent me. One month after I saw that recording, I was placed in the Mercury Group. That can’t be a coincidence.”


“I agree with you.”


“My grandfather was afraid of having me find out more . . . But what was it?”


“I don’t think it’s that hard to guess. He didn’t want you to know that he was the one who sentenced your mom and dad to death.”


“No! Not death. He sentenced them to mining.”


“What’s the difference? The mining ships on Deimos have accidents all the time.”


“But I can’t be sure the recording was of my parents’ punishment. I didn’t hear what was said, and in any event I was too young to understand it. Maybe my parents’ names were mentioned.”


“They were probably worried you’d dig deeper.”


“If it was just my grandfather, I guess I wouldn’t be so shaken. But Rudy was in on it, too. He had probably known it for a long time, but he kept it from me, along with my grandfather.”


“It’s possible that your brother even knew why they had been punished.”


Luoying had asked to see Chania because she wanted her help in figuring out what kind of crime would result in her parents being sentenced to mining on a moon until they died. The two of them had been puzzling over the matter for some time already, but weren’t any closer to an answer.


They had seen few instances of criminal punishment as they were growing up. The most that they recalled was of someone getting extra work in the workshops or being denied the right to share their creations for a period of time. Life on Mars tended to be peaceful and regular, with little crime or conflict. Luoying couldn’t imagine what her parents had done. The two of them had always loved life, and there weren’t any black marks in their files. They had always garnered awards and honors—until they received their sentence. They had been mining for less than a year before the accident happened.


The only thing that seemed remotely related was the fact that her mother had refused to register with an atelier.


Looking up at the stars, she asked, “Do you think not registering is a crime?”


Chania laughed. “If so, then I think I’m going to be punished.”


“You haven’t registered either?”


“Nope.”


“Same here.”


“I don’t think anyone in our group has.”


“Really?” Luoying was amazed. “I didn’t know that . . . So everyone is just dragging it out?”


“Yep. Anka almost got expelled.”


“What? When?”


“He didn’t tell you?” Chania looked surprised. “The day he got back, he got into a huge fight with Captain Fitz. I heard that after the banquet his squadron was supposed to fly around the hotel where the Terran delegations are staying and put on a demonstration of force. Anka refused. How can a soldier refuse a direct command? You can imagine what happened after that.”


“So that’s what happened . . .”


It was odd to hear what Anka had done from someone else. To be sure, she wasn’t particularly socially active and relied on others to tell her gossip. But even so, the Anka in others’ stories wasn’t like the Anka she knew. She always thought of him as someone who didn’t let anything bother him. Now she recalled that on Earth there was a time when he had left the group after an argument. Chania always knew what was happening with everyone and kept her in the loop.


“You know, maybe not registering really is a big deal,” said Chania suddenly.


“How do you mean?”


“Let’s take regular crimes: stealing, taking advantage of someone’s mistake, things like that. Usually it’s just an isolated incident, and everyone knows it’s wrong. A simple penalty is enough. But it’s different when it’s a . . . matter of ideology. That represents a challenge to our way of life. If ideological rebels spread their ideas around, it would become a threat to the whole system. To reject the need to organize life around the ateliers could be viewed as an ideological revolution.”


Luoying remained silent. Chania’s words reminded her of the Reversionist friends she had met on Earth.


“I’m just guessing, mind you,” said Chania.


“I was just thinking today,” said Luoying, “that the biggest problem with our world is that you can’t think it’s not good. Everyone must pick an atelier, must live the way we’re supposed to live. The more I think about it, the more scared I become. If your guess is right and refusal to register is a capital crime, then . . . we don’t even have the freedom to leave the system. What a terrifying world.”


“Did you start thinking like this only after you got back?” asked Chania.


Luoying nodded.


“It’s the same with me,” said Chania. “I feel awful. After everything we’ve been through, to finally get home, only to find out that I can’t stand the place . . .”


“You know, if one could live only by instinct, that would be true happiness,” said Luoying.


Chania chortled. “I think we said the same thing to each other four years ago.”


Luoying smiled. “Exactly. I guess we’re both a bit too old for that kind of sentiment now.”


They had grown out of the habit of making grand summaries about life. Having seen so many perplexing and troubling things in life, it was no longer easy to summarize it. Four years earlier they had summarized the life of Terrans with the overconfidence of youth, but the mood tonight was so different.


Chania turned to regard her. “What do you want more than anything else right now?”


“To get out.”


Chania laughed. “Same here.”


Luoying looked up and touched the cold, hard glass dome overhead. “Too bad we’ll never get out again.”


The four watchtowers of Mars City were the tallest structures in the city. Like four guardian deities, they stood at the cardinal points. The two of them liked to climb up here because they could touch the glass dome that separated Mars City from the outside, could feel the border that remained intangible during their daily routines. Without a thick atmosphere, the stars appeared particularly bright and didn’t twinkle.


“That’s why we want to get out even more,” said Chania. “When you were on Earth, did you argue with them about life here being so much better? I sure did. I told them how safe it was here, how little crime we had, how everyone on Mars was a moral person. But it wasn’t until yesterday that I realized none of this had anything to do with the advanced state of Martian ethical development. No one commits crimes here because there’s nowhere to run to. We’re all stuck, and sooner or later we know we’ll be caught.” Sadness clouded her gaze. “You have to live the way you’re supposed to because there’s no getting out.”


Both fell silent. Chania’s long chestnut hair was loose and swayed gently in the air.


They hadn’t talked like this, about life, in a long while. When they first got to Earth, they loved to engage in long, deep discussions after experiencing every new job, after seeing every new thing. They tried to extract principles, to declaim about the kind of life they wished to lead. But such discussions grew rare over time. They had little control over their own lives. Regardless of the variety of possible lifestyles, the choices open to the individual were so few.


Still, they had witnessed those possibilities.


On Mars, life was a matter of tradition. Every child’s path was similar to every other child’s: go to school at age six, volunteer for public service at nine, start to think about one’s future direction at twelve, be excited with the first set of electives at thirteen. Students could choose to intern at different ateliers, and once they had accumulated enough credits, they could pick areas of interest to study in depth, write papers, assist more experienced professionals, and then decide on an atelier. They also worked in stores, workshops, mining stations—but those experiences were also part of the atelier internships. They were volunteers aiming to acquire experience. No one did anything useless; no one went off on their own. Everyone ended up at a permanent atelier, with a number, a file in the Registry, a straight road that one followed until death.


But on Earth, as Luoying drifted about, she saw people doing anything they wanted. Every time she settled in a new place, she found a new group of friends. They never signed long-term contracts with any employer but filled their time by sometimes waiting on tables, sometimes freelancing articles, sometimes making deliveries or running errands, sometimes volunteering for the government, sometimes buying and selling on the black market, sometimes selling their own IPs on the web. They lived from day to day, hopping from city to city, wolfing down fast food at airports, attending galas in fancy hotels, buying cigarettes with the last of their paychecks, getting into business with someone they had just met. Their professions were as fleeting as flirty glances: the moment there was a spark, they shifted their attention elsewhere.


Such a life of uncertainty entranced her. It was such a contrast to the life in the platonic garden of idealized creation that she had grown up in. The two collided like air masses in her heart, and a tempestuous storm was the result.


And so her experience on Earth was the combination of two kinds of adjustment, opposite in direction. While she had to adjust to a far more primitive mode of life filled with inconveniences, she also had to adjust to a far more complex lifestyle. Mars City was much more advanced than cities on Earth in infrastructure and operation, but the lifestyle on Mars was older and simpler.


In Luoying’s eyes, Martians had Apollonian clarity, while Terrans had Dionysian frenzy. A ten-year-old Martian child knew Aristotelian logic, Hammurabi’s code, the Jacobins and the Bourbon Restoration, as well as the rest of the development of human history and art. Everyone sat at their own desk to study or stood around a table in a coffee lounge to debate philosophy, to discuss the manifestations of the universal Will in spiritual history, to deliberate over the succession of civilizations and the role of consciousness in human history. Martians worshipped great ideas, art, and invention. Every Martian asked themselves: Why am I doing this?


What value does this action contribute to the progress of civilization?


Terrans were not like that at all.


The first thing Luoying learned to do on Earth was how to party. She went drinking with the other girls of the dance troupe and their friends and ingested a hallucinogen that was not powerful enough to be illegal. She drifted in an altered state of consciousness, feeling closer to the divine. She listened to the others laugh, share jokes, sing loudly, and watched them twist and grind on the dance floor. No one asked anyone else who, what, where, why, but simply luxuriated in the collective release of their bodies. They hugged and kissed, followed their feelings and interests, and forgot as soon as they were done. They displayed the beauty of each individual body to its fullest extent, unified the self with the universe, and equated a moment of joy with cosmic eternity.


She was a quick student and soon was partying as hard as her friends. She never asked them Why are we doing this? What value do our actions contribute to the progress of human history? She understood, without asking, that such questions were meaningless in the frenzy of their passion.


There was alcohol served on Mars, but few ever got drunk. All the children of the Mercury Group had to survive the shock of encountering this new lifestyle. And they couldn’t avoid the question: Did life exist in order to create grand histories and artistic masterpieces, or was life itself all the meaning it needed? They hesitated, remained silent among the crowd, sober among the frenzied, drunk while studying; they lost all faith in a flash.


Luoying had to find out why she had been sent to Earth. She didn’t want to be a playing piece in someone else’s game. Once she would have accepted the fate she was assigned, but no longer. She had to know if there was a reason.


Oh, ye gods of Olympus, she thought, have you ever thought that one day a group of children would vacillate between your sobriety and frenzy, unable to choose?


*


Before she arrived at Uncle Laak’s office, Luoying tried to compose herself on the tube train. She deliberately picked the wrong destination station, twice, so that she came to the Registry by the most roundabout way possible. Otherwise, the trip would have taken only five minutes. The tube trains always picked the most optimal route, giving riders no time to think and plan.


She hesitated, trying to decide if she really wanted to pursue her inquiry.


She felt herself approaching a border, heading toward a question that did not exist in ordinary life but only appeared in the contrast of change. She was still a person who didn’t officially exist.


Without registering, she had no account, no identity in the system. She was someone standing outside the system, a potential challenger.


“Refusal to register,” she whispered to herself. Was this a great crime? Was this a challenge to the existing order of the world? Was this enough reason to force Grandfather to exile Mom and Dad, to make him fear her? Why did the system care so much about a nine-digit number?


She had heard certain stories on Earth, stories about something called the Age of Machines. The faces of the tellers were full of fear as they described a world in which the machines imprisoned everyone and treated individuals as interchangeable components to be exploited and discarded. Freedom and dignity had been suppressed out of existence. They told her that Mars was the example par excellence of such a world.


The tellers of these stories had never been to Mars, but they described its ills to her as though they knew her world better than she did. Eventually she grew used to these stories, knowing that the tellers were merely ignorant, not malicious. But she began to fear that they were telling the truth. She asked herself, if she truly lived in a world created by an evil regime, what should she do?


Luoying had so many questions, but most she dared not ask. Many Terrans had told her that Hans Sloan was a dictator. They spoke with such conviction. She dared not ask him, and didn’t want to ask him. Her grandfather’s blood flowed through her veins as well, and her doubt could never be voiced in a direct confrontation.


In the memories of her childhood, Grandfather was the protector of Mars. She did not believe that he was a dictator, but some details aroused her doubt. Grandfather was a warrior, one of the last pilots to fly during the war. He was a survivor, a victor, and a man who had done his duty. After the war he became an industrial pilot and guided mining ships between the moons of Mars and Mars itself. He had flown to Jupiter to explore, to the asteroids to gather water, to the moons to build bases. He began as a test pilot and then rose through the ranks until he led a fleet and directed the technological development of the entire Flight System.


For most of his life, Hans flew alone. Only in middle age did he go into politics as a legislator, and then a system director, until finally he became consul at the age of sixty. When Luoying was a little girl, she remembered seeing Grandfather at his desk, reading and writing until late into the night, or talking with others. Even when she and her parents visited him, sometimes he had to leave because there were urgent matters that needed his attention. His personal space stored as much material as an entire school. Luoying did not believe he was a dictator because he simply worked too hard.


But she couldn’t be sure. There was evidence pointing the other way: her place in the Mercury Group, her parents’ deaths, the very operation of the central archive itself.


She had to get to the bottom of her doubts.


The tube train glided through the smooth tunnels like a drop of water. Enveloped by air, it didn’t even make any noise. When she was a child, Luoying had not realized how quiet the world she grew up on was. Mars had no high-speed elevators, no noisy crowds, no cars, and no airplanes. All she knew were refined, delicate houses, glass, gardens full of footpaths, shops with no cashiers, coffee lounges, cinemas with no ticket booths, and transparent tubes filled with water-drop trains. All she knew were people who studied, worked, thought, conversed. There was no marijuana; there were no screams, no naked bodies dancing in frenzy, suspended between sleep and wakefulness. No noise; only tranquility.


Around the city Luoying rode, from light into shadows, from shadows back into light. The outline of the train car grew hazy with the shifting light. Finally, she made her decision and pressed the button for the Montesquieu Registry of Files, where Uncle Laak worked.


She needed answers. Though she didn’t like facing the absurd reality, she was even more terrified of ignorance, of never knowing. To doubt one’s own life was the worst of fears. She could not go on living in suspense.


As the Registrar of Files, Uncle Laak was in charge of the heart of the Martian system of files. More than anyone else, he was more familiar with those numbers that determined one’s identity. The numbers were beehives arranged around him in a dense phalanx, a phalanx of lives in which he was the hub. In front of him was an ancient desk with a cracked top, but it was dustless and everything on it was arranged neatly.


“Please, sit.”


Laak pointed to the chair before the desk. Luoying sat down, her back straight.


“I’ve read your letter and I know what you are looking for,” he said.


Luoying said nothing, but her heart pounded. The sun was shining into the corner of her eye and she couldn’t see everything clearly.


“Are you sure about this?” Luoying nodded.


“All right, then,” said Laak. “But let me explain something. We encounter many puzzles in life, but not every question must be pursued to the bitter end.”


“There’s a difference between knowing and not knowing.”


“Actually, there’s not much difference.”


“There is.”


“The difference doesn’t matter . . . once you’ve seen enough.”


Luoying gazed at Uncle Laak. His long, slender fingers were laced together on the desk, and his expression was somber. He sat very straight, as though a bowl of water were placed on top of his head. But for some reason, she thought his posture reminded her of prayer, with his hands together on the desk. There was a suffering look in his eyes, mysterious but clear, that came through the circular lenses of his glasses, through his laced fingers, through the air that divided them. She believed that he hoped she would see the pain.


Unlike Uncle Juan, Uncle Laak never showed his emotions. He never shouted, never laughed uproariously. His expression always resembled something carved out of an ancient stump, unchanging. She was sure that he wanted her to see the pain that was now in his eyes.


His face was long, with prominent cheekbones. The hair on his head was growing sparse and turning gray, as though singed by mental overexertion. He waited for her answer.


“I want to know.”


“All right.”


He stood up and touched the wall. The protective wallpaper slid away, revealing a metallic grid that filled the whole wall like filing cabinets. Each rectangle was brown in color, with a golden edge. A ringlike handle sat in the middle of each rectangle with a white placard beneath. Though it was all simulated, everything looked so real that she thought she could reach up and pull open the drawers.


The whole wall was like that, and the effect on Luoying was overwhelming. Laak walked along the wall, glancing at the markings on the white placards. He stopped and touched one of the rectangles, entering a few commands. Behind the wall, a droning noise grew.


Soon a sheet of electronic paper slid out of the slot at the side of the rectangle.


Laak picked up the sheet and handed it to Luoying. She received it carefully, like a bowl filled to the brim. She stared at it without blinking. The sheet showed her examination from five years earlier and the score. The number was incontrovertibly clear against the clear glass fiber; each stroke like a tiny knife cut into her heart.


She read over the sheet several times before looking up. She had already known what the number would tell her, but now she had confirmation.


“Why was I substituted in?”


Laak shook his head. “I can give you the facts, but I can’t give you the reasons.”


“I want to know who the other student was.”


“What other student?”


“The one who should have gone to Earth. The one whose fate was exchanged with mine.”


A moment of hesitation. “I don’t know.”


“That’s impossible!” Luoying blurted. “You were the one in charge of administering the exam.” She realized how disrespectful she sounded. She hated the way she always lost control when she was confused. She turned her face away to calm herself.


Uncle Laak’s eyes now looked pitying, with a trace of anguish.


“Even if I knew,” he said, “I couldn’t tell you. You have the right to view your own file. I don’t have the right to tell you what’s in anyone else’s file.”


Luoying looked down at her own hands. She was sitting in an old-fashioned office chair with high armrests. Sitting in it was like being hugged by it. Luoying felt that she needed such a hug. When a suspended crag finally smashed into the sea, it would start a tsunami in the deep.


“Uncle Laak,” she asked, “am I allowed to see anyone else’s file?”


“You’re not.”


“Not even family?”


“No.”


“I thought our guiding principle was that everyone’s file is transparent.”


“That is true, but there are two conditions. Either the subject must voluntarily disclose the file, or the law must require such disclosure. Anything a citizen has created and wishes to share with others is public, as are policy proposals they make to the government, and the financial records related to their work and management responsibilities. But otherwise every citizen has the right to privacy. Most personal files are never made public and become part of historical memory. It has always been this way in every age.”


“So I can’t even see my parents’ files.”


“Not unless they made them public.”


“I tried to look for information on my mother, but all the public records stopped two years before her death, when she left her atelier. I don’t know what happened to her after that. It’s as though those two years never existed.”


Laak looked sympathetic, but his voice remained neutral. “I’m sorry.”


“But why?”


“The public records are drawn from her work at the atelier. Once she was no longer registered, there would be no more records.”


“In other words, to the system, a person without an atelier is no different from a dead body.”


“You can put it that way.”


Sunlight slanted through the window, dispassionately slicing the wall with geometric precision. The grid of filing rectangles in the shadow resembled a bottomless sea. She knew that Uncle Laak was correct; everything he said was correct—so correct that it drove her to despair.


“Is that what it means to be registered?”


“Not entirely.”


“Then what is the meaning of registration?”


“The distribution of resources. The fair, open, transparent distribution of resources. The system guarantees that everyone receives what they should—not one penny more, not one penny less. No secrets or omissions.”


“We get paid according to age. What does that have to do with registration and ateliers?”


“You’re talking about the living expenses stipend, which is a vanishingly small portion of the total capital in the system. That part indeed has nothing to do with registration and is based solely on age. But when you become an adult, you realize that living expenses are not the bulk of the amount of capital you may allocate in society. Most of a citizen’s economic activity involves research funds, creation and production costs, the purchase of raw materials and the sale of finished goods, and so on. The flow of capital occurs strictly within the framework of ateliers, although the ateliers merely deploy capital, which ultimately flows back to the collective. This is the only way to ensure a single, consistent accounting. Without a registered account number, the system won’t allow you to participate.”


“Why can’t anyone just conduct research on their own, outside the system?”


“You can do that if you wish, but then you may only use your living expenses stipend and can’t tap into any public funding. If we allow a single breach to develop in the dam that keeps public wealth out of private hands, then corruption, hoarding, and greed will pour through like a flood.”


“If someone doesn’t want any public funding, is it a crime to not register?”


“No, it’s not a crime.”


“They won’t be exiled?”


“They will not.”


“Then why did my mother and father die?”


It took all of Luoying’s courage to ask this last question. She bit her bottom lip, slightly dry due to her anxiety, as her heart pounded against her rib cage. Contrary to her expectation, Laak didn’t look surprised. He continued to sit quietly, his posture erect, with no change in his expression or voice. He had been prepared for the question.


“They died from an unfortunate accident. I share your grief.”


“That’s not what I meant. I’m asking why they were punished and sent to the mining ship.”


“As I’ve told you, I can only tell you facts, not reasons.”


“Then tell me what the charge brought against them was.”


“Threat to national security.”


“What threat? How?”


“I can’t elaborate beyond what I’ve told you.”


Laak’s voice had grown softer. Luoying felt an invisible rope suspended between them, with each pulling on one end. But the rope refused to budge even one millimeter. She choked back tears. Laak poured her a cup of tea without speaking. She shook her head, refusing to accept.


She looked into his eyes, pleading. “Uncle Laak, I’d like to ask you something else.”


“What is it?”


“Is my grandfather a dictator?”


Laak gazed at her as though trying to ascertain the motivation behind her question.


At length, he spoke in a voice as dry and dispassionate as a textbook, and as unreal as an unearthed antique in the fading Martian sunlight. “We have to start from the definition. From the time of Plato’s Republic, the meaning of ‘dictator’ has not changed much. If someone could enact laws and execute them at will, without any checks and balances, then by consensus, they are a dictator.


“So let’s take a look at your grandfather. He cannot enact criminal laws at will because such laws must be proposed by the directors of the Security System. He cannot alter policy arbitrarily because every system has its sphere of autonomy, and cross-system policy changes require the consent of the Boule as a whole. Matters affecting the planet must be put to a vote involving the entire populace. He is under constant oversight: the central archive records and publicizes everything he says or does, every expenditure he authorizes. Do you think he is a dictator, then?”


“Then why can’t I see my grandfather’s file? I’m part of that oversight, aren’t I?”


Laak spoke slowly. “That’s different. Everyone’s life has a private part, a part that belongs only to memory. That part is like the reef under the sea, while we only have the right to monitor the ships on the surface. No one has the right to pry into his life outside of his official duties.”


Luoying bit her bottom lip. Laak’s words were like the gridded ocean behind him, bottomless.


“What’s contained in these files?”


“Memories. Time’s memories.”


“Why don’t they have such files on Earth?”


“They do. You just haven’t seen them.” Laak’s voice grew even more patient and slow. “You’ve been to Earth, so you know how helpful our files are. When a person switches from one atelier to another, they don’t need to provide any proof of identity or open new bank accounts and switch household registration records. All that is needed is a change in the atelier’s record, and everything happens automatically in the background. Don’t you find this convenient? The unified system of centralized record keeping makes it possible and ensures that we can establish each person’s true credit history.”


“Yes, that is true.” Luoying knew that Laak was right. On Earth, when she changed jobs, she had to take a whole stack of documents from one office to another to prove she was who she was, to introduce herself, to be interrogated by bureaucrats, to answer the same set of questions again and again, to be surrounded by suspicion, to be drowned in form after form. She had witnessed the frauds and disguises enabled by such a system. Yes, Uncle Laak was right, but that wasn’t her question.


“What I’m trying to understand is this: Why must we assign a single number to every person, a static space, an identity tied to an atelier? Why can’t we move around as we please, to forget the past and to re-create the self? Why can’t we be free?”


“You can do as you like, and you are free to re-create yourself,” said Laak, whose voice took on an enigmatic air. “But you are not allowed to forget the past.”


The rays of the setting sun were almost parallel with the ground, and deepening shadows made the ceiling seem even higher. Laak still sat erect in his gray suit jacket and his plain white shirt, the cuffs and collar neatly buttoned. Through his blackframed glasses, he looked at Luoying with pity, as though he wanted to tell her so many things while saying nothing. His hands were flattened against the desk, and his slim fingers resembled ancient quills lying still.


Luoying noticed the columns in the office for the first time. Like other columns in Martian buildings, they concealed the electrons speeding through the wires within. But these resembled the columns in ancient Greek temples, sacred and stately. The desk, though made of glass, looked indistinguishable from wood. The penholder on the desk had enigmatic patterns on its surface. Everything in the room hinted at the weight of history, like the figure of Uncle Laak himself.