SAND




Hugging the rim, the big ship slowly patrolled inside the crater. Second by second, it approached their position.


Anka and Luoying concealed themselves behind piles of loose rocks on the ledge. The big ship didn’t extend any visible probes, but they didn’t know if it had other sensors scanning the area. From where they were, it was impossible to see Runge’s mining ship. Hopefully he had managed to find some secluded hiding spot. They didn’t know why the big ship was here, but instinct told them that it was best to not be found.


“Do you think it’s here to look for us?” asked Luoying.


“I don’t know,” said Anka. “We slipped away from the city without triggering any alarms, so I don’t think this is meant for us.”


Luoying nodded. “I agree. I can’t imagine they’d go to so much trouble for a bunch of teenagers.”


“Well, I don’t know if that’s true,” said Anka.


“Even if we’re found, they’ll just take us back, right? It’s no big deal.”


“I just don’t know.”


“We’ve had a very successful day,” said Luoying. “We flew; we saw the ruins. Even if we have to go back, I don’t mind.”


“We don’t know what the ship is doing here. Most likely it has nothing to do with us. But it would be better if we aren’t found and can go back to the city on our own terms.”


“All right. Let’s wait a bit.”


The sun was low in the west, and the shadows on the cliffside grew deeper and sharper. The big ship made it most of the way around the crater without stopping as it passed directly below them. Continuing west, it stopped in the middle of the crater. An antenna extended out of the bow of the ship and swung around in a circle before retracting.


The ship stayed still. For Luoying, leaning against Anka, the moment seemed to last forever.


The evening wind picked up. Loose sand, swept up in the gusts, struck the hull of the ship, the only movement in the crater.


Finally the big ship began to move again. Slowly it departed the crater the way it had come. Luoying let out a sigh and relaxed. The westering sun shone on the stern of the ship, casting a long shadow ahead of the hull on the yellow sand, like a long, black sword probing over the ground.


*


The wind grew—not the warm rising currents of the afternoon, but the chaotic turbulence of the cooling air of nightfall.


The swirling gusts, sweeping off the ground, filled the air with sand. Loose pebbles rolled along sloping surfaces, and sand scraped past their survival suits like streams of refugees escaping war. Red dust coated their visors. Shielding Luoying with his body, Anka guided her deeper inside the mouth of the cave. They crouched behind a pile of loose rubble. From time to time, a strong gust dislodged some pebbles from the top, and Anka would raise an arm protectively over Luoying’s head.


Leaning against Anka’s shoulder, Luoying suddenly thought that her own great-grandmother probably felt just as protected and safe during that storm decades ago.


*


The longest half hour of Luoying’s life later, Runge’s voice crackled to life in their headsets.


“Luoying, Anka, Mira, Sorin, report! Are you all right?”


Anka jumped up. “Luoying and I are fine. Where are you?”


“We went through a canyon and found a whole new world— never mind, I’ll give you the details later. We’re coming back to get you now. Can you land safely?”


They leaned over the ledge and saw that the mining ship was swaying into view. In the twilight, the ship’s outline was blurred. Anka and Runge spoke over the comm link, making preparations for opening the airlock to welcome Anka and Luoying.


Anka leaped down from the ledge and descended slowly toward the mining ship. Luoying took a deep breath and followed.


All of a sudden she felt her body pelted by a torrent of sand. Before she could react, she found herself falling, out of control as she lost all sense of balance. Her vision was a blur, and she didn’t even have time to be scared.


The next minute was all chaos: strong currents gripping her legs like invisible claws; red sand; clashing winds; massive turbulence; wings out of control; being thrown; sky where the ground was supposed to be and vice versa; the red cliffside looming into view; an arm grabbing her around the waist and letting go; someone holding her up; the sensation of two feet on solid ground and the instinctive tensing of muscles as her fingers found something to grab on to.


By the time she finally recovered, Luoying found herself lying prone on a slope, hands tightly clutching protruding rocks. Her wings were hopelessly vibrating on her back. Next to her was Anka, crouching in a similar pose. Sand and gravel rolled past them in streams.