ROCK




When she was discharged, Luoying didn’t think she would be returning to the hospital for a while. But at the Registry she had read something about Dr. Reini, an episode in Reini’s past that he hadn’t told her. She decided to go ask him about it.


Two days after she left the place, she once again pushed open the hospital doors. She cared about this episode not only because it was the reason Reini became a doctor but also because it had to do with Hans Sloan. In fact, the event was the key that linked them. Because of it, Reini chose to specialize in neurology and ended up treating her. Because of it, Reini came to know Hans and won his friendship and trust, therefore receiving the privilege of accessing the Registry of Files. Because of this connection, her grandfather entrusted her to Reini, and Reini gave her the power to see the files. Everything depended on this occurrence in the past.


And it turned out to be an error. Luoying found the situation worth pondering. Whose error was it? She couldn’t say. There was apparently no villain, but Reini had been harmed and lost much in life.


Luoying read Reini’s file. As a young man, he had studied in the labs of many systems, ranging from the machine center to the Classical Philosophy Atelier, until he picked biomimetic engineering as his concentration at eighteen and, thereafter, at age twenty, entered the production lab of the biomimetic engineering center, where he studied animals and machines, their structures and locomotion.


The third year after he joined the lab, a mining vehicle suffered an accident: a biomimetic quarry machine exploded and burned up during trials. Though there were no casualties, the damage to equipment was considerable. The investigators combed through the burned and broken remains slowly until they isolated the cause of the incident to an electrical leak in a sensor subsystem. Due to the extensive fire that melted many of the components, it was not an easy investigation, and the precise cause—a design flaw, a production error, or a mistake during assembly—could not be determined.


As always happened after every major accident, despite the uncertainties, a committee was formed to hold those responsible accountable. After three days of detailed testimony from dozens at all levels of the system, and another three days of discussions between the Boule investigative committee and the consul, the final result was announced: only Reini would be punished.


“How did they determine it was your fault?” asked Luoying.


“They couldn’t.”


“Then why were you punished?”


“Someone always has to be punished after an accident.”


Reini put down the sculpting knife. His tone was placid, emotionless. More than ten years had passed since the accident, and he wasn’t expecting anyone to bring it up again. He saw the expression on Luoying’s face, an expression of genuine concern and confusion, which moved him. Once, many asked him about what had happened; some asked out of pity, while others asked out of politeness. Very few truly thought about his situation.


“Only the person responsible should be punished,” insisted Luoying. “How could they scapegoat a random person?”


“But it was impossible, given the wreckage, to determine the precise source of the malfunction.”


“I read the defense report you drafted for yourself. You offered persuasive reasons for why the design wasn’t at fault.”


“I suppose I did.”


“Then why did you retract it later?”


Reini didn’t answer right away. The events of those tense days replayed in his mind.


“Let me try to explain this to you through . . . accounting. At the time, it was necessary that some form of punishment be imposed. But the question was how many would be punished. If the problem was with the design, then the only one punished would be me. But if the issue was with production, then many more would have to be held accountable.”


*


Reini was the designer of the component at fault, a key sensor in the quarry machine. On the day of the committee meeting, leaders from both systems involved in the quarry operation were seated solemnly at the table. The legislators presided over the meeting while a row of observers from the Security System sat to the side. On the walls, videos of the production process played, and a prototype of the destroyed machine sat at the center of the chamber, with everyone gathered around like hunters encircling a captured beast. Reini sat in the back of the gallery as everyone listened to the investigators give their reports. As analyses and summaries circled the air, his childhood habit resurfaced, and once again words and phrases began to pile up in his heart like building blocks.


On Mars, holding responsible individuals accountable was taken extremely seriously. After every failed trial or accident, an exacting investigation followed. Reini had tried to understand the meaning behind this cultural obsession. It came not only from the meticulousness required of engineering projects but the very operation of the Martian system.


The Martian system was at once a government and an enterprise, and everyone’s survival required its stable operation. Quality assurance was vital to this goal. But in a production team monopolized by the system, there were no customers to win over and no competitors to keep one honest, and it would be easy to compromise quality and to cover up mistakes and negligence without a powerful and severe accountability system. Since resources were so constrained on Mars, to ensure efficiency, ateliers only competed for funding at the planning stage. Once a project was funded, it was the only one of its kind to go into production, and the production team had to be fully accountable for the results.


The reality that the system was equivalent to the entire industry had two consequences. On the one hand, the system and every atelier in the system, like any team, had a tendency to protect its members. On the other hand, the system, as the representative of every citizen in every area of life, had to ensure the fair and just application of the law. Thus, the system imposed on every high-level administrator a double identity: insider and outsider, leader and investigator, protector and punisher. Even with the Security System in place, the duality persisted.


Accountability. The key was accountability. If one were accountable only to the team, then it was only necessary to optimize future production. But if one were accountable to those outside the team, to all the citizens of Mars, then it was necessary to pursue those responsible without regard to consequences.


At the time of the accident, to pursue management negligence, to punish the lack of care up and down the production chain, would have led to the loss of many individuals to the process, which would have been damaging to the project itself. And the leader of the project was the most authoritative expert in the field.


Accountability. To both inside and outside. In the back of the gallery, Reini pondered the subtle implications of the word. One investigator called on him and asked him a question. Still lost in his thoughts, he didn’t hear the whole question, only the last part. “. . . do you feel you bear responsibility?”


“Responsibility?” he answered almost instinctively. “What kind of responsibility?”


Was it responsibility to the elucidation of facts or to the need for production?


The investigator asked more questions and announced more conclusions, but again he heard only the last part.


“. . . your manager has the responsibility to deal with you appropriately.”


“What kind of responsibility?” he asked again.


Was it the responsibility to maintain the integrity of the system, or to maintain the stability of the system?


As sentence piled on sentence, forming an edifice, he didn’t know where to place his steel beam. The dual meanings split responsibility apart. Erecting the beam or laying it flat led to completely different results. Like a child, he hesitated, toy block in hand, trying to evaluate the different possibilities.


No one paid attention to him. The discussions and decisions continued; data and charts scrolled over the walls. The investigators, engineers, and legislators whispered and debated, looking serious. As Reini gazed at them, he felt very distant. Hair and beards turned into blurred images, and he had the distinct sensation that the final result was about to be announced.


Two days later Hans Sloan, the consul, visited Reini personally. Before he had said a word, Reini knew all that he needed to know. Hans pinned the medal for valor that he had won as a young man on Reini’s loose gray shirt, stating that it represented both gratitude and regret. The words on the medal spoke of Defense of the Homeland, not Defense of the Truth.


Reini was thus punished. In the end, the investigative committee concluded that the cause was negligent design, which resulted in the fewest people possible being punished. It was a critical time in Martian history, when the mining operation required every hand, and the project leader was the only one who could move it forward. Reini believed that his own design was not flawed, but he didn’t argue against the conclusion. Whether his design was problematic wasn’t the most important question; rather, the most important question was accountability. The fire had burned any clues left in the wreck into a tangled mess, but the Boule still had to pick a direction. They chose the responsibility to maintain the stability of the system, to protect the people needed for the greater good, to continue the production necessary for survival. Reini wasn’t a fool; he understood what was needed.


Hans, sitting across from Reini, looked down and sighed. As he looked at the old man, Reini felt a sudden pang of sympathy. He could tell that Hans hadn’t wanted to see such a result either, but he had come here to face Reini himself, to hand him the medal that he had earned by risking his life.


Since part of Reini’s punishment was removal from the engineering lab, Hans asked him which atelier he would prefer to join next, which Reini understood to be Hans’s way of apologizing. Since he had a childhood friend who was a neurologist at First Hospital in Salilo District, he decided to go join him there, switching from the senses of machines to the senses of humans.


He wasn’t angry. In any event, in a complicated structure of crisscrossing beams, there was no place to insert resentment. Once in a while he did feel desolate, much as he did as a child sitting by the playground, a thicket of towering equipment that was empty of the presence of people. Emptiness was not unusual, and neither were thickets; only when his individual emptiness met with the system’s thicket did he feel this sense of desolation.


In reality, Reini didn’t much care where he was assigned. He had grown tired of the pressure at the engineering lab, and he thought it would be nice to go somewhere else, to have more time for reading and writing. His life at the hospital was uneventful, and Hans occasionally stopped by to visit. Gradually they grew to be friends. Reini told him that he wanted to write history, and Hans gave him access rights to the Registry of Files.


*


“Don’t you feel unfulfilled?” asked Luoying.


Reini smiled. “To feel that requires one to fail to achieve what one wants to do or is suited to do. A piece of iron left out of the steel frame of a new edifice would feel unfulfilled, but a piece of stone would not feel the same.”


He picked up a small yellow sandy rock from the table and hefted it.


“Not everyone wants to be part of a steel frame,” he said. “I prefer to sculpt.”


Luoying picked up the rough, irregularly shaped rock and examined it. She sat down and placed both arms on his desk and rested her head on one hand. She gazed at the rock and then at Reini. She made as if to speak then, but in the end said nothing. Behind them, a lion sculpted out of sand watched them.


*


An hour later Luoying pushed open the door to the rehearsal space.


She was inside a large, abandoned warehouse. Tall black steel racks lined the walls, and the ground was a featureless gray expanse. In one corner of the vast, empty warehouse was a simple stage built from old racks torn off the walls.


Spotlights lit up the stage, which seemed tiny from where she was. Some figures were reciting lines on the stage, while others busied themselves below. From a tall rack behind the stage hung the backdrop, on which were painted a cartoonish palace and a throne. Two actors were rehearsing a scene: their voices, rising and falling, fast and slow, spiraled up into the air, surrounded by the noise of the rest of the crew, and echoed in the vast, open space.


Slowly she approached the stage, her shadow stretching behind her on the floor like a long, slender train.


“Luoying!”


Leon, hurrying toward the prop area, greeted her with a smile.


Dressed in a tuxedo, he was carrying a giant cardboard box in his arms, and sweat beaded on his brow. The tux, contrasted with the tools and random objects poking out of the box, brought to mind an elegant duke who suddenly decided to sample the pleasures of manual labor.


“Did you just get here?” said Mira, sitting at the lip of the stage. “You’re late!”


Like a hawker at some bazaar, Mira had spread out in front of him a brown cloth on which were scattered broken fragments of colorful glass. Though he was in costume, he wasn’t currently needed in a scene. Instead, he rested his chin in one hand and watched the stage without care, whispering from time to time with the stage manager next to him.


“You made it,” said Sorin, the director, running up to her. “Let me show you around.”


They kissed each other on the cheek. After asking about the progress of her recovery, Sorin pointed at the chorus standing at the back of the stage, showing Luoying her place. A hat kept his hair out of his lean face, and his bright eyes darted about with efficiency. As soon as he was done with Luoying, he ran for Kingsley, who was in charge of the lighting.


Luoying surveyed the stage. The chorus stood in two separate arcs at the back, surrounding the lead actors. One arc was dressed in white robes and the other in black, like two walls of angels observing the world. Anka’s tall figure, in a white robe, stood out at the center of the group on the left. Lyric sheets in hand, he nodded at her, his eyes glowing brightly out of the dimness in back of the stage.


She walked toward her assigned place with some trepidation, because it was her first rehearsal.


Standing next to the stairs at the left side of the stage, Anita was waiting for her cue with a large bedroll in her arms. She smiled at Luoying and glanced at her ankle with an inquiring look. Luoying nodded. “I feel good.”


Anita’s elaborate updo and heavy, exaggerated stage makeup made it clear that she was playing the role of a wealthy woman, a grand lady used to being obeyed.


“It’s a mess up there,” she said, indicating the stage with her chin and grinning.


“What’s happening?”


“Everyone’s just making it up as we go.”


“Isn’t there a script?”


“Well, yes, but there have been so many revisions that no one knows what’s the latest version.”


“Who are you playing?”


“A lawyer. Appropriate, no?”


Anita specialized in law. Luoying nodded and pointed to the bedroll she was carrying. “What’s that?” “A corpse.” Anita laughed.


Startled, Luoying was about to ask for elaboration, but Anita held up a finger to indicate that it was time for her entrance. She climbed up the stairs, swaying from side to side from the weight of the bedroll but planting each foot with determination.


Luoying followed Anita onto the stage. She edged her way to the back and joined the chorus next to Anka. He held up the lyric sheets so she could follow along.


She discovered that Anka had been right. The lyrics really were as simple as he had claimed. Most consisted of a single line: “Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful!” The paper was covered with repeated instances of that line, but there were notes explaining differences in emphasis and tone, the lines of the principals, and cues. Looking at Anka, she lifted a brow and smiled.


Together they looked to the center of the stage. Anita was just starting her monologue. Apparently she was a widow lamenting the death of her husband. The bedroll was unfurled on the stage, revealing a mannequin with thick eyebrows and a beard painted in black. Anita looked disconsolate and complained about how hard it was to make a living. Another actor approached, and after a few lines of dialogue her face broke into a joyous smile. She clapped her hands and circled the stage.


“Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful!” sang Anka and the whiterobed chorus.


Gradually, Luoying became immersed in the story taking shape onstage until it was reality and the rest of the world was forgotten. Since this was the first time she was seeing the play, she was surprised by many of the jokes and almost burst out laughing. In several places she wanted to exclaim “Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful!” without even needing to read the cues.


On the opposite side of the stage, the black-robed chorus was mostly singing “Ah, so great, so, so great!” at different lines. The two sets of singers wove a distant harmony and presented a neighboring contrast.


The plot slowly developed, sliding imperceptibly from farce to realism. At first Luoying had to tamp down the urge to laugh, but gradually she didn’t feel like laughing anymore. She sensed the bitterness under the surface, a rising sense of doom that seized her heart. Her voice grew a bit raspy. From the back of the stage, she saw, for the first time, a possible depiction of reality looming upon her.


At the end of the rehearsal, Luoying ran to the lip of the stage and asked the others, “What was that ending about?”


Chania, who was closest, answered calmly, “I didn’t get a chance to tell you about it the other day. Runge discovered something interesting.”


“What did he discover?”


“He read some notes written by his mom, who is one of the archivists for the diplomacy files, responsible for recording the details of various negotiations with Earth. Runge found out that three years earlier, when Mars was trying to purchase acetylene and methane from Earth, the negotiations reached an impasse for several months. The Terrans were concerned that it was a trick on the part of Mars, as the volatile cargo could be detonated during the delivery process to launch a surprise attack. From January to June, the negotiators just couldn’t make any progress.


“But then, a series of dramatic events occurred. On July twelfth, all the students from the Mercury Group went to North America for vacation. On July eighteenth, the final agreement was signed. On August first, Mars took delivery and the shipment began to sail for home. On August tenth, we returned to our temporary homes all over Earth. We had no idea what was going on at the time. But do you really think this sequence was a mere coincidence?”


“So . . . Runge concluded that we were hostages to guarantee the peaceful delivery of the cargo?” asked Luoying.


Chania nodded.


Luoying muttered to herself, “Following that logic, then for five years we were only hostages on Earth to allow trade to proceed. The idea of studying on Earth was simply a cover.”


Chania held her by the hand. “I know you don’t want to hear this . . . but if our theory is right, then your grandfather added you to the Mercury Group not because of your parents’ deaths but because you’re the consul’s granddaughter. Having you with us was a way to reassure the other parents so that they wouldn’t see the risks.”


“The risks . . .” Luoying’s mind was blank. “You’re saying the goal was to have me share the same risks as the rest of you.”


“And should it have been necessary, all of us would have been declared heroes of Mars after our deaths.”


“That’s terrifying!”


“We also hope it isn’t true,” interjected Sorin. “That’s why we changed the script and added this new ending. It’s a way to gauge the reactions of the top leaders. If our theory is merely the result of hyperactive imagination, then they’ll only be confused. But if our theory is true, they’ll likely explode in rage.”


“It’s not just aimed at your grandfather,” said Mira. “This is a test of the entire top leadership. It’s possible that the consul didn’t want to do this at all, but others did.”


Luoying nodded, her heart in tumult. Once again, she heard accusations and suspicions directed against her grandfather, raising her anxiety to a new peak. She didn’t want the others to see how unhappy she was, but she couldn’t find an excuse to get away. Even Anka was nowhere to be found.


She tried to change the subject. “What about the rest of the play? Where did the ideas come from?”


“Based on our personal experiences, of course. I bet you can tell which ones, too.”


“That part with Anita I figured is based on her note on the ‘copyright of works authored by the dead,’ right?”


“Ha! You’re right,” said Anita. “At the time I came up with that idea for fun, but just this week I heard that a representative in the U.S. Congress is bringing up a bill that essentially implements my idea! Had I known this, I would have figured out some way to secure the IP in my idea back then . . . Ah, I’d be so rich now, and the first holder of an ‘extraterrestrial copyright’ on Earth.” “See, we should put that in the play,” said Sorin.


“Forget it,” said Anita. “Aren’t you tired of it yet? You’ve added so many scenes the last couple days.”


The happy mood of her friends lifted Luoying’s spirits a little. “What about the part after that? Was that based on what happened to Runge?”


Anita nodded. “That’s also why the play is called Revolution.


Runge was part of a real revolution, and we have to commemorate it.”


“I don’t know if that was a ‘real’ revolution,” said Luoying. “It was just a bunch of hot-blooded young people with nothing better to do getting together. They didn’t accomplish anything.”


“What do you think a revolution is?” asked Anita, laughing.


“That’s the very definition.”


Luoying laughed, too, finally feeling her tensed body relaxing.


“Remind me, when is our performance scheduled for?”


“On the day of the finals for the Creativity Fair. Just over a month from now.”


“All right. I should be able to attend all the rehearsals from now on.”


“Don’t stress out over it,” said Sorin, a spirited smile on his face. “Unlike those competing in the fair, we’re here to have fun. Come only if you want to. Don’t turn it into a chore.”


Luoying nodded. The relaxed, easy atmosphere of the group made her feel a sense of belonging. Here friends were always laughing or smiling, even when they were voicing their suspicions. This comforted her, pressing her anxieties down to the bottom of the lake that was her heart.


She knew also what her friends were keeping from their faces, and why. By mocking everything around them—by acting as if they were only having fun—they concealed the desperation of their inner inquiries. They called everything around them into question but didn’t resort to petty rage.


Feeling at ease in their presence, Luoying busied herself among her friends. She crisscrossed the stage made of abandoned racks, wove lies out of towels, smiled at sadness as she sat on the floor. She looked up and saw that the afternoon sun, shining through the roof, cast a transparent rainbow in the darkened air of the warehouse. Dust motes drifted through the light, as crisp as ice.


As everyone was getting ready to leave, Anka stopped Luoying. Halfway through the rehearsal, he had disappeared without alerting anyone. While Luoying was still puzzling over this, he reappeared and quietly returned to his place in the chorus. He didn’t explain but simply went on as though nothing had happened. Only at the very end did he call to Luoying.


“Thanks for connecting me with Pierre yesterday,” he said. “I sent him another message later.”


“Good. How did the discussion go?”


“All right. I went to his lab just now to check out his membrane technology. I think I can use it.”


“Use it . . . where?”


“To fix my fighter. Didn’t I tell you that it can’t fly right now? I was thinking that if I could coat the wings with his photoelectric membrane, I might give the engines more power. It’s just an idea for now, though. I need to run trials.”


“Did Pierre agree to help you?”


“He did, but we have to figure out how to conduct trials without Fitz finding out. I’m sure he won’t approve of this attempt to get off the ground my own way.”


“What are you going to do?”


Anka looked into her eyes. “Would you . . . help me join a team for the Creativity Fair? My squadron won’t allow anyone to participate, but a team in the Creativity Fair has the right to apply to use labs and production facilities, which would be a way to hide what I’ll be doing. I just don’t know if there’s enough time.”


“In theory, teams can be organized up until the first round of the competition. But . . . that’s tomorrow.”


“I know. It’s too difficult.”


“Let me try,” said Luoying determinedly. “Just let me.”


“All right,” said Anka. “Thank you.”


Luoying smiled to show that it was nothing. Of course she wanted to help him. There was nothing in the world she wanted to do more than to help him. She liked seeing him act with purpose, and his dedication to his task reassured her.


“How do you plan on running the trials?”


“First, I have to assemble the modified wings, and then conduct the test flights.”


“Don’t run unnecessary risks. I don’t want you to hurt yourself!”


“Don’t worry.” Anka grinned. “But only risky things are worth doing.”


Anka’s voice echoed in the empty warehouse. Most had already left, carrying boxes of props and costumes. The two of them were the last two to go. As they exited, Luoying gently pushed closed the heavy warehouse door. The clang of iron striking iron reverberated in their hearts.


*


The next morning the Russell District qualifying competition for the Creativity Fair was held at the district’s children’s hall.


This was the favorite haunt of all the neighborhood children. Everyone, regardless of whether they were participating in the competition, was excited. First thing in the morning, youths from all over the neighborhood filled the building like a surging flood. Though individual neighborhoods were small, each contained at least several hundred young residents of the right age for the fair; and as the teams spread apart to take their places, soon the space felt like a bustling market.


The competition site hadn’t been completely made over for the occasion. No stages were erected, nor was any of the regular equipment removed. But all the desks and chairs had been painted with images from classical myths, colorful flags hung everywhere, and posters publicizing the various teams’ projects scrolled across the walls.


The children’s hall was the neighborhood’s integrated learning center, furnished with all kinds of educational equipment: musical instruments, painting supplies, electrical and optical apparatuses, and so on. The tables and chairs made natural display pedestals for the products of the competing teams, and all that had to be done was to remove the pens and papers that normally littered their surfaces. Some of the teams had been working since dawn, and all kinds of machines, sculptures, art installations, and so on rested on the tables like soldiers standing at attention for a parade.


Among the crowd of spectators was Luoying, who experienced a nostalgic sense of familiarity. She had left Mars when she was too young to have attended many elective classes or worked in an atelier; therefore, most of her memories were from the children’s hall. As she looked around, fragments of those memories seemed to be floating in the air. Next to the wall were snatches of the cowherd’s ditty she had sung; on the shelves were traces of her fingers’ explorations; on the desks were blotches of paint she had carelessly spilled; in the air were faded tinges of her colorful dresses. She saw herself, a much more innocent version of herself. She had spent most of her waking days between the ages of five and thirteen here. As her gaze passed over the walls and desks and other objects, the memories awakened, like dehydrated vegetables uncurling and growing vibrant again when immersed in water.


Several teachers walked about the hall—the judges for the qualifying round. A group of kids followed them around like the layers of fabric dragged behind noble ladies of yore. The opinions of the judges made up a large part of the final score, and so every competing team was prepared to give their teachers a most compelling introduction of their projects within the shortest amount of time.


“Lomar Néas, the great fashion designer of the twenty-first century, borrowed from modern dance and tried to define clothing as the relationship between the human body and space. Our design is intended to extend this concept . . .”


Gielle was speaking animatedly, her hands gesturing for emphasis. She had worked on this speech for a whole week, and stayed up late last night to practice the delivery.


“. . . Most people think of clothing as a means of staying warm or mere decoration, feeling alienated and estranged from nature and space. But we all know that the spiritual goal of every person is to break through the bonds of conventional thinking, to constantly innovate. We made this armor for this very purpose. By turning sunlight into electricity, not only is it a suitable material for space suits and mining suits, but it brings about a novel conceptual framework: our body doesn’t have to hide from nature; it can embrace nature, appropriate nature . . .”


Gielle beamed sweetly at the teachers. She spoke with confidence and natural grace, the effort of a whole night’s practice paying off. From time to time she glanced at Luoying in the crowd, who nodded back at her encouragingly. Next to her, Daniel was in a pale blue suit of armor, styled more for comic effect than practicality. As Gielle talked, he puffed out his chest and lifted his head, shifting into various poses copied from classical Greek statues.


Watching Gielle, Luoying was reminded of the old house on Earth in which she had lived for more than a year and that she shared with a group of heretics. After so much time in the company of Gielle, she discovered the other girl had a habit of using “innovation” to describe everything. It was as though her life was replete with new ideas, new concepts, new passions, just like Luoying’s old housemates’.


They had also prized innovation. They pursued novel additions to a hedonistic life; members of the avant-garde, they wore strange clothes and experimented with new drugs, disdaining the tired old metropolises in their search for a completely different way of life. Luoying had partied with them and joined them in occupying the estates of the wealthy. They wove flowers and herbs into their clothes, disassembled the escalators of skyscrapers to be repurposed as slides for their old house. Gielle spoke of innovations, as did her old housemates on Earth, but neither group could have imagined the life of the other.


Among her old housemates was an Australian man whom everyone called Kangaroo. He was a kind, bald, middle-aged man and also the friend she had known the longest on Earth. He didn’t dress in the unusual fashions of the other housemates or party with them in the streets. Instead, he had a job at a museum where he pretended to be a statue. Supposedly he had been hired by an artist interested in challenging the traditional conception of sculpture. Sometimes he snuck out the old hunting trophies from the museum and arranged them in the plaza to scare urbanites who had never seen wild animals. One time he even poured fresh concrete in front of an office building and left in it impressions of shoes and animal tracks. Luoying had no idea how Kangaroo managed to never be caught for these pranks, as he enjoyed a seemingly carefree existence.


While reminiscing, Luoying kept up with the roving crowd of spectators. Gielle, finished with her presentation, caught up to her excitedly. One hand on her thumping heart, sweat beading on her forehead, she gazed at Luoying inquiringly. Luoying smiled at her and squeezed her plump hand reassuringly.


Colorful exhibits greeted the teachers one after another, full of novel and interesting creations. Applause and gasps of admiration rose and fell, and more and more youths joined the group following the teachers.


Luoying saw that Brenda and two other girls had created a double-sided painting reminiscent of the old double-sided embroidery of Chinese tradition. The canvas was translucent, with a girl in deep thought on the obverse side and a strolling boy on the reverse side. From each side, only one figure could be seen, but the same stars and the moons glowed from both sides. She couldn’t tell how it was made.


The procession finally wound its way through all the exhibits and returned to the center of the long hall, where the scores were tallied.


Holding up a notebook, Jean, one of the teachers, called out,


“Are there any projects that haven’t been shown to the judges yet?” The crowd waited expectantly.


“A total of one hundred and twelve teams have shown their projects so far,” said Jean. “Unless there are any more competitors, this is the end of the qualifying round.”


Behind her, the other teachers were beginning to pack up their notes.


Luoying decided that this was her only chance. Forcing herself to ignore the butterflies in her stomach, she spoke up.


“Yes, there is one more!”


Luoying heard how her own voice reverberated around the silent hall. She took a step forward and, without looking at any of the other astounded competitors and spectators, walked slowly to one of the largest desks in the center of the hall. There, she carefully nudged the projects on it aside until she had cleared out a small space, revealing the dark blue tablecloth. Then she retrieved the small rock she had taken from Reini a few days earlier and placed it in the middle of the space. The yellow rock, roughly spherical and with an unfinished surface, appeared dull and insignificant next to the other projects.


She locked eyes with Jean.


“What is this?” asked the confused teacher.


Luoying smiled. “This is my project, titled Alone.”


The teachers looked at one another, as did the other youths in the hall. Among the colorful, complicated structures, robots, and art pieces, the rock was so primitive and clumsy that it seemed an insult. It did not fit. The other projects seemed to inch away from it the way a crowd cleared out the space around a criminal suspect. Luoying faced all of them without any expression. The astounded silence was exactly what she had expected.


After almost a full minute, Jean said, slowly, “The . . . idea is good.”


She turned to face the rest of the crowd and, straining to keep her voice natural, said, “Luoying’s project is a reminder to us all not to be limited to only high technology in our creativity. We should all broaden our minds.”


Luoying sighed with relief. Gratefully she smiled at Jean.


The first round of the competition was finally over. Everyone began to clean up, and the hall was once again full of noise and laughter. The colorful flags were pulled off the walls with as much ease and joy as when they had been hung. The busy crowd filled the space, and the lonely rock was forgotten, as though it had never existed.


Gielle pulled Luoying into a side hug as they were leaving and whispered, “How did you come up with it? You never said a word!”


“Oh, the rock? I didn’t think too hard.”


“It’s so creative!”


“Do you think so?”


Luoying smiled, thinking only: It does not fit. Palming the rock, she was thinking of Reini, of herself and her friends in the Mercury Group, and her mood darkened.


She had at one point contemplated bringing nothing at all and simply pointing at the empty air to declare that her creation was titled Dream. But in the end she thought that would be too pessimistic. After knowing Kangaroo, she didn’t think of herself as creative at all. She was sensitive and felt things deeply, but that wasn’t the same as being creative.


Through the whole morning, she had seen only one project that she thought was truly creative. It was a large, thin-shelled, hollow glass globe in which was suspended a slightly smaller glass globe, and another one inside that . . . until it was impossible to see the smallest, innermost globes. The inner surface of each shell was carved with different features: land, houses, slides, factories . . . and in the outermost layer, if one looked closely, it was possible to see tiny humans in the middle of all kinds of activities, their feet firmly planted against the glass, their heads pointing to the center of the concentric globes.


The whole sphere had been hung high up so that the layers of different worlds shone through the almost-invisible glass, a multilayer projection that was eye-catching. Luoying had no idea how it had been made. She spent a long time gazing up at the crystalline spheres, gazing through the infinite recursion of concentric shells, gazing at the different-scaled but self-similar worlds, gazing at the outermost layer as though seeing the upturned dome of heaven from outside, until she felt she had also been turned upside down, inside out, tossed into the depths of the infinite cosmos.