CRYSTAL




As Gielle entered Luoying’s room, Luoying slid Dr. Reini’s manuscript under her blanket and picked up a book of pictures from the nightstand. She didn’t want Gielle to ask about what she was reading. It wasn’t that she felt she had anything to hide; she simply didn’t know how to explain.


Gielle was her usual chatty and vivacious self, as bubbly as the rising sun.


“How’re you feeling?”


“All right,” said Luoying.


“Can you walk now?”


“A few steps.”


Luoying could see that Gielle was disappointed. In fact, she didn’t really need to stay at the hospital. Reini had told her that her fracture was healing well, and it would be all right for her to recuperate at home. But she didn’t want to leave. She still had so many questions for Reini, and she loved reading old books by the light of the setting sun on the skydeck. Once she went home, she would likely not enjoy such peaceful times again.


Gielle couldn’t hold back any longer.


“Aren’t you excited about the Creativity Fair? The preliminary rounds will be held next week. I thought you would be out of the hospital by now, which was why I signed you up as part of our team: me, you, Daniel, and Pierre.”


Gielle’s words brought Luoying back to her conversation with Reini a few days earlier. All at once, a flood of memories inundated her mind.


“What’s wrong?” asked Gielle, noticing Luoying’s distracted look. “Did you forget about the Creativity Fair?”


“Oh, no, not at all.” Luoying shook her head. “How could I forget that?”


Gielle went on excitedly to describe their plans while Luoying listened halfheartedly.


“We just settled on the team name. Every afternoon we’re supposed to get together at Interchange Plaza to plan. Oh, every team is supposed to have a flag, and Lily designed ours . . . I was thinking . . . But then Daniel said . . . In a few more days, after your leg is better, you have to join the planning discussions. We can have tea and snacks while we talk.”


Gielle’s enthusiastic voice drifted in and out of Luoying’s consciousness. She had no interest in the fair at all. She couldn’t help but remember how this all looked from Earth: an authoritarian regime using education to consolidate its rule. But she couldn’t possibly explain any of this to Gielle.


Luoying sighed. Gielle’s animated expressions complicated her feelings even further. She was sitting on the window ledge, telling her all the details of their preparation. Against the sunlight streaming in through the window, Gielle cut a sharp silhouette. Her round arms supported her body on the window ledge, and a few strands of loose hair fluttered in the room’s air currents. The bright sun was like a halo around her. All of a sudden Luoying felt tired. Memories of Earth seemed to have become a nasty habit: she was doubting everything. She couldn’t shake the taut nerves and unsettled feeling.


She shook her head, angry at herself. “What are you planning on making for the competition?”


“Another outfit!”


“What kind of outfit?”


“Still using Pierre’s material, of course. One variation of his material has photoelectric properties, sort of like our roofs. I want to see if we can design an outfit that can generate electricity. Daniel is good with electronics, and he says he can embed wires to conduct the electricity out. I’ll be in charge of overall design. Although this material isn’t as soft or light as the material I used for your costume, we can make it into something utilitarian, like armor. It will look so gallant.”


Luoying nodded. “That sounds fantastic.”


“Definitely. Daniel and I already drew the patterns and the circuits. If Pierre didn’t have to be at the hospital these last couple of days, we would have already started trials.”


“What happened to Pierre?”


“His grandfather is ill. He has to be at the hospital to keep watch.”


Luoying’s heart clenched. “I hope it’s nothing too serious.”


Gielle nodded. “That reminds me . . . I should go visit, too. His grandfather is also staying at this hospital.”


She jumped down, patted Luoying on the arm, and rushed toward the door. But at the door she seemed to remember something and turned around, her eyes sparkling.


“I almost forgot: we’re all getting together this weekend. You should come, too.”


“What are you talking about?”


“You know, the old gang. It’s a party to get everyone excited about the preliminary rounds next week.”


“Don’t you already see each other every day?”


“It’s not the same. We’re having a picnic, and then we’re dancing at the function hall.”


“I won’t be able to make it,” Luoying said. “Have fun.”


She knew what kind of party Gielle was talking about, but she didn’t want to go. The attendees had all grown up together, gone to school together, played house and war together, entered ateliers together, and held parties together. At this party they would continue the same games that were left unfinished at the last one, joke with one another about the past, gossip when someone seemed to be dancing with someone else just a little bit differently, and plan for the next party.


It wasn’t that she didn’t like parties like this, but she still remembered another kind of party, a party of strangers. Lightning flashed across the sky as tiny planes landed like a flock of birds around a dance club. Men and women, sleep deprived, filled the space, exchanging charming smiles and clinking glasses. They hugged before they knew each other’s names and then parted, never to see each other again. Every time a new face, every time a new introduction, every time a new pose, dancing only for herself. Scattered souls meeting by chance, never to return to the same place. Long, winding corridors filled with goods from every country: Sri Lankan mirrors, Thai pipes, German canes, Mexican knives. The loneliness of the vagabond.


*


Reini turned off the screen and, eschewing the tube train, walked slowly toward Hans’s home. The video that he had just watched, still fresh in his mind, raised many questions.


Hans had asked Reini to review the video and give him some suggestions. It was an animation combining the rivers of Earth with the mountains of Mars. Although Hans didn’t explain, Reini understood why Hans had shown him the video.


As he walked, thinking over what he was going to say to Hans, Reini’s thoughts stretched like the footpath he was on.


Hans was a nostalgic man, Reini knew. He would remember a childhood wish or a good friend’s ideals for the rest of his life. Reini knew few people like that. They were usually as silent as iron, but also just as solid and resolute. Out of all his contemporaries, Hans was the only one still working. His old friends had all died or become bedridden, and only he remained at his post, soliciting the advice of others with a serious expression. He persisted because certain beliefs, deep in his heart, had supported him throughout the years.


Among Hans’s closest friends, Galiman was the only one who stood by him in his struggles. They had been part of the same fighter squadron during the war and, after the war, rebuilt Mars together. During those difficult years Ronen traveled far from home, while Garcia stayed on Maearth. For forty years only Galiman accompanied Hans, lending him his strength like a roaring lion. If one compared Hans with Diocletian, then Galiman was his Maximian, except this Augustus had no secret plan to split with the consul, and never did groom his own Caesar. For decades, he and Hans fought together for this city on a battlefield where there were no lasers or missiles, only the howling of the wind over sand. Without each other’s support, neither would have lasted as long.


Hans and others his age were the founders of the Martian Republic. Mars was born in their thirties, and for the next four decades the baby grew, inch by inch. Galiman was the architect, responsible for the city’s design. At the age of twenty-two, he drew up the first plan for a glass house, which defined the core structural principles for all Martian houses and became the foundation for the city’s infrastructure. Their city grew and expanded on this design, and around a core of durable foundational technologies evolved an infinite variety of external forms and rich details. This was a city born from ideals. In his mind, Galiman sketched a crystal garden in the air and led his people out of the valley shrouded by the darkness of war.


Of all of Hans’s beliefs, Galiman’s city plan was among the most important. Hans had participated in all phases of its realization. He grew from the young pilot who flew everywhere to gather raw materials to the old consul who presided over the execution of plan after plan to perfect their vision. He gave no less of himself to this city than Galiman had. For the city he fought, and devoted his life to its protection.


Reini knew that there was no decision more difficult for Hans than the decision to give up this city, especially now, when, after two terms as consul, he was about to set down his burden and retire. The choice presented a complicated dilemma.


As Reini walked into Hans’s study, Hans had just finished playing a recording of Galiman. Reini caught the very end of the video, which was from forty years ago. Galiman was an impulsive young man, and his insuppressible passion animated his smooth features, warming the air in the spacious study like a fireplace.


The sun was setting, and Hans’s back cut a lonely silhouette.


Reini coughed softly. Hans turned around, saw him, and nodded in acknowledgment. Hans poured a cup of tea for Reini at the table and pressed a few places on the wall. A minute later a flask of liquor and a few bowls of snacks were sent up in the dumbwaiter. Hans opened the small door and took out the tray, setting everything down on the table.


“I watched the video,” said Reini.


Hans poured for Reini without speaking.


“I also reviewed the computer simulation of the plan.”


“What do you think?”


“I think there are two main difficulties: air and water temperature.”


Hans nodded, waiting for Reini to continue. Though his gaze appeared calm and steady, Reini could see in Hans’s eyes the kind of expectancy one had when waiting for the surgeon to emerge from the operating room.


“The first problem may be the hardest,” Reini said. “It’s a million times harder to maintain the air in an open environment versus an enclosed environment.”


“You’re concerned about air pressure?”


“Yes, but that’s not the key. The key is the composition of the air. A human being is essentially a balloon in equilibrium with the surrounding atmosphere, and changes in the atmosphere are reflected instantly in the body. The brain is very sensitive to the proportion of oxygen. Much of the rest must be made up by some kind of inert gas so as to prevent disruptions to the body’s reactions. Since it needs to be fairly common, the only choice is nitrogen. We can’t have too much carbon dioxide, lest people suffocate. The amount of water vapor also needs to be controlled, since humans are sensitive to humidity. Ultimately, we must essentially replicate the atmosphere of Earth, which is a challenge in a place with such low escape velocity.”


As Reini spoke, he seemed to see thousands of thin tendrils extend out of his body to connect with the air around him, like a plant being pulled out of the soil, dangling a web of roots. He had always been cautious about grand fantasies envisioning humans scattered to every corner of the universe, because he didn’t view a human being as an independent sculpture but as a membrane with air on both sides. A human being required certain conditions to survive, and without a suitable environment a human being could no more remain a human being than a jellyfish could maintain its shape out of the water.


Hans’s features relaxed slightly, as though the answer was what he had anticipated.


“What about the water temperature?”


“That’s the other problem,” said Reini. “If we can’t maintain water in a liquid state and create a true water cycle, then the idea of an open-air ecosystem is meaningless. No matter where we locate the site, the temperature at night will be below freezing. Rivers will freeze over and perhaps not even thaw completely during the day. To artificially heat the water would be incredibly costly in terms of energy, and the final result won’t be better than the enclosed city.”


“In other words, you don’t believe the development plan can succeed.”


“I can’t rule out the possibility, but it will be extremely difficult.”


“I understand.”


“Of course, I’m basing this on rough estimates,” said Reini. “I didn’t perform any detailed calculations.”


“That’s all right,” said Hans. “I was just trying to get a sense.


The final result doesn’t just depend on me.”


Reini hesitated. “How far . . . has the plan progressed?”


“It’s still just a proposal being evaluated. Right now the focus is on fleshing out technical details for the feasibility analysis. It hasn’t yet been submitted to the Boule for debate.”


“Will this be decided by the Boule or require a full plebiscite?”


“That has yet to be determined.”


“Which way are you leaning?”


“I haven’t decided either.” Hans paused, and then added, “I have to be extremely careful here. That’s probably all I can do.”


There was a hint of anguish in Hans’s tone that touched Reini. After a long moment he nodded. “I understand.”


He understood what Hans was struggling with. Hans wanted to stay in the city, but he didn’t have much chance to see his wish fulfilled.


Hans was no longer a warrior but the consul. A warrior could cheer on the ideals of his comrades, but the consul had no such freedom. The consul had no power to dictate policy; rather, he was like a judge in court. His function was to ensure the fairness of the policy debate process and to decide the most effective way to continue the discussion. He himself, however, was not allowed to decide the outcome of the debate on his own. His interest in the technical principles of this project was like a judge’s interest in the facts of the case.


The debate had grown more fierce the last few days. Since Ceres had been brought into orbit around Mars, planning for the city’s future became part of the Boule’s agenda. As the negotiations with Earth progressed, plans for Ceres developed from the conceptual stage into detailed reports. Following Boule protocol, every proposal must first be disclosed in the central archive’s policy zone, along with supporting research and data. Rounds of open debate then followed until a final vote by the Boule or a plebiscite.


The two proposals drawing most of the attention right now were referred to as “migration” and “continuation.” The former advocated moving all Martians into a crater and constructing an open-air ecosystem, while the latter advocated remaining in the crystal box that was Mars City and turning the water of Ceres into a river flowing around it. Both proposals had advantages and difficulties, and they drew about the same amount of support. Hans was in charge of presiding over this debate, and if the ultimate decision of the people was to abandon the city and move away, he had no choice but to follow their will.


“Actually, I also invited you to come because I wanted to ask you a favor,” said Hans quietly.


“Of course,” said Reini.


“I’d like to ask you to pay attention to what people around you are saying about this matter,” said Hans, his tone cautious. “It’s helpful to understand the public mood.”


“I understand.”


“But don’t make too big a deal of it,” said Hans with some hesitation. “We both know this is not entirely proper.”


“You don’t need to worry.”


Hans nodded. Reini could tell that he was struggling with two competing impulses. One was his personal desire to prevent the accomplishments of his old friend, Galiman, from being abandoned. The other was his duty to the system to protect the fairness of the process against manipulation by selfish desires. He cared about both deeply.


As consul, Hans had the power to decide the form of the final vote, and thus could pick the form most beneficial to Galiman’s crystal city legacy. Theoretically, the choice of form should be decided by the nature of the question, not the ultimate answer desired, but everyone knew that there were inevitably going to be differences between the perspective of the Boule, largely composed of elite citizens of the republic, and the views of the public as a whole. A consul who understood the public’s mood accurately could thus, within the framework of the law, choose the form that most favored the outcome they desired. The influence was subtle but possibly critical in close votes. Hans had always despised such tricks, but this time he was forced to resort to them. Reini felt a pang of pity. He understood how much Hans Sloan had always prized fairness of process. The democracy of Mars was a planned democracy, and the fairness of the plan was always the heart and soul that kept the republic going.


Reini thought that perhaps the greatest irony of Hans’s life was that he was forever forced to make choices that he did not want to make but had to.


He gazed at the old man sitting across from him. Hans poured for himself and drank. His brown hair, slightly curled, was combed back neatly. His dense beard was showing streaks of white, and the corners of his mouth drooped. Though he hadn’t changed his look in twenty years, a careful observer would have noticed that he was aging every day, as his skin sagged and more wrinkles appeared under his eyes and on his neck. Even a body hammered out of iron was no match for the power of time.


“I think you shouldn’t be too hard on yourself,” said Reini, trying to keep his tone casual. “Que será, será. Whatever the final outcome, I don’t think Archon Galiman would blame you.”


Hans looked out the window as though gazing into the distant past or discerning a pessimistic future. The setting sun deepened the shadows cast by his wrinkles. When he spoke again, he sounded tired.


“I’ve had to live with so many regrets in my life . . . I’m afraid this is going to be yet another.”


“You’ve done the best you could,” said Reini.


“I’ve had to bid farewell to all my friends and loved ones,” said Hans. He turned and regarded Reini. “All of them.”


Reini had no answer for that. In Hans’s dark brown eyes, there was a sorrow that he rarely expressed. It was like looking into a deep sea, only the surface of which appeared tranquil.


“Perhaps . . . you should have retired earlier.”


“You told me that back then,” said Hans. “I imagine you must be puzzled about why I’ve remained at my post. Since it wasn’t what I wanted, why didn’t I retire? I know that I shouldn’t have sought another term five years ago . . . but I just couldn’t set my mind at ease.” Hans’s voice cracked. “I couldn’t let go. I care.” He gazed at Reini, a plea for understanding in his eyes.


Reini looked back, watching as the old man struggled with himself inside. He sighed and nodded. The sun continued to shine in the distance, and the old man’s wrinkles seemed to stiffen in that fading light. Hans got himself under control, and his face stopped twitching, but a sense of tragic helplessness radiated from his pose. Minutes passed. The air in the room gradually relaxed.


Hans set down his cup and refilled it with cold tea, and now he looked just as calm and cool as his beverage. A hand supporting his temple, he conversed with Reini about less contentious topics, such as the proposed reforms to the debate format in the central archive and the Sais Crater’s geology and planned development. Reini listened quietly, occasionally interjecting a quick question or a bit of analysis.


At the end, Reini told Hans that Luoying seemed to have a great deal of interest in history. He didn’t mention the Registry of Files, only saying that she wanted to know about the history of her family.


“What did she ask about?”


“Our life in the past,” Reini said, “and also the causes of the war.”


“How did you answer her?”


“I didn’t say much, but I agreed to give her some books on the topic.”


Hans nodded. “Do as you think is appropriate. If she wants to know, then tell her. She’s old enough.”


Reini agreed. He knew that Hans was more worried about Luoying than about Rudy. After bidding farewell, he got up to leave. At the door, Hans gently patted him on the arm and watched as he walked away.


At the corner, Reini turned and looked back. Hans looked his usual somber self, his face as tranquil and expressionless as the desert.