THE HOTEL ROOM AT NIGHT




Eko stood at the wall of his single-occupancy hotel room and looked up at the dark sky through the transparent wall. Of the three moons, he could see two. The moonlight wasn’t as bright as usual. The wind was strong. Though he couldn’t hear it, he could see particles of sand being thrown against the wall, as though a storm was on its way.


It was late, but Eko didn’t want to sleep. He was exhausted, but he couldn’t rest. As soon as he got back from the hospital, he paced back and forth in the dark room, stood, and sat, talking to himself, talking to invisible fate. He had never doubted himself as much as he did now. On Earth he had been a successful filmmaker. At one point he thought he had found a path to follow for the future, and all that remained was to sustain the passion for fighting and advancing along it.


The trip to Mars had changed everything.


Eko had long been opposed to big business. Like his nonmainstream predecessors in generations past, he despised the blockbusters intended for the “big supermarket,” where everything had the same content, the same packaging, the same themes and subjects that had been done a million times. Instead, he made his films for the “artisanal market.” He called mainstream filmmakers “worker drones,” because each of them was responsible for only a tiny part of the final product and had no control over the overall vision. Worst of all, they seemed content with their own repetitive, noncreative work. He almost never set foot in the web space of the “big supermarket.” He mocked films that pandered to the audience in order to make a profit the same way he ridiculed animal crackers. He disdained buyers who bought on the advice of advertisements and followed trends, the same way he derided the empty-headed, status-obsessed aristocrats of the eighteenth century. He created in order to resist, with an instinctual abhorrence of the formulaic. He focused on craft, on the pursuit of the personal and unique. His films warred against the worship of money, against cloying platitudes aimed at dulling the public. He thought he was on the side of truth, critiquing the stupidity of the many to empathize with the suffering of the few.


But now he was forced to confront himself, to doubt his fundamental beliefs. This journey to the red planet had challenged his imagination. It was only now, as he was about to leave, that he saw a more complete picture, a clearer meaning.


For the first time he saw with clarity that all that he had done on Earth, instead of resisting commercialization, had only strengthened it. He hadn’t challenged the logic of commerce but only provided more products for sale and purchase. He had honored the lone wolf as his totem, but now he realized that the wolf was fake, though the totemic power was real. Symbols meant imitation, and imitation meant consumption. The words he had thrown at Theon in accusation rebounded onto himself, and they struck as hard as he had meant them to. He was also a willing participant in the consumption economy, a manufacturer of desires. His creation was a language, and the language was not fundamentally very different from Theon’s enticements. He had never truly departed from the mold of his commercial society. He facilitated commerce, promoted the pursuit of symbolic pleasures, and his loyal fans bought his films and mementos. He had filmed scenes of poverty, and those images had enriched the wealthy. He asked for funds from those who sat in luxurious offices in skyscrapers, and then used those funds to capture lonely souls wandering outside. With those captured images, he then generated more money, which he handed to the people inside the skyscrapers. Round after round, he played his role in making the cycle spin. The subjects of his films didn’t see the films. He had never thought of showing his films for free, even though he thought the idea brilliant on Mars. But on Earth the very notion was absurd, impractical.


Eko looked at his own thin reflection. He examined his own language and analyzed how it reflected the light of the world. The result was disappointing. Formally, he seemed to have found the opposite of big business, but he had never thought about the light of the world. Isolated in a familiar language and context, he had never attempted to communicate between languages. He took delight in how different his own expressions were from the popular mode, but he didn’t devote enough effort to seeking something deeper beyond mere expression. He didn’t go to the big supermarket and refused to learn the language there; he and his followers took pride in such isolation and saw it as part of their own identity. But he wasn’t looking for the light of the world; all he cared about was the reflection in the mirror. He had never asked himself, if he only existed in opposition to a reflection, then how could his own image have an independent existence? He had thought it impossible for one language to be converted into another, and that there was no need for such exchange.


But reflections could only be connected through the medium of light, and languages needed translation only because of the needs of the world.


Eko pressed his palms against the glass and looked outside. Dawn was approaching. The wind rose and slackened. Sand struck the glass from time to time. The night was like a roiling ocean, and in the distance the mountains outlined the mournful land, simple, somber, and deep.


Conversation. Commerce. People had lost sight of which was more important. The first commercial exchanges served the purpose of starting a conversation, and now conversation only facilitated the goal of continuing commerce. When commerce was no longer necessary, it was easy to forget about conversation. The isolation of languages was the result of collusion; it brought profit, engendered hatred, gave birth to manufactured identities, and, above all, generated the desire to buy, buy, buy. Conversation was dying, but commerce grew ever more vibrant.


Only those who cared about the world cared about conversation. Eko thought about Luoying, thought about what she had said about the commonality of all humankind. The young woman was full of doubt and confusion, and her search was running into dead end after dead end. But at the moment of confrontation, she forgot about language; faced with a web of conflicts, she lifted her chin as the strongest of princesses. He had made her cry, but she had saved him.


Eko looked at the stars overhead, gazing down on him like gods. On Earth he had never seen them so bright. The thick atmosphere weakened starlight, and urban incandescence drowned out the stars that remained. He had almost no idea what stars really looked like; he had to imagine them instead.


The sharp roofs of Mars City cut through the night like the wings of giant birds. In the distance, glass tunnels, glowing blue, crisscrossed like lines arbitrarily placed over a canvas, bright and slender. The dust storm seemed to be growing, and he could see the tunnels tremble in the wind.


Eko turned on a screen and browsed the news programs from Earth from the last few days. He kept the sound off and saw images of thousands screaming and marching through the streets. The economic crisis on Earth had worsened during the last month. He had heard about it, but it wasn’t until now that he understood how serious it was.


The crisis stemmed from an economy built on language. Earth’s IP stocks had collapsed within a few days because the system of IP agents and resellers had grown too complicated. A single clever sentence could be wrapped in layers of packaging to become substance, and a single idea could be registered and inflated into a vast but empty shell. Buyers were no longer buying the idea itself; they were buying the chance to sell it to someone else. As ideas churned through this economy, rising in price with every exchange, inflation set in. Higher prices meant lower worth. This was a business without substance, a glowing golden balloon inflated by the race to sell something to someone else first.


Until one day a needle poked the balloon, and a single hole led to the collapse of all packaging. The world was shaken to its roots. Everyone took to the streets to protest and complain and vent their frustration.


Eko made his decision. He would promote the central archive on Earth. As a first step, he would put all his own films in it so that his teacher’s dream would advance. He wanted to construct a public space, a forum in which everyone was responsible for their own thoughts but no one would profit from their own language. Babel. What a grand and ambitious dream. When humankind was united in language, then the tower would reach heaven. All the media on Earth had been completely commercialized, and there was no more voice doubting commerce. Power and capital had reached an all-encompassing agreement in which one paved the road while the other drove everyone down it, and both profited and prospered in mutual defense. Even doubt was put into display cases for sale, while analysis and flattery competed with each other via packaging. Eko felt that he had to do something. He had never done anything like it and didn’t know if it was the right answer. But he knew that his teacher had been braver than he was. The step from dreamer to doer was the hardest step of all.


Returning to his bed, he lay down with arms and legs outstretched. His hand touched the screen on the headboard and the still scene there disappeared, replaced by Vera, the virtual concierge. She looked exactly the same as the first time he met her, with the same dress and the same sweet smile.


He gave her his account and password, but instead of opening a door and welcoming him inside she shook her head, looking perplexed.


Eko understood that his account had been deleted. He would never have another chance to enter the central archive, to visit Babel, or to browse an atelier.


Still lying in bed, he raised his chin until he could see Vera, upside down, on the headboard. He tried to converse with her, but her unchanging smile contrasted sharply against the depressing night. He tried to imagine the space behind the door: nine systems, an infinite amount of storage.


The Sunlight System; the Air System; the Water System; the Biology System; the Land System; the Astronomy System; the Security System; the Art System; the Flight System. Such simple and primitive names, redolent of the nostalgia of an imagined pastoral past. Like nine thick vines, they entwined and grew and supported each other in a virtual world. In this world, every language could be read, like an impossible library. Someone had once said that if heaven exists, it must be in the form of a library.


He twisted the tiny sphere by the frame and adjusted the transparent walls of the room to a light green, then light yellow, light red, light purple, and through the cycle until they were transparent again. He looked up at the stars glowing overhead like watching gods.


He finished watching the last film of Arthur Davosky. In a voice-over, his teacher explained that he was retelling an old Chinese parable. In that parable, a man went to visit another city and saw that the people there walked with an elegance that he admired greatly. He tried to imitate their dance-like gait, but despite putting in all his effort, he couldn’t copy their steps correctly. When he tried to return home, however, he found that he had forgotten how to walk the way he used to.


This is the saddest parable in the whole world, said Davosky. It’s sad because it’s true.


Eko lay still on the bed. The wind outside had stopped. He remembered that there was no rain on Mars, and no thunderstorms. It was only his imagination. He lay still without making any sound.


When the first rays of dawn peeked over the horizon, he was asleep.