THE FILM ARCHIVE




Before paying a visit to Janet Brook, Eko went to see Peter Beverley first.


He didn’t make an appointment; instead, he went up to Beverley’s door and knocked on it.


It was nine thirty in the morning, and Eko knew Peter was certain to be up by then. The first formal negotiations would begin at ten sharp. It took about ten minutes to get from the hotel to the meeting hall, and he only needed a few minutes of his time.


Eko knew that Peter had had a rough time at the reception the previous night, and he wished he could have seen the expression on the man’s face after he got back to the hotel. At the banquet, Eko had placed a camera under one of the poinsettias, and though he didn’t make an announcement about it, he was sure Peter knew. Peter had been a movie star, and there was perhaps no one else on Earth who was more sensitive to the presence of a camera. The whole night he had presented his profile from the right side to Eko’s lens, smiling in that most charming way he had. Ever since he had gotten into politics at the age of thirty-five, he posed like that for the camera.


Eko found Peter interesting. The man led a charmed life: handsome, scion of a prominent family, Ivy League–educated, friends everywhere, and though he was barely in his fifties, already many were speaking of him as the next Democratic candidate for the presidency.


His family was perhaps his most powerful asset. It was rumored that he had been selected to lead the Terran delegation because of his family’s vast network of connections. Everyone understood that the job was perfect for him: high-exposure but low-risk, a great way to accumulate political capital for the next step in his career. He cared very much about how he was seen through the lens.


And that was why Eko was enjoying himself so much. After getting back to the hotel the night before, Eko had reviewed the footage of the reception and found himself quite taken with the ruddy-faced man who had sat next to Peter and screamed at him.


The door opened to reveal a perfectly coiffed Peter Beverley in a pale blue silk suit. He greeted Eko warmly, completely at ease.


“Morning,” said Eko. “It’s all right, I don’t need to come in. I just need a few moments of your time.” Peter nodded, waiting.


“Do you remember the Martian consul’s speech last night about democracy? I spoke to one of the Martian legislators after the reception, and he explained that the Boule is responsible for most day-to-day decisions and engineering projects, but major decisions that affect everyone have to be put to a vote by all the citizens of Mars. That doesn’t jibe with what we usually hear on Earth.”


“It is rather different,” Peter acknowledged.


“So . . . what do you make of this difference? We have a representative democracy with free and fair elections. They don’t have elections at all, but they do have plebiscites involving everyone.”


“You’re right to point out the difference,” said Peter. “It’s worth pondering.”


“Can I reveal this . . . ‘difference’ in my film?”


“Of course. Why shouldn’t you?”


“But this seems so different from the general consensus about how Mars functions that I don’t know what I’ll find if I keep on digging.”


“Don’t worry about your conclusions. To think, to probe, to test your theories—that’s what matters.”


“I’m not sure you understand what I’m getting at. Right now, everyone on Earth thinks of Mars as an autocracy. My film may challenge this consensus and lead to unpredictable results.”


Peter continued to smile, as though giving Eko his full attention. But Eko had noticed him fidgeting with his cuffs and brushing the hair from his shoulders. Peter reached out and clapped a hand over Eko’s shoulder like a kind, older relative.


“Young man, don’t worry about the consequences. To have a future, you must dare to dream.”


Eko tried to tamp down his rising rage. There was no sincerity in Peter’s words. He had evaded him with cliché after cliché and said nothing of substance. Eko wondered if Peter had grasped the import of his revelation at all.


But he must have. On Earth, despite the competition and distrust among nations, everyone saw Mars as the common enemy. It was like another Cold War, one based on the iron curtain of space. Mars was described as an isolated community controlled by evil generals and mad scientists, the textbook model of a society under a repressive authoritarian regime abetted by thought-control machinery, the very opposite of a free market economy and democratic governance. The media and the intelligentsia both portrayed Mars as a byword for cruelty, tyranny, and inhumanity, a massive dystopian war machine the likes of which had never existed on Earth. The Martian war for independence had been declared a suicidal act of betrayal, and the Martians were supposed to have no future except to return to the community of nations or face utter annihilation. Surely, Peter Beverley knew all this and could see what Eko was getting at.


To show democracy functioning on Mars was to challenge the very foundation of the narrative about the red planet. It would lead to admission that politicians on Earth had lied, that the propaganda against Mars was based on prejudice and envy rooted in defeat. Eko wasn’t afraid of making waves, but he knew what was politically correct for a filmmaker to show. As an official member of the delegation, he knew he was subject to constraints.


But Peter had not reacted. He simply fended him off with poses and elegant, meaningless words.


Fine, thought Eko. No matter what I end up producing, I can always say that I asked for permission first. In fact, this was better. As a lifelong antiestablishment Reversionist, Eko delighted in shooting down conventional wisdom on Earth.


“Thank you,” he said. “I guess I should have told you earlier: this conversation isn’t being recorded. There’s no camera here.”


As Eko turned to leave, he glimpsed through the door Peter’s wife putting the finishing touches on her makeup. About ten years younger than Peter, she was also a famous actress. Their romance had always been conducted in front of cameras, from the first kiss to the birth of their son. Peter was skilled at the role of model husband, romantic and appropriately spontaneous. Their marriage looked perfect, and he always made sure that she accompanied him everywhere. Eko had seen many men move from acting careers into politics, but so few of them seemed to understand the importance of the women’s vote. Peter was one of the few.


*


The Tarkovsky Film Archive wasn’t far from the hotel. Like the hotel itself, it was in the southern part of the city, two districts away. A tube train would get him there in twenty-four minutes, passing by the Capitol, site of City Hall and the Boule Chamber, as well as the Expo Center, where the world’s fair was being held.


As with his visit to Peter Beverley in the morning, Eko didn’t make an appointment with Janet Brook. He left no message in Janet’s personal space, and didn’t call the archive ahead of time either. He didn’t want to alert her at all, to give her a chance to turn down his politely phrased request for a meeting, or to prepare herself to spar with him in a superficial conversation in which both sides carefully avoided the truth.


He wanted to catch her off guard; perhaps then he would see the real person. He didn’t know if she was the “cause” that he sought; he had to see her first to judge.


Once aboard the tube train, Eko took out a camera patch and stuck it to the wall of the car to record the scenery along the way. He had ridden the tube train from the shuttle port to the hotel, but the ride was so short that he didn’t have a chance to shoot any footage. The totally transparent structure of the train car gave the camera patch a great view.


Tube train cars were of different colors. The one Eko was in right now was beige, and he enjoyed the fantasy of sitting inside a drop of some solution as it traveled from retort to beaker to flask to funnel through twisting glass tubing. The train passed over different types of structures: clusters of small residences alternating with large public buildings. The small houses surrounded the larger edifices like satellites orbiting planets. The larger buildings were typically ring-shaped, with a glass roof over the open center. The smaller houses, on the other hand, were typically covered entirely by semispherical glass domes, including the yards, filled with flowers and other lush vegetation. Eko heard that the oxygen needs of many dwellings were mostly satisfied by the plants in their gardens, thereby saving both precious energy and the need for complex oxygen-producing machinery.


Small screens inside the train car displayed the names and brief histories of the various landmarks and districts they passed. Eko noticed that many of the buildings on Mars showed the influence of practically every architectural trend and tradition on Earth: the symmetry and harmony of the Renaissance; the complexity and excesses of rococo; the sweeping roofs and long verandas of Chinese wood-frame architecture; the hard, geometric lines of modernism; and so on. The whole city therefore resembled a natural museum of architectural history, full of layers and variety. The buildings that most drew Eko’s attention, however, displayed a unique kind of fluid curves and surfaces, like gently flowing water. All the structures were made out of glass.


As the train passed by the Capitol, Eko stood up and took a few still photographs. The Capitol was the administrative center of Mars City, where all the policies affecting the republic were made. Constructed in a solemn, classical style, it wasn’t a very large or imposing building. It was rectangular in plan, its front doors were located on one of the shorter sides, which were lined with bronze statues and metal, Roman-style columns. The walls were a rare dark copper interspersed with ivory-hued vertical panels, reminiscent of the Teatro alla Scala.


While the camera patch continued to film, Eko took out his notepad and wrote to himself in shorthand. This was his habit as he wandered everywhere, whether at home or on a battlefield by the sea.


Beverley is a fool.


After a moment of thought, he deleted the note. It wasn’t an objective observation and didn’t quite capture what he meant. He knew that Beverley was a clever man who knew how to evaluate a situation, and he was sensitive to his own role. But he lacked wisdom. For Eko, opportunistic cunning wasn’t the same as wisdom. Peter was an idol whose holographic image could be seen in every supermarket, his trademark million-watt smile gently nudging shoppers this way or that. That required no wisdom.


“He was not stupid. It was sheer thoughtlessness,” Hannah Arendt wrote of Eichmann more than two hundred years ago, but the words remain applicable today. I don’t like Beverley. There’s no good reason for it—except that he seems like a wax figure sculpted by himself. He makes himself smile rather than smile because he wants to. He exudes charm, but there’s nothing behind it. He doesn’t even have the humor of a JFK. A man like this probably didn’t exist in the past. Every age has its hypocritical politicians, but before our age, no one could be an empty shell of pasted images from the moment of his birth. Beverley is so used to being a hologram that the image has become the person, while his real self has faded into illusion.


He finished his notes just as the train pulled into the station. He despised filming politicians, though it was one of the primary sources of income for the film industry. This sort of work sapped his passion, and he would have rather filmed some urchin cursing in the streets. He stuck the notepad back into his shirt pocket, packed away the camera patch, and stood before the door.


The door slid open. An aquamarine structure resembling an oyster stood before him. The walls were opaque, so he couldn’t see inside. A footpath led from the station to the building entrance, which was shaped like a conch shell.


*


Inside the Tarkovsky Film Archive lobby was a circular screen. Photographs scrolled across it, along with a menu of choices for visitors: self-guided tours, film viewings, atelier visits. Eko picked the last one.


Several sub-menus popped up. Patiently, Eko navigated through them until he found Janet Brook.


His heart sped up as he touched her name. The high-resolution photograph of a woman with light-blond hair appeared. One glance was enough for him to know that he had found the right person: he had seen her in Arthur Davosky’s journal. Compared to the photograph in his teacher’s possession, she had gained a little weight, her skin sagged a bit, and her hair was shorter. But her eyes were very distinctive, giving the appearance of always smiling. He did some mental math and determined that Janet Brook was now about fortyfive, her face still as lively as that of her younger self. After a moment of hesitation, he touched the button to let her know she had a visitor.


The screen pulsed, showing that the call went through and was being processed.


A few minutes later Janet came into the lobby from a door at the other end. She wore a salmon jacket over a white blouse, with light makeup and hair tucked behind her ear on one side. When she saw Eko, she looked momentarily confused, not recognizing him. Nonetheless, she smiled at him politely.


“Hello,” she said. “I’m Janet Brook.”


Eko held out his hand. “An honor to meet you. I’m Eko Lu, from Earth.”


“Ah, you’re with the Terran delegation.”


“That’s right. I’m the delegation’s documentary film director.”


“No kidding.”


“Here’s my card.”


“Oh . . . it’s not that I don’t believe you. I’m sorry. I just . . . I had no idea they brought along a film crew.”


“It’s just me, actually.”


“Well, this is truly wonderful. I haven’t met a colleague from Earth in ages.”


“Eighteen years, to be exact,” said Eko.


“Really? Let me think . . . yes, you’re right. My memory isn’t as good as when I was younger.”


Eko hesitated. Janet’s reactions told him nothing. She looked composed, and meeting a filmmaker from Earth didn’t seem to arouse any particular passions. He decided to test her some more before revealing the true purpose of his visit.


“I explained to officials at the Boule that I wanted to meet Martian filmmakers,” Eko said. “They recommended you.”


“That’s nice of them. Why don’t you come in?”


Janet pushed open the door leading to the interior of the archive building, and Eko followed, taking in everything around him. The conch-shell design motif of the entrance continued deep inside the building, and they walked through round tunnels with smooth-flowing curves full of blue-gray lines that spiraled inward.


Various videos and images scrolled over the walls as the route they took twisted around like a maze.


“Honestly, I don’t know why the officials recommended you to me,” said Eko after a while. “They didn’t tell me much about you.”


Janet laughed. “I’d guess it’s because I’m the only filmmaker they know.”


“Oh?”


“There was a technology developed here that they used to trade with Earth a while back. Terrans really liked it.”


“What technology was it?”


“Full-fidelity holographic projections.”


Eko grew excited. He had made up the excuse to continue the conversation, but Janet had brought up that exchange from decades ago herself.


“Did your atelier invent it?”


“We sure did. More than twenty years ago now.”


“Please accept my gratitude, then. I have a job because of you.”


“You’re a holographic filmmaker?”


“Most films are holographic. Flats are almost extinct.”


Janet laughed heartily, and Eko could sense the genuine pleasure behind it. “You shouldn’t thank me at all. Without holographic projections, you’d still have a job. But with them, many people can no longer do what they used to do.”


Eko smiled in return. He knew what she meant. Every revolution left many behind in the old world. From silent films to talkies, from flats to full-fidelity holographs—it wasn’t that people were incapable of learning the new medium, only that many didn’t want to. It was complicated. The more someone excelled in the old world, the more unwilling they were to start afresh in the new. They had put so much of their life into the outdated mode of expression that they could not abandon it. No one liked to abandon themselves.


“What about here on Mars?” he asked.


“We still have flats as well as holographic films. When you’re recording a meeting or some industrial footage, there’s no need to use 3-D. Too expensive.”


“I see. We have those as well, though we don’t usually count those as ‘films.’”


“I understand,” said Janet. “You call something a ‘film’ only if you can publish it.”


“Isn’t it the same here?”


“No. On Mars the definition is purely technical. Any kind of audio-visual record is classified as film. You publish your films on the web, divided by genre, but we don’t do things that way. Our films are all stored in the central archive under each person’s name. Since everyone can make dramatic narratives, factual documentaries, records of experiments, or industrial footage used as raw data, there’s no need to separate them.”


Carefully, Eko probed. “It sounds like you’re very familiar with the way things are done on Earth.”


“I wouldn’t say familiar. Out of personal interest, I’ve picked up a few things here and there.”


“Why are you interested in Earth?”


“I suppose . . . it’s an occupational hazard. I once studied the history of film regulation on Earth. Though that’s no longer an area of focus and analysis, I’ve maintained an interest.”


“Do you have contacts on Earth, then? I wasn’t aware that direct communication between citizens of the two planets is possible.”


“Oh, it’s not. But I’ve seen some official introductory material from Earth. Most stick to generalities, and so my understanding is very shallow.” Janet smiled. “I’m so glad you’re here. You can teach me a great deal.”


Eko fell silent again. His questioning didn’t seem to get him anywhere. There was nothing unusual in Janet’s answers, nothing he could seize on. Every explanation she offered was objective, carefully phrased, inoffensive. Friendly but without any trace of the personal. No, it wasn’t that she was without personality. Her laughter was direct and genuine, and her expressions were sincere and curious. But she always managed to avoid revealing anything of her private life. Eko didn’t know what to do. To continue the conversation this way was to meander aimlessly around the target, but to bring up what he really wanted now seemed too abrupt.


They arrived in a large, brightly lit hall. Thin pieces of glass in various shapes hung from the ceiling, breaking up the monotonous space with refractions and shadows. Words and images scrolled over the glass surfaces. Once in a while, some larger-than-life figure appeared on one of the screens to deliver a silent lecture to an invisible audience. The air was cool but felt a bit stuffy.


“Everyone shown on the screens here is an experienced filmmaker,” Janet said. “If you’re interested, you can wear this ceramic earplug and listen to what they’re saying.”


“How do these glass screens work?”


“They are plated with a thin conducting and light-emitting membrane. The membrane is so thin that it’s indistinguishable from ordinary glass.”


“I’ve noticed that Mars likes to make things out of glass. Is there some significance behind it?”


“Some significance? How do you mean?”


“Uh . . . I mean, why did you make this collective decision?”


“I wouldn’t call it a collective decision; it’s more a matter of necessity. On Mars, we have plenty of sand, but lack clay and stone. Other than iron, we have to rely on glass as the raw material for most things. During the war, Niles Galle invented the construction techniques we now use. Glass is easy to build with and easy to recycle.”


“I see. But how do you deal with the issue of privacy? What are the rules? I noticed that many houses are not transparent, but the walls in my room are.”


Janet looked surprised. “They didn’t tell you? All the walls are adjustable! The virtual concierge in your hotel isn’t doing a very good job if it didn’t explain these basic features. The ions in the glass are controlled by electric fields, and you can twist a dial in the room to alter the degree of transparency.”


Eko felt quite silly. He remembered the grand conclusions about Martian society he had drawn from the transparent walls and was glad that he didn’t commit those to permanent record. He was so steeped in the context of Earth that it was natural for him to fall into the assumptions and political symbolisms prevalent on Earth. But starting the previous night, he was coming to realize the dangers in such carelessness. It wasn’t just that he risked injecting subjective bias but also that he couldn’t get at the objective facts. He wanted to send a message to Earth: there was nothing more dangerous than jumping to conclusions.


A glass house was just that: a glass house. It was a fact determined by the geology and technology of Mars, with no symbolism behind it, and certainly no political oppression. To capture reality, he needed to go deeper, to dig beneath the surface, until he touched the true context of Mars.


“I thought the transparency was a deliberate choice,” said Eko.


“Well . . .” Janet hesitated. “I suppose it depends on your point of view. Whether something is transparent depends on the light.”


“Can you elaborate?”


“No matter how you adjust it, the medium will always be transparent to some forms of light but not others. Total opacity is impossible.”


“Are you talking about glass . . . or something else?”


Janet chuckled, her eyes curving in mirth. “If you stay around here for a few days, you’ll hear people say there are two individuals in Russell District whose words should never be taken as plain description nor as pure metaphor. One of them is Dr. Reini, and the other is me. You can interpret what I said however you like. There’s no real answer.”


There was a trace of slyness in her that gave her the flightiness of youth. Eko imagined that when she was younger, she must have been very charismatic. She wasn’t beautiful in the conventional sense, but there was a powerful, living authenticity in her. It was a rare quality that drew others to her. He could now understand why Davosky had fallen in love with her.


“Ms. Brook, I have a confession to make. Forgive me for keeping it from you at first. I just didn’t know how to bring it up without disturbing you. But I think I have to tell you the truth.”


The joy faded from Janet’s face. “All right. What is it?”


“I studied under Arthur Davosky. I’m here as his representative.”


Janet’s face froze, as though she had heard a voice from the ancient past, distant and unreal. He stared at her. They faced each other like two statues. On the glass screens overhead, figures moved and flapped their lips, but the two of them remained still. Eko was staring at her, while Janet was staring at the air between them.


At length, Janet took a deep breath. “Why don’t you come to my office? We should be sitting down for this.”


*


“. . . I was twenty-seven at the time and dating a young man who liked me more than I liked him. He wanted to get married, but I dragged it out, unsure what I wanted. That was when Arthur came to Mars. At first, our relationship was purely professional. I was his designated liaison on Mars, and it was my job to explain the technology to him. And then one day he invited me to make a film with him.


“Arthur is the type that . . . you grow fond of over time. He was always full of strange and interesting ideas, figuring out ways to show life in a new light. Since you were his student, I’m sure you know what I mean. At first he explained to me that he wanted to practice using the new techniques, to see if he had really mastered them. I thought nothing of it and agreed to help him. It wasn’t until much later that I understood it was only the first step in his long plan. His aim wasn’t the technology but to realize the ideas in his mind authentically. He became engrossed in the plan for his film, and I . . . became engrossed in him.


“I don’t know how much you understand the situation at that time. On Earth, Arthur was very successful, but he had to constantly worry about the commercial success of his next film. That isn’t the case here. All of our incomes are set based on age, regardless of the atelier we’ve joined or our accomplishments. All of our films are uploaded to the central archive, and anyone is allowed to view them without paying for the privilege. Money isn’t something we worry about. Arthur loved this arrangement. As a visitor, he received a stipend and didn’t need to be concerned about making a living. He finally had an opportunity where he didn’t need to worry about the market but only about expressing himself. He had waited for so long for such a chance that, once he had acquired the knowledge of holographic filming, he couldn’t stop himself. Every day he immersed himself in the act of creation, like a man who no longer belonged to the real world.


“I loved how passionate he was, and he . . . he fell in love with me. He was like a meteor that had crashed into my life, something I had never experienced. Each day we experimented with new camera angles, new techniques, new editing styles, and then went to his hotel room to read and debate and make love. He loved thinking about light and shadows. Van Gogh’s ideal was to capture the turbulence of air and light, and that was Arthur’s ideal as well. He told me that the sky on Mars was different from the sky on Earth, and he loved being able to see the stars in sunlight.


“Arthur didn’t want to leave. His stay on Mars was supposed to last only three months, but he asked for an extension of another three months. At the end of that, he still didn’t want to leave. He asked other Terrans to bring the technology back to Earth while he stayed behind. We began to live together.”


Janet held a glass but didn’t drink from it. She told her story coolly and slowly. From time to time she glanced at Eko, but most of the time she looked out the window. Her atelier was on the second story of the archive, facing due south, and there was plenty of sun. Outside the window was a row of short palm trees whose tops just reached the floor of the office. In the distance they could see a domed building that resembled a mosque. The light struck Janet’s face from the side, breaking into a tessellated pattern against the texture of her skin. Though eighteen years had passed, the light of reminiscence was clearly connecting her to the past.


Eko sat across a small round table from her. He also held a glass containing a reddish liquid. Listening to Janet, he could picture the young Davosky like a meteor, direct, quick. It was a different image from the old man on his deathbed, but Eko felt the core of his teacher’s being.


“I’ve always wondered about something,” he said. “Why did Mars allow him to stay? Weren’t the Martians suspicious of his motives? How could they be sure he wasn’t a spy here to steal technology?”


“I was his guarantor. Myself and my father. My father was Secretary General of Information at the time, and he agreed to sponsor Arthur after I begged him.”


“Did you get married?”


“No. We thought about it, but in the end we didn’t.”


“Where did you live, then?”


“In Arthur’s hotel room. Since he wasn’t a Martian, he couldn’t be allocated a residential unit.”


Eko didn’t know how to continue. He wanted to ask what had happened during the eight years they were together and why Davosky had left Mars in the end. His teacher never spoke of that time, as though it were a black hole into which words disappeared. He struggled to find the right phrasing.


But Janet spoke before he could. “Tell me: How’s Arthur doing now?”


Eko was shocked. He had planned to tell her all about Arthur’s life on Earth during the last decade before bringing up the end. He looked at her intent expression. Though she tried to keep the question casual, the tension was obvious in her voice and face. Her smile was frozen, like an expanding balloon stretched taut. With Eko’s reply, it would either let the air out and relax, or burst. She didn’t rush him, but her held breath and intense gaze put even more pressure on Eko. He couldn’t lie, nor could he delay answering indefinitely.


“He died.”


“Oh.”


“It was lung cancer. About half a year ago.”


Janet held very still for three seconds before breaking down. Her shoulders shook and tears streamed down her cheeks. She covered her mouth with both hands, but the tears continued like a river. She struggled to be quiet, but the effort only intensified her grief. She cried as though nothing could stop her. A whole morning’s worth of politeness, constructed as a defense, had collapsed into nothing. Her vulnerability was laid bare. Though she continued to sit upright in her chair, the devastation in her pose forced one to look away.


Eko felt her anguish but didn’t know what to do. He doubted it was his place to offer her comfort. After all, she was crying for a good reason. Handing her a tissue, he looked at her and knew that his questioning was at an end. Even the matter of the chip full of Davosky’s memories had to wait for another time. For a long time he simply sat with her until she stopped crying. He sat with her through the longest noon of her life.


Before he left, Janet brought him to a small monitor. She tapped at it until the screen showed registration successful. She gave him an account number and a password, informing him that he could use them to access the Martian central archive.


“All of Arthur’s films are still there. Just look for his name.”


Janet’s voice cracked. Her eyes were swollen and her hair was no longer neatly brushed. But Eko found her beautiful. There was nothing that enhanced a person’s beauty more than genuine emotion. For most of her forty-five years of life, Janet struck those around her as invulnerable. But today she lost the most precious thing in her life. In her heart, she had always believed that Arthur would return one day, and the expectation had made her lonely but open and strong. That was all over now. Eko had ended her hope.


*


Davosky was dead, but the world didn’t stop advancing. Neither Mars nor Earth ceased to spin simply because a dreamer had died.


The Earth of the twenty-second century was a world dominated by media, which became the pillar of the world economy. Manufactured images and the personalized web altered social structure and changed the relationship between the individual and the world. As the economy based on physical goods was devalued, trade in IP saved the world.


You are the web. This was the heart of the IP economy. Everyone contributed their knowledge, and the globe was interconnected into a web so that endless commercial opportunities could be born from the exchange of knowledge. In this web of commerce, even a single sentence or a stray thought could turn into a whole array of products. Trade on this web of knowledge was a revolution, a spring without a source, a business that had effectively zero cost and nearly infinite returns.


In this revolution, every thought, every sketch, every smiling face was part of the world’s GDP. Everyone sold, bought, hid their own creations, and then enticed others with revelation of these secrets for money. Any idea could generate income over the web, but without the web there was no income. The web was the locus of incessant sparks. Capital overpowered nation-states. Three giant media conglomerates vied for dominance of the world, grew into empires, lobbed propaganda back and forth, and encouraged and discouraged opinions as they sought increased profits. The description from two centuries earlier remained applicable: Investment in media has everything to do with profit and nothing to do with value.


On the other hand, the Mars of the twenty-second century was also a world of media. But on Mars, media weren’t synonymous with the economy but represented the lifestyle everyone lived. Media created a stable electronic space connected to the various ateliers. It was like a massive cavern in which everyone was allowed to store their creations and from which everyone was free to take what others had stored. The space contained a clear record of copyright and attribution, but there was no profit to be made. To take and to give were both duties, while money was allocated to everyone without regard to their participation in this exchange of ideas.


Eko understood the concept of media on Earth very well. He was familiar with their fickleness, with tidal waves of fads and trends. He knew how to paint the treasure chest so that it aroused the desire to pay for the privilege of opening the lid. But he had no understanding of media on Mars. In his imagination, media on Mars resembled a silent beast, hidden in darkness, waiting for sacrifices from the faithful. He didn’t understand how individuals related to media and who was controlling whom. Without a doubt, media on Mars freed creators from the burden of having to make a living, but media also prevented creators from obtaining riches and glory.


His teacher had been a defector, Eko was now sure. He was a courageous lover and a self-aware defector. Of the twenty billion humans on Earth and Mars, he was perhaps the only one worthy of that label. He had shuttled between two planets and observed their bilateral isolation, separate evolution, reciprocal distancing, and mutual ignorance.


*


After leaving the Tarkovsky Film Archive, Eko followed the road to Dance School #1, Duncan Troupe. Since the dance school was also in Russell District, he didn’t have far to walk. Following the electronic map, he took a footpath through an area full of shops until he saw the diamond-shaped one-story building. Through the glass walls he could see girls, all dance students, practicing inside.


Between the footpath and the wall of the studio was a gap filled with flowers. Eko walked along the path until he was next to the building and glanced inside.


Luoying Sloan. He recognized her from Maearth and the welcome reception. She was practicing at one end of the dance studio by herself while the other students stretched along the barre under the direction of an instructor.


Eko observed her quietly. He didn’t film. He had studied all the publicly available material on her, and now he wanted to see her in person. Luoying was dancing by herself, practicing the same set of moves again and again. A series of short hops followed by a high leap as her body spun several times in the air. Her dark leotard made her seem even more lithe and pale, and her ink-black hair was neatly pinned up in a bun. From time to time she took a break to get a drink of water, stopped to look outside, and then returned to her practice.


Eko was looking for the right subject, and he didn’t yet know if she was the one. He took Theon’s suggestion, though not for the reasons Theon tried to entice him with. He had little interest in following around a princess like some paparazzo. But after reviewing her public records and learning what she had done on Earth, he was curious. The reports he had read were in dry and spare prose, but the tension hidden between the lines intrigued him. He tried to imagine the girl, tried to guess where the tension had come from. She looked utterly unremarkable, like a small bottle whose bland white exterior belied the contradictory torrents of thought waging war within—a bottle that contained and concealed a turbulent sea.


The afternoon sunlight slanted to the other side of the dance school, and the long blades of grass cast shadows against the glass wall. Luoying was finished with her practice. She sat down, untied the ribbons from around her ankles, slipped off the pointe shoes, and packed them away. Smiling, she said goodbye to the teacher at the other end of the studio.


Eko was pacing back and forth some distance from the studio, trying to figure out a way to introduce himself to Luoying. At that moment a boy about Luoying’s age approached the dance school along the footpath. He was tall and slender, with broad shoulders holding up a long uniform jacket, topped by a handsome face. Eko hid himself behind a tree.


The boy peeked inside the dance school, glanced at the time on his button, and waited on the lane outside. A few minutes later Luoying emerged with her backpack. The boy smiled and took the bag from her. The pair walked away together, side by side, without speaking.


The scene aroused Eko’s curiosity. He saw between them a kind of simple tranquility, but he couldn’t tell if they were a couple. They didn’t kiss or hug, but he also didn’t sense any polite distance. The way they had smiled at each other spoke of some shared understanding. The overall impression was one of being completely at ease, rather like the mood of Mars City itself. There was no sense of rush, of desperate need; rather, everything was without guile, artless.


It was such a stark contrast to the world Eko came from. He lived in a city whose prosperity was based on the entertainment industry. People rushed everywhere like fluttering birds and obsessed over their riddle-like relationships and statuses. He was used to the desperate need to be alluring and the harried sense of insecurity. But here, where everyone strolled around and paused to chat in the streets as though they had all the time in the world, he felt out of place.


Watching the two figures walking away, Eko tried to imagine Luoying’s childhood, tried to imagine how one built a web of friendships and other relationships in this serene city. The idea of interviewing Luoying felt hollow. He turned and headed back toward the station.


On the tube train, Eko recalled the exhibition hall inside the archive. Crystal cubes of different sizes were scattered around the hall. Inside, he could see various scenes: three-dimensional figures moving about a miniature, vivid, living world. Next to each cube was a metal plaque explaining the film the scene was taken from. A sense of absurdity seized Eko. He realized that he was just like the tiny people inside those cubes. He also lived inside a crystal box— not just now, but since long before he had come to Mars.