MEDAL




On the way to the Registry of Files, Anka told Luoying the truth about the revolution.


They sat side by side in the tube train. Anka leaned against the side of the car, an arm on the tiny table supporting his forehead, his legs extended straight ahead of him. He looked relaxed and free, his cold blue eyes as unperturbed as lake water on winter nights.


Luoying turned to him. “What did Chania mean earlier by starting a revolution?”


A gentle smile appeared on his face. “Oh, that. She’s talking about a play.”


“A play?”


“A comedy. It’s about Earth and Mars. You have some lines in it.” “What? I know nothing about it.”


“Don’t worry. Your part is small.” Anka’s smile grew wider. “You and I are both in the chorus, which offers commentary on the action. It’s easy. Once in a while we sing, ‘Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful!’ or ‘Ah, so great, so, so great!’ After you’ve recuperated a couple more days at home, you’ll pick up the gist with a few runthroughs.”


“Is that all?” Luoying let out a sigh of relief. “I was so nervous when she used the word ‘revolution.’”


“The title of the play is indeed Revolution. It’s a response to the Creativity Fair.”


“Wait. This is for the Creativity Fair?”


“No. It’s not part of the competition. The plan is to perform the play for the public on the day of the finals.”


“So we’re not boycotting the fair?”


“More like we’re boycotting it by participating.”


“Ah . . . okay.”


Luoying relaxed and smiled. She had been worried that the others were planning some dramatic revolutionary act; it was a relief to find out the truth.


Is a revolution a good thing? She had been pondering this question since Chania’s first message. She felt that her inquiries remained insufficient, leaving her uncertain if they should resist this world, and specifically which parts of this world. The whole morning she drove herself to distraction as she thought of the possibilities behind Chania’s declaration, speculated on their secret plans, and guessed at the consequences of those actions and the reactions of Rudy and Grandfather. But Anka’s answer had drained all the anxiety out of her. Apparently reality was more creative than all her conjectures. A play called Revolution—a comedy; that was it. She laughed to herself.


“I’m actually going to be in the competition proper,” she told Anka.


“Oh?”


“Gielle added me to her team.”


“Ah.”


“I didn’t want to do it, but Gielle was so enthusiastic that I couldn’t turn her down.”


“What are you making?”


“Clothing, an outfit that generates electricity. Pierre is an expert with photoelectricity and membrane fabrication. I think he’s found a way to incorporate the technology in our roofs into a soft, wearable material.”


“Really?” Anka suddenly sat straight up, his expression grave. A light came into his eyes. “What kind of material?”


“I haven’t seen it,” said Luoying. “Gielle told me it can be used to make transparent armor.”


“Interesting,” said Anka.


“Want to tell me what you’re thinking?” asked Luoying.


“I can’t quite explain it yet.”


Luoying could see that Anka was preoccupied. He gazed outside the car for a while, his fingers gently tapping against the small table. After some time, he asked “Can you ask Pierre if others can use his invention?”


“Meaning you?”


Anka nodded without elaboration.


“Sure. I’ll ask.”


She saw that Anka had the same look of calm excitement he had had when he was pulling her through the crowd on Earth. It made his whole person seem sharper and more vivid, as though he had come into focus; she hadn’t seen him like that in a long time.


*


As the tube train came to a stop, Luoying refocused on the goal of this trip. Her mood now was very different from the last time she was at the Registry of Files.


For a moment she stood before the door, gazing up at the gray colonnade in front of the building and the statues on both sides. They seemed to be alive, their expressions thoughtful or passionate, somber but kind, as though welcoming her. She took a deep breath and stepped through the door, her heart at peace. During the month-plus since she had been back, she had found out so many secrets that she was no longer as anxious and confused as last time, no longer doubting whether she should pursue her inquiries. Since she had come this far, she knew that the question was no longer whether she should proceed but how.


Uncle Laak was waiting for them in the lobby. Standing ramrod straight and looking grave, he shook hands with Anka and Luoying, the same way he would greet other visitors to the Registry. Though his black pullover sweater and pants were not a uniform nor formal dress, the look was equally dignified. For a moment he gazed at Luoying, his face expressionless.


Luoying handed him the envelope; Laak opened it and read the contents without speaking before folding the paper and putting it back inside the envelope. Luoying stared at his face, a bit tense.


Without changing his expression Laak nodded.


“Come with me,” he said.


Relieved, she and Anka followed. But Laak stopped and politely addressed Anka.


“I’m sorry. I don’t want to separate you, but the document authorizes only Luoying.”


Luoying and Anka looked at each other. She wanted to argue, but Anka stopped her.


“Rules are rules,” Anka said softly. “I’ll wait for you here.”


After a moment of hesitation Luoying nodded. Without Anka she felt much more alone and anxious. She hurried to catch up to Laak. After a retina and fingerprint scan, they passed through a glass door and entered a short, empty gray corridor devoid of decoration.


At the end of the corridor was a metal door. Laak passed his hand over the scanner, entered the password, and pressed three switches. The two thick, heavy leaves of the door swung open silently. Luoying held her breath, peering into the widening slit of light. Gradually a vast hall filled with bookcases came into view. Hungrily she looked around. The hall was approximately circular, and the rows of bookcases stretched into the distance without end. Each case was about three meters tall, made of some brown metallic material arranged in neat ranks like an army awaiting orders.


“Whose file would you like to see?” asked Laak.


“My grandfather’s,” said Luoying. “If possible, also my great-grandfather’s. And my parents’, of course.”


Laak nodded and led her to the west side of the hall. She had the impression that he had known her choices before her arrival, and the question was just part of a procedure he had to follow. They walked through a main corridor between the cases, his steps steady and purposeful.


To Luoying, the tall cases around her appeared as walls inlaid with a grid of tiny photographs of smiling faces, like glowing buttons along the horizontal shelves of each case. It was like walking past a miniature world flattened into two parallel surfaces.


“Uncle Laak, does every Martian have a file here?” Her voice echoed in the vast space.


“That’s correct. Everyone does.”


“Why do we have to do this? Isn’t all the information in the central archive already?”


Without stopping, Laak answered. “It’s not a good idea to rely overmuch on any form of storage, and it’s especially bad to rely exclusively on a single form of storage. On Earth the Swiss bank vaults survived long after the popularization of electronic currency for the same reasons.”


“Are physical objects stored here, then?”


“That’s true for some individuals. Not all.”


“What kind of objects?”


“Donations from the subject or the subject’s heirs. Occasionally artifacts of historical significance.”


“It doesn’t depend on the position or status of the subject?”


“It doesn’t.”


“Did my parents leave anything behind?”


Laak stopped and looked at her. His gaze softened, no longer so formal and distant. For a moment Luoying found herself looking into the face of the Uncle Laak she remembered from childhood.


“Their legacy is your responsibility,” he said. “If you find . . . anything, you may donate it to the Registry—if you want to, that is.”


Luoying looked down, slightly embarrassed. She understood what Laak was hinting at. To find the legacy of her family was her responsibility, but she had been asking questions of outsiders as though they knew her family better than she did herself. In Laak’s face she read an unspoken concern for her well-being. The wrinkles on his brow and at the corners of his mouth appeared even deeper to her. Left by years of worry, they remained even in his moments of tranquility. It was as though his face were a rock that had been carved by the waves over eons, not a beach that could be easily smoothed. He looked far older than his age, and his figure faded into the sea of looming bookcases.


“Uncle Laak,” she said, “I know you’re right. What others say cannot be a substitute for my own judgment and continuation of the legacy of my family. But there are some facts I have to understand. Without these facts, I cannot come to a judgment.”


“Such as?”


“Such as . . . did Grandfather kill many people?”


“No more than other warriors, and no fewer.”


“Did Grandfather put a stop to the revolution and protests on Mars in my parents’ time?”


“Yes.”


“Why?”


Laak said nothing. Luoying recalled that he provided only facts, not reasons. She lowered her eyes.


After waiting a moment to be sure she had no more questions, Laak continued forward. Luoying followed.


They passed through rows of metal bookcases studded with miniature portraits like diamonds; passed through frozen smiles and the lives of the dead; passed through all the souls who had ever existed on Mars. Luoying’s eyes flitted from face to face. They all had the same young, fresh faces. Whether the owners of the portraits were still hale and hearty or had been dead for decades, there was no distinction between them in this world of shelves and portraits. The names of the individuals were sorted alphabetically, wiping away all differences in rank, history, age, and personality. Everyone had a spot on the shelves, as though they had been part of the shelves from the start and, after a few decades spent in the world, returned home.


Above each portrait was a box, and the e-paper label in front of each box presented scrolling images and text. As Luoying went by, she saw familiar neighborhoods, children’s classrooms, mines in the desolate wilderness, Jupiter and the galaxy. The texts were largely snippets from daily life. As her eyes roamed, she felt as if countless details were falling into her mind, swirling about, coalescing into the shapes of individual men and women. She didn’t know if the details could really represent someone, how many details were necessary to piece together such a shape, and what the relation was between the shape and the person.


“Uncle Laak,” she asked, “have you worked at the Registry for long?”


“Thirty years now.”


“That’s a long time. Weren’t you the Superintendent of Education before?”


“That was only part-time.”


“Do you like your work here?”


“I do.”


“Why?”


“There’s no answer to that.” Laak caressed the photographs on the shelf next to him as he walked slowly past. “For you, perhaps it’s hard to understand. You want to see all your potential choices and then rationally pick the one you want, justifying it with reasons. But in reality, if you spend your life doing something, it becomes part of your life. You will like it without having to choose it. I can tell you that I’m familiar with every shelf in here and can take you directly to whoever you want. I know this place as well as I know myself. During the thirty years I’ve been in charge, nothing has leaked out of here contrary to regulations; there has been no chaos, and no one has been treated any differently from anyone else. This is my life. It’s a fortress. No matter what happens outside, you can find the souls of the past here without being disturbed.”


Luoying looked at Laak’s straight back and suddenly envied him. He spoke with such conviction, while she couldn’t find a single belief in her mind that she could convey with equal certainty. The price for his conviction was decades of his time. Though he spoke calmly, she knew that no one could contradict him. This was strength, the real strength in words.


They stopped. Laak stood in front of a case and pulled off the e-paper in front of a box on the fourth shelf down, handing it to Luoying. hans sloan.


Heart pounding, she looked at the box and those around it. The whole shelf belonged to the Sloans, and there were five of them: Richard, Hans, Quentin, Rudy, Luoying. Her mother wasn’t here because the boxes were arranged on the shelves by the name at birth, without regard to changes due to marriage or otherwise. She held the translucent, thin sheet, a bit uncertain.


She began to scroll through it. The text started with a simple summary of Hans’s life.


“Take as long as you want,” said Laak. “I’ll be in my office. If you need me, use the blue button by the door.”


Laak left, and Luoying was the only one in the vast circular hall. She looked up and realized that the ceiling resembled the ceiling of the Pantheon she had seen in Rome. Tall, solemn, magnificent, the translucent dome glowed stately in the sun, as though made of clouds. The homage to one of humankind’s ancient sacred buildings was intentional. This was not a temple of the gods but a monument to human souls.


*


Hans was born in an abandoned prospecting aircraft at the foot of Angela Bluff: 11°S 46°W, 2120 C.E., 30 B.R.


His birth was simultaneous with the death of his mother. Richard Sloan, a twenty-six-year-old pilot, was flying his twenty-fiveyear-old wife, Hanna Sloan, through Aquila Canyon to get back to Camp Sixteen so Hanna could give birth. An unexpected dust storm struck, however, and Richard’s plane was forced to land at the base of the cliff due to a mechanical malfunction. There they sent out a distress call through satellite link, hoping to be rescued.


But as Hanna’s contractions grew more intense and frequent, no rescuers came. Richard hailed the base multiple times, begging for aid, but never received a definitive answer. (Communication records at the base showed that during the fifty-one hours the couple was trapped, Richard spoke with the base fourteen times.)


The rescue was delayed due to legal wrangling back at the base. Richard found out that there was an intellectual property dispute over the navigation guidance system, and lawyers were evaluating the legal risk to the rescue company. Richard tried to negotiate a solution over the comms, growing more agitated and enraged as time went on. In the end, Hanna delivered the baby herself and lost consciousness after massive loss of blood. A few hours later she died.


As Richard held his wife, he felt life leaving her bit by bit as her body cooled. Helpless, he sobbed, and his grief turned into anger. He named the baby Hans to commemorate Hanna. After wiping the baby clean, he wrapped the tiny body in his flight suit, gave Hans the last of the water, and then tried to keep the baby warm with his own body heat. Father and son huddled in a corner of the plane and continued to hail for rescuers.


(The above segment was summarized from an oral account by Richard Sloan in the third year of the war. For the next forty-four years, the rest of his life, he never discussed the event again.)


By the time the rescue ship finally arrived, Richard had had no food or water for forty-eight hours. Though he was dehydrated and starving, he moved with determination and purpose. Declining to be helped, he climbed into the rescue ship by himself, refused to answer any questions or to sit with others, and turned down all medical help except food and water.


Forty years later, Lorraine Elaine, who had been a trainee nurse on the rescue ship, recalled the following: “After he handed the baby to me, he went into a corner and sat down by himself. But his eyes never left my hands as he watched me care for the newborn. Every time I turned, I could see his eyes, burning with pain, grief, and something darker. As his face darkened, the eyes only glowed brighter. Every time my eyes met his, I couldn’t help but shudder.


“One time, when I was changing the newborn’s diaper, my hand slipped and the blanket around the baby slid as though the baby itself were sliding. He jumped up right away, scaring the other passengers. I found it puzzling at the time that he was so concerned for the baby, and yet, instead of coming over to take care of it himself, he stayed far away. Thinking back on it now, I realize it was because he was afraid that his dark mood would affect the baby. Of course it was a bit irrational, since moods don’t spread like some gas . . . I guess I have to say, if I had been in his position, I would have done the same.


“He sat in the corner by himself, not talking to anyone, cradling his wife’s body, holding her hardened, purple hand as though she were just sleeping on his lap. I tried to imagine what it was like in that canyon, with sand and dust swirling over the sky, while the woman you loved died in your arms, the happiness you were on the verge of experiencing slipping away second by second. I thought it must have been terrible. But I was only twenty-one at the time and couldn’t understand just how terrible.”


The rescue ship belonged to the third Martian branch of Homeward Bound, an emergency rescue company. As soon as it landed at berth #3, Camp Sixteen, Richard got off the ship without speaking to anyone, ran into the headquarters building, and assaulted the chief executive officer, leaving him with severe injuries. Before an alarm could be raised, he managed to make his way to UPC, a computer company, and killed its president, Phillip Lyde. Then he returned to the rescue company, took his infant son, and escaped into a life of exile.


Three months later, war broke out.


*


“I knew that my grandfather was born in the first year of the war.” Luoying paused, and then continued in a more depressed tone.


“But I never knew that he was the cause of the war.”


“There’s something I don’t quite understand,” said Anka, frowning. “Why did your great-grandfather kill the president of a computer company?”


“I found it strange when I read about it, too, so I looked into it more. The situation was complicated. The main issue involved a commercial dispute. At that time Homeward Bound’s rescue ships were all out of commission as the result of a failed software upgrade of the navigation guidance system. But it wasn’t an accident. The fact was all of Homeward Bound’s ships ran the operating system from UPC, which charged a high price for software upgrades. Homeward Bound, unwilling to pay the cost, decided to hack the upgrade package themselves. The unauthorized action led to UPC flipping a remote kill switch that shut down all of Homeward Bound’s ships until they paid a penalty.


“On the day of Richard Sloan’s accident, Homeward Bound contacted UPC to explain that there was an emergency and asked UPC to grant a temporary, onetime license to the software. UPC refused, fearful that the temporary license might be hacked to enable the unauthorized use of the software indefinitely. Richard Sloan tried to call UPC during those fifty-one hours but was unable to reach a decision-maker. Initially my great-grandfather thought it was because low-level employees at UPC failed to escalate his issue properly, but later, as he attacked the executive officer of Homeward Bound to avenge his wife, the executive told him that his call had in fact been transferred to Phillip Lyde, the president of UPC, but Lyde personally issued the directive not to grant the temporary license.


“But why did Lyde do such a thing? It turned out that my great-grandfather was employed by SG Siliconics, a chipmaker and UPC’s biggest competitor. UPC and SG Siliconics were locked in a heated battle over a particular large customer, and my greatgrandfather, whose specialty was mining and refining, had been surveying the area behind Angela Bluff for a potential site for a new mine. There’s probably no way to ever find definitive proof of the detailed commercial interests and private emotions behind this incident, but the executive officer told my great-grandfather that Lyde said on the phone, ‘The baby isn’t my problem, but my shareholders will never allow me to jeopardize three hundred billion euros.’ Consumed by rage, my great-grandfather let the UPC executive go and went after Phillip Lyde instead.” “That is complicated,” said Anka.


“You haven’t heard the most complicated part yet,” said Luoying. She had memorized practically everything she had read in the Registry. She had never devoted as much effort to memorizing anything in her life. “One week after Richard Sloan committed murder and became a fugitive, he was captured. But one week after that, he was rescued and made into the leader of the rebel alliance.”


“What’s the rebel alliance?”


“That’s the predecessor to the Martian Freedom Fighters.”


“What kind of people were they?”


“Just ordinary people. Pilots, engineers, scientists. They came from all the Martian bases.”


Anka silently pondered what Luoying had said.


She went on. “There was a great deal of controversy about this part, and I couldn’t read all the material or memorize it. All kinds of reasons were proffered for the war, and these debates filled many pages in both my grandfather’s and great-grandfather’s files.”


Anka nodded. “I imagine that the war didn’t erupt by chance. The unfortunate events surrounding your grandfather’s birth might be accidents, but the rebel alliance didn’t arise because of that. My feeling is that they had been waiting for a triggering event.”


“I think that’s right,” said Luoying. “But I still can’t figure out how the accident was connected to the war that erupted right after.”


“Let me see . . .” Anka looked deep in thought. “I think there are two important clues: one is the competition between UPC and SG Siliconics, and the other is the IP dispute between Homeward Bound and UPC. Given the importance of the central archive to Mars, it seems that the latter was more likely the reason. Or maybe both were involved.”


“Maybe. But do you think these two causes are enough to lead to war? I just can’t see how commercial or IP disputes can lead to war—a war that killed so many.”


“It’s very hard to understand such large historical events from our position.”


Luoying was seized by a sudden wave of emotion. She had been trying hard to describe the events dispassionately, to be objective, but grief overwhelmed her at that moment. “I hate asking these questions. To think that my great-grandmother died in such a horrible way . . . I wish I could be like everyone else, focused only on home and family, but I can’t. I have to ask the big questions, to pursue the truth. I have to know whether what my greatgrandfather did was right. Why did he lead everyone to build this new world? Was his rebellion right?”


Anka put an arm around her shoulders and caressed her hair. “I don’t know about the new world or the old, but I do know it was wrong to leave two people and their newborn in the dust storm. Your great-grandfather did what he felt he had to do. The war that came after wasn’t something a single man could have controlled.”


He kissed her forehead, and as she gazed into his lake-like irises, tears spilled from her eyes. She leaned against his shoulders, lost to the tides of her emotions. She could see, in her mind’s eye, that looming cliff with its rough red surface standing in the howling wind. The swirling dust and sand was like a mask that had been peeled off and shattered into a million fragments, covering the sun, devoid of all concern and restraint, attacking every life in sight with a naked, savage will. The fragments were like an army in which the only soul was collective, and the vortex of dust and sand surrounded the abandoned ship. Inside, two people, still ignorant of what fate held in store for them, leaned together, as she and Anka were doing now, keeping each other warm with body heat, still trusting in false hope, enduring cold, hunger, and the pangs of labor, supported by the sweet expectation of a newborn and the warm anticipation of rescue, telling each other that everything would be all right to disguise their rising anxiety, pushing the diminishing supply of food and water to the partner, knowing nothing of the tumultuous changes to come. That was the pair’s final shared moment of mutual reliance.


Luoying’s vision blurred. She refused to sob, and the tears swirled in her eyes until they finally returned to the depth of her heart.


She sat up and looked expectantly at Anka. “Do you think we can go visit the site of the crash?”


“I don’t know.” Anka hesitated before continuing. “We can ask Runge’s mining group to see if there’s still a mine out there.”


“Does your squadron fly there?”


“No. All our training is limited to north of the cliffs.”


“Can’t you fly there on your own?”


“That will be hard.”


“Because of regulations?”


“Only partly.” Anka shook his head. “The technical challenge is a much bigger problem.”


As he continued to explain, his long, bony fingers flitted through the air, imitating different types of aircraft.


“It’s not hard to obtain a flight permit,” he said. “But even the smallest ship I can get to is about the size of five tube train cars.” His fingers sketched out the shape of a long loaf of bread. “We’ll need at least three trained crew members, two to pilot the ship and one to oversee the engine. Also, something like that has to fly close to the ground and probably can’t climb over the mountains.”


“Why does it have to fly close to the ground?”


“These ships rely on ground effects to achieve lift. They can’t go too high.”


“What about shuttles?”


Anka shook his head. “They’re completely different. A space shuttle is essentially a rocket, not an aircraft. The larger shuttles are restricted to flying official missions such as visits to Deimos. Also, the pilot isn’t completely in control of a shuttle. Shuttles depend on ground control and guidance, and are only semiautonomous. As for the smaller atmospheric shuttles . . .”


Luoying waited, but Anka seemed to hesitate, unsure how to continue.


“What’s wrong?” asked Luoying.


“The smaller shuttles are actually fighters,” said Anka. His tone was still even, but there was a trace of a bitter smile at the corners of his mouth. “They rely on omnidirectional jets for propulsion. Piloted by a single person, they are very nimble and effective. I can certainly take mine out on private missions . . . except the one Fitz assigned to me is broken. I can’t repair it yet because I lack the replacement parts.”


“Why did you get assigned a broken fighter?”


“He claimed that he wanted me to demonstrate what I’ve learned on Earth,” said Anka with a laugh. “The real reason is the argument I had with him. When I returned, I was supposed to get one that was in good condition, but after that night I got one that couldn’t fly. I’m tired of fighting, so I’m still thinking of a way to fix it.”


“How can he treat you like that?” asked Luoying. “You should file a complaint. It’s not fair.”


“Not fair? Nothing is ever fair.”


“Then you haven’t flown since you’ve been back?”


“No. I’ve been serving as a mechanic.”


“Didn’t you learn to fix aircraft on Earth? Maybe you can just do the same thing.”


“It’s not that easy,” said Anka. “Aircraft on Earth generate lift from the atmosphere. Lift is directly proportional to the dynamic pressure, one half of pressure times velocity squared. Since the Martian atmospheric pressure is only about one percent of the pressure on Earth, while the gravity is around thirty-eight percent, the same aircraft from Earth essentially must fly about six times as fast to stay aloft on Mars. That translates to a velocity of thousands of kilometers per hour, which is unsustainable without special materials. Since our aircraft don’t rely on the atmosphere to generate lift, they require much more power and higher energy conversion efficiency from the engines, which are far more complex than the ones on Earth. Even if I could learn everything I need to, I can’t fix some of the valves and components by hand.”


Luoying sighed, looking at Anka sympathetically. “You know, I’m beginning to miss that old junker of yours.”


Anka laughed and gazed warmly into her eyes. “I told you so. And you wouldn’t believe me at the time.”


Anka had taken Luoying flying on Earth. It was unlike any of the flying taxis Luoying had taken. Anka had acquired a retired old fighter and removed all the weapons systems and other extraneous structures until it was basically a flying engine that he could pilot around for fun. Though the airplane rode turbulence about as well as a fifty-year-old donkey, it could achieve much higher altitudes than ordinary private aircraft.


As soon as Luoying landed, she threw up. Anka laughed while she berated him for not warning her about what to expect. He told her that she would miss that plane someday, but she was adamant that such a day would never come. “Never” turned out not to be so long.


She still remembered that dusk. Her stomach roiled as though there were a storm inside, but her heart was shaking with astonished pleasure. She had never seen clouds like that, as bright and colorful as rainbows, stretching from beneath the airplane’s wings to the horizon. The gigantic setting sun glowed an orange-red in the distance, while the puffy clouds were lit up from within, billowing in every hue. The transition between the colors was seamless, from white to gold to crimson to deep purple, and the whole sight was as magnificent as a sacred church or temple. Once in a while, blue sky peeked out from between the colorful cloud patches.


Sitting before her in the pilot’s seat, Anka pointed out various sights outside the canopy. She clutched him from behind tightly, leaning against his shoulder, so excited that she felt she couldn’t breathe.


Such beautiful clouds on that day, she thought. I’ll never see clouds like that again. There were no clouds on Mars, so even if she were to fly again, she wouldn’t see anything like it. The occasion on which Anka had taken her turned out to be the only time. They had flown once and only once.


Abruptly, Anka reached out to caress her forehead. “Don’t pine after something you can’t have. If I could fly, I would have done so long before now.”


Luoying looked at him with a heavy heart. She knew he was telling the truth. He loved flying far more than she did, and if he told her he couldn’t fly his broken fighter, then that was final. Anka was sitting on the bench in the Registry hall with a relaxed posture, one hand on the back of the seat behind her, the other resting in his lap. But she could see the defiance beneath his smile, a defiance that made her sad. She didn’t know what to say to him.


She tried to change the topic instead. “I also found a medal. In the Registry, I mean.”


“What sort of medal?”


“It belonged to my great-grandfather. Do you remember the medals they gave out to our heroes during the war?”


“Yes. There’s an eagle on it—a desert eagle.”


“That’s right. But it wasn’t until today that I learned that the desert eagle wasn’t the original design by my great-grandfather. The desert eagle came into use only later in the war, after the other leaders of the rebel alliance decided on a change.”


“So what was your great-grandfather’s original design?”


“An apple.”


“What?” Anka blurted, almost laughing.


“Yes, an apple.” She held out her hand and opened her fingers. “See?”


Anka picked up the tiny copper-colored medal and admired it.


“There wasn’t a lot of explanation in his file,” said Luoying. “I don’t know why Richard Sloan picked this design.”


“It’s a bit . . .” Anka paused, searching for the right word.


“. . . unusual.”


“What came to your mind as soon as you saw it?”


“Paris and the pageant of goddesses.”


“Possible.” Luoying nodded. “As a metaphor for the origin of the war? Using the bloody fields of Troy to comment on the present?” She paused and looked down at her own hand. “That wasn’t what I was thinking. My immediate reaction was another story.”


“Which one?”


“Eden.”


“You think . . . the apple is a metaphor for mankind’s rebellion against God?”


“No,” said Luoying softly. “I wasn’t thinking of anything grand like that. I can’t tell you if Earth was meant to represent Eden, and the meaning behind Mars’s rebellion. But I thought of a man looking at the woman next to him, silently saying in his heart, ‘For you, I’m willing to fall.’”


Anka said nothing, but his arm tightened around Luoying’s shoulders.


“My grandfather lost his mother,” Luoying continued in her low voice. “My father lost his mother, and I lost mine. Maybe all the women in my family have to die young—”


“Don’t be silly,” Anka broke in. “During the war years, almost a third of our people died. It’s nothing out of the ordinary.”


“But maybe it’s my fate.”


“No! These are unfortunate coincidences, that’s all. There’s no fate.”


Luoying looked at Anka, who appeared to be unusually serious. Something caught in her throat, and she felt fragile. She didn’t know why she was saying such pessimistic things, but she felt that after learning the tragic history of her family, she could imagine only a tragic future to achieve some measure of balance in her mind. She felt absolutely exhausted, unable to move forward, helpless. Against the irresistible tide of fate, an individual’s struggles were useless. It was so simple to wipe out a life, as easy as wind blowing away dust. She sobbed against Anka’s shoulder. Without saying anything, he held her, supporting her back with his steady arm.


For a long time they sat next to each other on the bench in a corner of the magnificent empty hall. Towering bronze statues stretched before them in two rows, like living gods gazing down at them, perpetual enigmas between the thick gray columns. The hall stretched far into the distance, where Greek letters spelled out fate, poetry, and wisdom. Silence enveloped the hall, devoid of the signs of any other person.