STARS




As sand flowed past her, Luoying dared not look up.


The slope she was on wasn’t too steep, and her feet found purchase. She knew she could hold on for at least a while, though she didn’t know how much longer the wind whipping about her would last. Like all children born on Mars, she understood the danger of dust storms.


She turned her head to the side and locked eyes with Anka, who nodded at her. His blue eyes were like the sea in the deepening twilight, and in their depths she saw serenity. Luoying snapped the switch that shut off the vibrating wings, waiting patiently for the storm to pass.


“Can you hear me?” Anka’s voice crackled in her headset.


Luoying nodded. Her throat was too dry for her to speak.


“Look up and to your right,” said Anka. “See that large boulder? Do you think you can climb up to it?”


Luoying looked where he was pointing, about twenty to thirty meters upslope. She squeezed her fingers to keep herself calm and strained to smile at Anka. “No problem.”


Anka got up first and then helped her up. Slowly they made their way toward the boulder, deliberate step by deliberate step. Luoying made sure that three of her limbs were in contact with the side of the mountain at all times. Anka was to her left and below, not touching her, but ready to catch her if she should fall. The short climb took them a very long time. Finally, Anka climbed onto the boulder—which turned out to be another ledge—and reached down to help her up.


The two rested for a while to catch their breath. Luoying cleared her throat and asked, “I guess we’re stuck up here?”


Anka pointed to the swirling sand below them. “It’s too late in the day now. The wind has shifted to the wrong direction. We’ll die if we try to jump down.”


“What should we do?”


“Let’s discuss it with Runge.”


Luoying leaned over the edge of the platform. The mining ship remained where it was at the bottom of the crater. The two of them, however, had been carried to the east, closer to the pass. From this distance, the mining ship reminded her of a clumsy turtle crawling slowly toward them. The dust storm hung between them like a translucent orange curtain, and the temperature was plunging. They were about forty meters above the crater floor, too high to jump. Anka screamed into the mic, hoping that the crew of the ship could see them. The wireless system they used was extremely primitive, with a range of under a hundred meters. At first they received no answer. Only when the mining ship was directly below them did Runge’s voice emerge from the headset.


“Are you all right?”


“Yes, but we’re probably stuck here for the night.” Anka got to the point right away.


“How much oxygen do you have left?”


Anka glanced at the display on the oxygen bottle. “Should be enough to last until noon tomorrow.”


“Are you safe where you are?”


“Pretty safe. I took a quick look around. Behind us is an abandoned cave that we can use as shelter.”


“I’m afraid there’s no choice but to have you stay there for the night,” said Runge resignedly. “We’ll find a way to rescue you in the morning.”


“We’ll be fine,” said Anka. “Why don’t you head back to the city? You can send a rescue team tomorrow morning.”


“What’s the matter? Don’t you trust me?”


Even through the headset Luoying could picture Runge’s grinning face.


“I’d trust you with my life,” said Anka, also smiling.


“Then don’t make ridiculous suggestions. We’ll wait right here tonight. If anything changes, call.”


“Definitely.”


“I’m really sorry about this,” said Luoying. “Now we all have to be out here the whole night because of me.”


“I don’t want to go back anyway.” The speaker this time was Mira. “It’s not easy to get out here. I want to do more sightseeing.”


“Mira!” said Luoying. “I’m glad you got back to the ship safely.”


“I’m back . . . though not exactly safely.”


“What happened?”


“I twisted my ankle.”


Runge broke in to explain. “He and Leon basically rolled down the slope. He’s lucky he didn’t break a leg.”


“Did you get it taken care of?” asked Luoying anxiously.


“I taped it,” said Mira, his voice easy and carefree. “I’ll be fine.”


“It seems to be a pattern with you getting hurt every time we’re out,” said Anka, laughing. “Do you remember that time in Barcelona with the hot-air balloons?”


Mira guffawed. “That wasn’t my fault! Who could have predicted a thunderstorm? Bad luck.”


“We both fell, but only you broke a leg.”


“I seem to recall you broke your leg in Tokyo, too.”


“That’s not the same thing at all. The next time there’s an earthquake when you’re trying to take off, I want to see how you handle it.”


“I can’t wait,” said Mira. “The next time we fly, we should do it at Olympus Mons. I’m sure I’ll fly higher than you.”


“Listen to you! The tallest peak in the Solar System is no joke.”


“Who’s joking? I’ve been planning this. I’m going to fly through all the major sights of Mars. Valles Marineris is next. And also Hellas crater, probably a hundred times the size of this one.”


“All right,” said Anka with a chuckle. “If you dare to go, I’ll be there with you.”


Night fell. Luoying sat on the flat ledge, listening to Anka and Mira banter as the last rays of the sun disappeared behind the western rim. She drew up her knees and massaged her lower legs. The fall had hurt her kneecap and leg, and exhaustion sharpened the pain. Anka stayed busy even as he was chatting. He moved the rocks blocking the mouth of the cave out of the way until there was enough space for them to squeeze inside.


The cave had probably been eroded out of the mountainside by wind. Here the cliff curled around, and the wind, deflected into a sharp curve, carved a smooth opening between the massive rocks. Luoying followed Anka into the cave, where the faint starlight failed to penetrate the inky darkness. As Luoying felt her way along the cave wall, her fingers sensed the signs of human work. There were cubbies carved into the rock, as well as a long water basin dug along the foot of the wall. Her feet crunched over collapsed and broken furniture. The cave wall had been smoothed by tools, though it was nowhere as polished as the walls at home.


To conserve their energy supply for the night, Anka had turned off the two-way wireless with the mining ship. He unfolded his wings and secured them at the mouth of the cave as a simple barrier. Then he sat down to modify the equipment.


“It’s too dim in here,” he muttered as he tried to see the electric motor of the wings in the faint starlight. “This is harder than I expected . . .”


“What are you trying to do?”


“I was hoping to disassemble one of the wings and connect the battery to the two ends. The conducting veins in the wings can function as a heater for us during the night.”


“I didn’t know you’re so handy with circuits.”


“I wouldn’t say handy, but all of us worked on the wings, so I know them well.”


“What about my costume?”


Luoying took off her dance costume, which she had worn outside the survival suit, and handed it to Anka. The costume was so light that it was like handling a cloud of puffy mist.


“The material is luminescent,” she explained. “Maybe there’s a way to light it up.”


Anka nodded. “I’ll give it a try.”


He stepped outside the cave, bringing a battery and the costume with him. Crouched in the moonlight, he tried to figure out how to turn the costume into a lamp. Luoying watched him crouch on one knee, his body a dark silhouette with a silvery glow on top of his head.


She shivered from the cold. The air temperature was now below zero, but she had been too nervous until now to notice. The formfitting survival suits they wore provided only the most basic protection, without heating elements. Since Anka was even more exposed and hadn’t moved in a while, she began to worry that he had frozen like a statue.


Just as she was about to go out of the cave to check on him, Anka came in.


“All set,” he said.


There was a glowing semispherical ball of mist in his hand, as delicate as a luminescent seashell. As he carefully stepped inside, her costume shifted through a spectrum of translucent colors, the hues flowing and swirling. The eye-catching magnificence of the stage had turned into something gentler and more lasting here, like a soft, lingering song.


After Anka placed the makeshift lamp in the middle of the room, the two took a good look at their surroundings. It had once been a living room of some kind. There was a table carved out of sandstone next to one of the inner walls, though only half of it was still standing. Hooks for hanging clothes could be seen on some of the still-intact wall sections. The decaying ruin painted a sketch of the lives that had once flourished here.


“We’re lucky to have found this place,” said Anka. He examined the cross section of a broken wall carefully. “There’s a layer of insulation and another layer that absorbs radiation. We might not last the night if we were exposed in the open.”


“Don’t we need heat, though?”


“Are you cold?”


“A little.”


“It’s going to get a lot colder during the night.” Anka lifted the bundles of folded-up wings. “Give me a hand, please.”


They unfolded a pair of wings, which were too large for the narrow space and had to be twisted and bent to fit. Carefully, Anka showed Luoying how to bend the wings into arches and erect them on the ground like a tree-branch shelter on some island. Anka brought over more batteries. Sitting near the wing roots, he began to pick apart the complicated wires.


Carefully, he attached wires from the wing tips and roots to the terminals of the battery, forming a simple circuit. In a few minutes the wing tent began to give off heat. There was a faint glow in the thin, translucent material as well, illuminating the space along with the mist lamp.


Anka made sure that everything was secure before sitting down with a sigh, finally relaxing. They sat on the floor side by side, leaning against each other.


“Still cold?”


“Better now.”


Anka put an arm around her shoulders.


“If we use up all the electricity for heating,” said Luoying, “how are we going to fly tomorrow?”


“Let’s not worry about that for now,” said Anka. “We could always hang the wings out in the sun in the morning to recharge.”


The cave didn’t seem so shabby or terrifying with the two of them together. The wings kept the place warm and glowed like curtains. Moonlight, as clear as water, limned the mouth of the cave. The survival suits they wore sealed them from head to toe, so it was impossible for them to even touch their fingers, but the pressure sensors they wore also amplified all sensations—not only the rough texture of the rocky floor but also their mutual touches. The act of leaning against each other enveloped both in a singular sensation to be savored. Luoying rested her head on Anka’s shoulder.


“We’re lucky to have friends like Runge and the others,” said Luoying.


“We are,” said Anka. “They would rather stay out here all night than risk not being able to find us tomorrow.”


“Mira worries so much about everyone . . . yet I feel he’s the happiest of all of us.”


Anka grinned. “He never takes anything too seriously, including himself.”


“I’m concerned about Chania. She’s never been happy.”


“I don’t really understand her. But I think Sorin is right: she’s too extreme.”


“Do you think there’s something going on between them?” asked Luoying, turning to look at Anka.


Anka chuckled. “Yeah.”


“But I don’t think Sorin supports Chania’s plan.”


“I think Runge is the only one who agrees with her one hundred percent.”


“Runge is also so extreme. He’s always claiming that everyone is working for self-aggrandizement. I don’t think that’s true.”


“There’s an old man in Runge’s lab,” said Anka. “He’s got a bad reputation. Since he’s in charge of a big project, everyone in the lab has to try to curry favor with him. Runge refused, so the old man has been interfering with his work in petty ways.”


“I had no idea.”


“Runge is thinking of leaving the lab, but you know how hard that is.”


Luoying sighed. “I don’t know why. But it seems all of us are having trouble readjusting to life on Mars.”


“You’re right,” said Anka. In a self-deprecating tone he added, “I suppose we all . . . think too highly of ourselves.”


“Do you also think we should start a revolution?”


“Not really.”


“Why not?”


“Because it’s useless.”


“Do you mistrust revolutions? Like Mira?”


“Not exactly the same.” Anka paused to think. “I don’t just feel that revolutions are useless; I feel everything is pointless.”


“What do you mean?”


“The problems they’ve identified are problems. But I feel that no matter how the system changes, no matter what government or way of life we adopt, the problems will always remain.”


“I . . . I’ve never thought about it that way.”


“So how do you feel?”


“I think there are things we can do to make it better, but I don’t know the best way.”


“Really?”


“Do you remember the filmmaker in the Terran delegation? He wrote to me later, saying that he thought the way we live on Mars could provide the solution to Earth’s problems. He was going to work on that. I liked his determination, regardless of the consequences. His idealism made you feel there’s a purpose in life. I wish I had such faith in some ideal that would propel me to act. I would feel so much better then.”


“Then you agree with Chania’s suggestion?”


“Not exactly.” Luoying chose her words carefully. “The others are all too fuzzy in their aims; they just have a lot of passion. But in the end I can’t tell what actions would be useful.”


Anka gazed at the costume lamp, glowing like a tiny campfire. “Don’t you think it’s funny that a Terran is trying to save Earth with lessons learned from Mars, while a bunch of Martian kids are trying to save Mars with lessons learned on Earth?”


“You’re right,” said Luoying. “That’s the part that puzzles me the most. What is the relationship between the two worlds? Even as children, we were taught that Earth eventually would become like Mars, because when knowledge and wisdom had advanced sufficiently, it was inevitable people would crave the freedom of sharing and the community of the intellect, like we have on Mars. But on Earth, everything we heard was the opposite. They say that Mars was too primitive and simple, and progress would eventually force us to become just like Earth. Who is the primitive stage of whom?


I’m so confused.”


“I think these are just empty theories.”


“So you think neither is better than the other?”


“Something like that. The war caused us to diverge in our development, that’s all. There’s no good or bad.”


Luoying also gazed at the mist light, as though seeing mirages in the darkness. “That’s also one of the reasons I can’t just support Runge and Chania. Whether the system is good or not, it’s the result of the life’s work of my grandfather and his companions. I don’t want to go against them without being sure.”


“I think the people of that time were very idealistic.”


“That’s true. I read some of Garcia’s speeches and Ronen’s essays. At the time, they weren’t thinking of some system of controlling the population. For them, the central archive was an ideal that represented truth and communication. Knowledge was the common wealth of all humanity, and everyone had the right to approach and pick from that treasure trove, like the right to freedom and existence. They argued that only by mutual understanding could they guarantee the coexistence of all faiths, to prevent cycles of slaughter, and the central archive was the best protector of the freedom of faith and conscience by allowing each to express their true beliefs without having to compromise by the need to make a living. Politics would be enriched by such honesty for all.”


“They probably never thought so many would remain hypocrites full of lies.”


“Or maybe they did, but nonetheless hoped it would be otherwise.”


After an interval of silence, Anka said, without any emotion, “I’m not idealistic like that.”


Luoying gazed at his face through the visors, not sure what to say. Anka’s dispassionate declaration made her sad.


She was about to try to comfort him, but at the last minute she changed her mind. “I wonder if the wind is still blowing.”


Anka stood up and pulled her up. “Let’s go see.”


They emerged from the mouth of the cave. The sand and dust that had filled the sky all through dusk seemed to be gone, and the night was very tranquil. Runge’s mining ship had shifted closer to the cliff.


Anka put his arms around Luoying and both leaned back to look up the cliff face. Moonlight came from the side, coating both of them in a silver sheen. The stars glowed densely overhead without twinkling. Other than the Milky Way, every other part of the sky looked about the same. Black holes from billions of light-years away were no more distinguishable than the Large Magellanic Cloud, practically close enough to touch by cosmic standards. There was no violent upheaval, no history, no stellar birth or death, only a bright web of stars quietly glowing overhead, aloof but also warm, comforting those who gazed up at them with fear and confusion.


“Do you recognize any constellations?” Luoying asked Anka. He shook his head.


“Can you find Earth?” Anka shook his head again.


Luoying sighed. “If Zeta were here, she could teach us.”


“I doubt she would know either,” said Anka. “She’s a cosmologist, and I heard that she doesn’t know any of the stars by sight or name.”


Luoying began to hum an old song. After the dust storm had abated, the yearning for peace returned. Singing, like starlight, was insubstantial but made one feel settled. Since the air was too thin to transmit sound, she sang quietly in her heart.


“I like the old folk beliefs,” said Anka abruptly.


“Like what?”


“When someone dies, they turn into a star in the sky.”


“I like that one, too. I’ve always felt that those we had known and who had passed away are stars. I think there are three hundred billion stars in the Milky Way, which is just about the number of people who have ever existed.”


Anka grinned. “We may run into a bit of a problem there. There are going to be more and more people, but the number of stars isn’t going up.”


“But I like the thought.”


“Me too,” said Anka. “Wouldn’t it be nice if we were put on Earth just to accomplish some mission, after which we’d return to the sky? Life would be more bearable.”


“Yeah.”


Surveying the night-shrouded crater, thinking of Mira’s dreams of flying all over Mars, they couldn’t help but imagine the future. Anka said that he really did want to visit Olympus Mons and to experience the sensation of flight at such heights. Luoying, on the other hand, wanted to visit the network of gullies in the northern plains and Ravi Vallis, just south of the equator. Rudy had said it would be ideal to take all the water from Ceres and refill these ancient channels. She wondered what that would look like. Would it be the same as a real river?


“Maybe one day we’ll get to go visit other stars, like the crew of Cerealia.”


“Do you know what’s happening with the colony ship?”


“They’ve left the Solar System safely. Everything seems to be going well.”


“Then they must be getting ready to select the next crew.”


“Not much chance for us, though,” said Luoying. “They’re still focused on experienced astronauts and experts. I guess it will be a few decades before we’ll be considered.”


“Still, there’s hope.”


They spoke of distant stars no different from the names of ordinary streets. It didn’t matter how many millions of kilometers or decades were involved, as they gave language free rein to carry them on waves of hopeless hope. In the sky, strange planets lit up one after another, like abstract pencil sketches.


The deep night gave Luoying’s thoughts a kind of free-flowing freedom she hadn’t experienced in a while, not since the days in the hospital, when she had read by herself on the skydeck. The feeling was like a surging sea under her skin; it had given her courage, had helped her find her direction.


The stars shined steadily overhead like diamonds of time, and in a flash they awakened a memory deep in her mind. Without hesitation, she began to recite a passage from a book she loved, L’Homme révolté.


Mais qui se donne . . .


Almost three hundred years ago, Camus spoke of facing one’s destiny, of rebelling against history, of choosing the faithful land of Ithaca, of the first and last love of Earth.


Her voice echoed in the headset, like a declaration from the heart. Anka listened intently. For a long while afterward they remained silent, unwilling to break the simple determination that rose in both hearts. All other words seemed extraneous. The ancient crater and the abandoned past spread out silently beneath their feet, the best support for them in this moment.


Back in the cave, it took them a while to fall asleep. They lay next to each other, and every movement from one was felt by the other, leading to laughter, which was amplified by both. Several times they were about to fall asleep, only to wake up laughing.


Tired out in the end, they fell asleep without noticing.