SHIP




The day for the finals of the Creativity Fair had arrived.


The various districts took turns hosting the finals. This time it was the Alyosha District. The Alyosha Stadium and its environs had been spruced up for the occasion. The whole plaza was decorated to resemble the Earth of the Romantic era, classic and luxurious. The crowd at the site of the final competition was jubilant and enthusiastic. The dome of the stadium showed palaces in clouds and dancing angels, and symphonic strains filled the air. Roller-skating youths circled the stadium, taking off from various ramps to perform stunt jumps and spins, landing to waves of applause and cheering.


The audience in the seats was especially excited. To be able to witness the results of the final competition was an honor, and only the best competitors from every district were given the opportunity. All the youths were expectant, attracted not just by the competition itself but by the parties and dances that would follow. This was one of the best venues to meet young people from other districts. Everyone was looking sharp, the girls in beautiful dresses and the boys in crisp uniforms, posing elegantly. The youths who couldn’t make it to the venue gathered in their own districts and watched the proceedings remotely, cheering on their friends as they consumed snacks and drinks.


Backstage was full of excitement as well. Gielle had been picked to be one of the goddesses to give out the awards to the victors. She checked herself in the mirror nervously, babbling to those around her to be sure that her hair was perfect and the floral diadem on her head straight. Thinking that she would soon have to stride confidently across the stage, the focus of the gazes of millions, she felt her palms grow sweaty. She had been reciting her lines to herself continuously, and she had drafted Luoying to check that she made no mistakes. Around them other girls in the dressing room were busy with makeup, costumes, running about and screaming “Who has seen my necklace?,” and suchlike. Luoying could barely make out Gielle’s recitation.


“When are you going to put on your makeup?” asked Gielle.


“I’m done,” said Luoying, smiling.


“You’re going up like that?” Gielle was too astounded to be polite.


“That’s right. I’m just part of the chorus.”


Luoying was in a long flowing white dress. She wore no jewelry except a small flower on her shoulder. Her long dark hair draped loosely about her shoulders, and a thin golden band was wrapped around her forehead. Her eyes and brows were not painted or lined.


Gielle found Luoying’s almost casual attitude incomprehensible. Luoying didn’t bother explaining herself except to say that her role was just part of the overall atmosphere of the performance. She didn’t mention that she also needed to change quickly right after the finals, so the simpler her costume and makeup the better.


It was vital that Gielle know nothing about that second part.


The play they had been rehearsing would be the third performance today. Luoying wasn’t nervous at all. In her mind, the performance was for no one except themselves, a calm expression of their beliefs.


The first two performances were choreographed dances for the opening ceremony, so their play would be the first real act. While waiting for their turn to go onstage, Luoying peeked out from backstage at the bright, colorful domed ceiling of the stadium, like a nebula deep in space. The other Mercury Group members around her weren’t nervous either. No one said anything except for occasional whispered reminders of instructions for how to get out quickly afterward.


It was time.


“Ladies and gentlemen, talented youths,” the emcee, the education minister, spoke as fireworks exploded, “let’s celebrate this feast of the mind! . . . To create is the highest of honors! . . .”


After the wild celebratory opening ceremony, it was time for drama.


*


All the lights were focused on Mira. Dressed in a ragged brown shirt and a brown hat full of holes, he looked the very image of a vagrant down on his luck. His big toes stuck out of the gaps in his ill-fitting black boots, and he carried a small cloth bundle on a stick. He took two steps forward, two steps back, scratched his head and sighed.


—I’m a pitiable vagabond, full of talents and dreams recognized by no one. Once, I aspired to do great deeds that would change the world, but reality smashed my ambition to smithereens. O universe, why are you so unfair? I should have been a great doctor, the vanquisher of cancer, but now I’m a homeless wanderer. Oh, what did I do wrong?


A spotlight illuminated an area stage left, where the first recollection of the vagabond began. A student—Mira’s character’s younger self—dressed in a white shirt buttoned all the way up, stood excitedly next to a rotund middle-aged man and held up a document with both hands. The middle-aged man looked serious and imposing, and the student looked at him with awe and respect.


—Welcome to our lab. All of us are heirs to an illustrious history, and innovation is our unceasing pursuit. Our motto is: Never stop in the quest for constant innovation and eternal truths, ever maintain lively minds and progressive aims, exert all effort to keep our lab at the forefront of human exploration. Excelsior!


The black-robed chorus chimed in.


—Ah, so great, so, so great!


—Director, such lofty sentiments! I cannot agree with you more. I think my discovery will be perfectly in line with your goals.


—Oh? What sort of discovery is that?


—I’ve come up with a plan to streamline our production process. As soon as I arrived, I carefully examined our process chart and added a feedback procedure right here. By my calculations, we can reduce our production time by up to half.


—Why in the world would you want to do that?


—But . . . isn’t that a good thing? This will lower our costs significantly. Wouldn’t that help us get more funding in the budget?


—Oh, you foolish child. Do you really think victory in the competition for a share of the budget is won by such accomplishments? Have you no experience of the world? To win a share of the budget, we must make bold pronouncements and airy promises. You must never waste your energy on such useless details. Set your mind to grand blueprints.


Once again, the black-robed chorus chimed in.


—Ah-ha-ha, so great, so, so great.


The light on the left side of the stage went out. Once again the spotlight highlighted Mira in the middle of the stage. He was in a boat on wheels, and he was straining to row it forward.


—Little did I know that the improvement I suggested had long been thought of by others, but they were all too smart to bring it up. The fact was, the higher the costs of production for a project, the higher the allocated share of the budget. I was too inexperienced to understand this basic rule of the real world. But by pointing out a blatant inefficiency, I angered my colleagues, who exiled me to another continent. Oh, I am the most unfortunate soul in the world. I must learn my lesson and hold fast to my ideals. I will revitalize my career on the new continent.


The ship wobbled ahead, passing through a sea of stars until it reached the right side of the stage. The lights came on to reveal a second version of Mira’s character’s younger self.


He was dressed in a glittery, silvery bodysuit, his hair in a spiky, hedgehog-like style that was very fashionable. Once again, he stood next to a middle-aged man, and his attitude was again full of respect for the man in charge. The middle-aged man here had even more severe features and slicked-back hair.


—Welcome, young man! We welcome all good ideas and improvement suggestions, which will help us increase our profitability. Oh, profit, that most sacred word in the whole cosmos! You reflect the welfare of all humanity! We need more commerce, more trade, and more contracts to satisfy the demands of others with our supply. While benefiting them we also benefit ourselves!


The white-robed chorus, of which Luoying was a member, sang for the first time.


—Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful!


—Boss, such wonderful thoughts! I cannot agree with you more. I think my discovery will be perfectly in line with your goals.


—Oh? What sort of discovery is that?


—I’ve come up with a plan to streamline our production process. As soon as I arrived, I carefully examined our process chart and added a feedback procedure right here. By my calculations, we can reduce our production time by up to half.


—Aha, that is a fantastic discovery. This will lower our costs a great deal.


—And our prices, too.


—No, the prices will not change.


—But . . . why? If we lower our prices, there’ll be many more customers.


—Not at all. You’re too inexperienced, young man. Do you really think there is a relationship between the price and demand for cancer medication? No matter how high the price, they have to pay. Reducing the cost of production is excellent, but you must never touch our profit. Our profit is social utility! Let’s devote our efforts to lowering costs, which will result in ever more profit and more social utility.


The white-robed chorus raised their voices.


—Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful!


The light on the right side of the stage dimmed. Once again Mira appeared on stage, only this time he was sitting. His clothes were even more ragged, and before him, like a hawker at a market, was spread a torn blanket on which were scattered bits of broken glass. As he tried to offer his wares to invisible buyers, he spoke to the audience.


—I was enraged by their plans. They could have reduced their prices to one-eighth what they charged, but they refused to do so. I stole the ingredient list and production method for the medication and found another manufacturer who could make the drug much cheaper. Surely, trying to get medicine to the sick cheaply is a good thing? But they were absolutely outraged and tried to shut me down no matter where I went. Look at the state of my blanket! I was lucky to meet with a lawyer who took me in; otherwise I’d have nothing to eat.


Mira looked toward the center of the stage. A beam of white light from above illuminated a circular area in which Anita, dressed expensively, stood. Bathed in the bright light, she looked like an angel. A third version of Mira’s younger self stood next to her.


—Ah, me, unfortunate me. I loved my husband, a great author, but he died too young. He had so many ideas that he hadn’t written down.


Anita turned to the new Mira, dressed in worn but clean clothes. He held a piece of white bread and bit into it hungrily as though he hadn’t eaten in days. Anita patted him on the shoulder, full of compassion.


—Did you say that you improved your predecessors’ technologies?


—Yes. I optimized their production methods.


—Did the previous patent holders agree to have you improve their processes?


—Of course. Why wouldn’t they? Only with constant improvement can an idea continue to live.


—Ah, such wise words! What a philosopher you are. You’ve just given me the solution to the problem that’s been bothering me. I’m going to invent the concept of copyright by the dead. If the living can have copyrights, why not the dead? I’m going to write down his ideas, and anyone who wishes to analyze, quote, or even mention my dead husband’s work is going to have to pay me. My husband would surely agree with this. To have profit even after death! That means he will continue to live!


The white-robed chorus sang.


—Ohhh, that’s wonderful, WONDERFUL!


At that point a large number of characters made their entrances all at once. They rushed about the stage as Anita cradled the mannequin-corpse while negotiating deals, signing contracts, and counting money. Some protested that they would stop analyzing his works if she charged for the privilege, but Anita beckoned them closer to explain that, after paying her, they could turn around and resell the license to someone else for profit. The more deals made, the more profit for everyone. She was going to divide her dead husband’s representation rights into a thousand strands and auction them all off until there was a vibrant market of IP derivatives.


It was an idea that would make everyone rich.


The white-robed chorus sang with even more joy.


—Oh, oh, oh! That’s wonderful, wonderful, WONDERFUL!


Mira, looking like a beggar, clawed his way out of the chaotic crowd on the stage. His hands were empty, having been entirely forgotten. He picked up his small bundle and looked lost. His eyes caught the small boat, as lonesome as he was. He climbed in and quietly rowed his way back to the left side of the stage, the continent where he had started from. Anita and the others disappeared in the darkness.


Despondent, Mira made his way to a small bar and complained to a woman he met there. The woman was extremely interested in his story.


—Wait, tell me what you said again?


—I said that no one cared about my inventions and improvements.


—No, not that. What did you say before that?


—I was saying that they took a single piece of music and divided it into movements and chapters. By selling the rights to each piece separately, they managed to make a lot of money. They also advertised heavily on the campuses of music schools. Any student who wanted to graduate had to buy the rights owned by many dead composers.


—What a brilliant idea! I can do the same myself. I can divide a single article into several chapters and cite my own works. Not only will I have a much larger number of publications, but I’ll also be boosting my citation rate. The director of the lab will be so pleased. And it’s also a good idea to advertise among the students. If all the students I advise end up citing my papers, I’ll look so smart and gain so much prestige. I wish I had thought of this earlier! Now I can gain all kinds of honor and glory, and soon I’ll be the youngest, most talented researcher in the whole lab!


The black-robed chorus, long dormant, finally sang again.


—Ah, so great, so, so great!


Since the woman was completely absorbed by her ever-growing dreams of glory, Mira was once again ignored. He sighed and got back on the wheeled boat and paddled his way back and forth between the two continents, alone, aimless, directionless. For a long interval he slowly paddled from the left side to the right side, and silence enveloped everything.


When he arrived on the right side of the stage once more, there was a crowd gathered around a man, interrogating him all at once. The man was having trouble fielding the questions, and when he saw Mira standing by himself, he ran up and grabbed his hand.


—Young man, you must be from the other continent. Wonderful! That therefore makes you completely impartial. These people think our company’s mineral health product contains harmful substances, and they won’t believe my explanations. Why don’t you come and offer a testimony? All you have to do is to read from this.


Then he whispered.


—Whatever you say, they’ll believe! I’ll pay you a hundred when you are done.


The white-robed chorus began to sing in a mysterious manner.


—Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful.


Mira shook his head, baffled by what was being asked of him.


—You should simply publicize your ingredients and the trials you did to ensure safety. Why do you need me to read your paper?


—No way! This is a trade secret.


—But such information is always publicized on my continent.


—Absolutely not. Publishing the secret will make it impossible to sell.


As the crowd onstage listened to Mira, they shouted: Investigate! Publish! They pushed Mira to the front and rushed toward a cardboard skyscraper in the back, raising their fists and shouting, Transparency! Revolution! Pamphlets fell from the sky like snowflakes, and the frenzied crowd shouted, Accounting irregularities! Tax dodgers!


Mira, pushed and jostled by the crowd, stumbled around. His clothes became torn, as though he were a wild child raised in the jungle, and two pieces of cardboard somehow became attached to his back like wings. Soon the agitated crowd raised a banner with revolution on it and lifted Mira onto their shoulders as they ran into the middle of the stage in a chaotic mob. There was no direction or aim, and their voices merged into a loud cacophony in which no individual sentence could be distinguished.


Then a pointless fight broke out in the thronging mob. Mira was captured by one faction from another and then captured back again. After this happened a few times he was once again forgotten.


But he began to fly. Wires pulled him up into the air, and his cardboard wings flapped, giving him the appearance of a fairy from neverland. A spotlight stayed with him—a lonely light.


After drifting about for a while, he fell. The audience exclaimed in shock. But Mira didn’t fall to the ground. Instead, he landed in a net and bounced up and down. Confused, he looked about himself, and two columns of people with serious expressions stared at him from each side.


As the lights came up, the audience realized that the net had been present throughout the show. It was behind the boat that had carried Mira between the two continents and hidden by the darkness. He had never managed to escape the net at all.


Mira sat in the net as though he were waking up in a hammock. His face was blank and innocent. While his eyes roamed from one column of serious people to the other, none of them paid any attention to him. The leaders of both sides seemed to be engaged in some heated negotiation. As they craned their necks and flapped their lips, no sound emerged. Between them was a gigantic balance scale, swaying unsteadily. A lot of weights had already been placed on both pans, but the negotiation had stalled.


One side angrily placed another large weight on the pan before them. The lever pivoted toward them. But the other side nonchalantly tipped the weight that had just been added off the pan, and the balance tilted back toward them. The two sides looked so angry that they seemed about to come to blows.


Just then, one of the leaders stepped forward and urged everyone to calm down. He looked at the other leader and then pointed at Mira, who was still entangled in the net. The other leader nodded, and both walked up to Mira, grabbed him, and tossed him toward the scale. Pulled into the air by wires, Mira tumbled a few times until he landed right on the balance. The beam tilted and then returned to horizontal and held steady. Both sides laughed in satisfaction and shook hands. As they slapped each other on the shoulders, they exchanged two huge bags of goods.


For the first time, both the black-robed and white-robed choruses sang together.


—Oh, that’s wonderful, wonderful! Ah, so great, so, so great!


The whole stadium was silent. Members of the Mercury Group and invited extras rushed onto the stage all of a sudden and began to dance and run about in circles. After a few turns, they picked up Mira and rushed off, leaving behind an empty stage and an audience with mouths gaping.


The play had come to an end, although there was no ending. Sparse applause rang out here and there, but the actors didn’t mind. They didn’t even come back onstage to take a bow. The next act and the award ceremony to follow soon caught everyone’s attention, and the play was forgotten.


Backstage, the Mercury Group pushed their way through the throng of other performers still waiting for their turns and stadium workers, took off their costumes and makeup, and left in a coordinated fashion. Noiselessly they went through back passages and down little-known back paths until they congregated in the ore yard where Runge was waiting for them.


As soon as Luoying walked into the ore yard, she saw an old mining ship lying in the middle of it like a hungry fish whose maw yawned open.


*


For the whole day Juan had been feeling unsettled.


In the morning he inspected the new transforming fighters and was satisfied with the results. The fighter model had been under development for many years, and the project had overcome multiple setbacks. At this point it was finally ready to be produced in larger numbers and put into service. Juan felt that a great burden had been lifted from his heart and replaced by a rising sense of ambition. He had been preparing for this day for a long time, and only he knew the price he had had to pay.


As the metal doors of the aerospace center slowly slid open before him, he saw rows of brand-new fighters arranged like loyal and brave warriors in gleaming armor standing at attention in a phalanx. The silvery wingtips shone in the bright sunlight, bringing to him a wave of unspeakable joy and a sense of hope. He seemed to see the curtains being pulled open on a new act in the drama that was history, silently but full of grand significance. He knew that there was no fleet in history that could surpass this one. He was already writing history.


After the inspection, he went to the surveillance center. Theoretically, the city’s security was not part of the Flight System’s responsibilities. But he had been insistent that an atelier under the administration of the Flight System devote its resources to researching a real-time surveillance system that was even more comprehensive and capable than the one in use. The goal was clear: to lay the foundation for the future fleet’s needs and to develop the technologies necessary for espionage and counterespionage.


There was a room in this surveillance center from where it was possible to see every corner of the city on screens, just like in the control room of the official surveillance center. This was not exactly in accordance with the laws and regulations of the republic, but Juan had always protected its existence with his own power.


He had a premonition that something was wrong. Although the inspection of the new fighters had revealed nothing, he decided to come to the surveillance center to see for himself.


The newly developed “Swarm”-style electronic eye system was in operation, which transmitted to the surveillance center live footage from every part of the city. At first, as he glanced through the screens, he saw nothing out of the ordinary. Citizens were busy at work or enjoying their leisure time, each in their expected place. Silently, Juan flipped through the images. East, south, west, north. Three cargo transporters were taking off from the eastern edge of the city, and a mining ship was passing through Gate Twelve, on the southern edge of the city.


A strange hunch guided Juan’s attention to Gate Twelve. He called for the feed from that area to be magnified. Every day, mining and prospecting vehicles left the city, but there was something about this ship that bothered him; maybe it was the appearance of the ship, or the youths talking silently in the video feed.


The camera zoomed in until it was possible to see the faces of the conversing youths clearly. Juan was pleased with the capabilities of the electronic eyes. As he was trying to identify the boy in the scene, who looked familiar, Luoying’s face appeared. She climbed out of the mining ship and stood next to the boy, smiling sweetly as she spoke to the gatekeeper.


“Turn on the audio,” Juan whispered.


The operator nodded and turned on the audio feed.


“Thank you. We’ll keep that in mind.”


That was all he heard. While Luoying’s voice still echoed in the surveillance room, he watched as the two youths climbed back into the ship. Like a clumsy, aged dinosaur, the mining ship slowly crawled forward, passing under the raised gate.


Juan called Hans and reported what he had seen. “You are certain she mentioned nothing of this to you?” “I really have no idea,” said Hans.


“Then should I start an investigation? Or perhaps send a team after them?”


Hans hesitated. Then, calmly, he said, “Don’t do anything yet. Let me do some checking and call you back.”


Hans’s image vanished from the screen. Juan was surprised that the consul didn’t look shocked or anxious. Sitting before the control panel, Juan frowned and felt rage rising in his heart. He didn’t care why the youths had left the city; the reasons weren’t important. But he did care that the security regulations had been bypassed so easily. If the youths had managed to leave the city without official approval, then it was a sign that the city’s security measures were much too lax. The city leaked like a sieve, without discipline or a mind-set for security. He slammed his fist onto the panel.


He had no choice but to wait for Hans. Staring at the buttons before him, he was baffled by his friend’s seeming lack of concern.


*


For most adult citizens of Mars, the day was just an ordinary day, no different from the hundreds of other days in the year. Although young people were immersed in the excitement of the Creativity Fair, most adults, busy with work, weren’t infected by the mood.


Radio antenna arrays neatly arranged around the perimeter of the city worked tirelessly, like spinning silkworms, to send data into the storage buffers. From there, the strands of data flowed into the processing center, where they were woven into dense pictures displayed on the screens of the researchers. The researchers worked hard to stay ahead of the data, telling themselves to hurry, hurry. Important discoveries were hidden in the trove of data, and they had to rush to dig out the jewels. New equipment, new instruments, new methods, had returned them to a bygone, prescientific age when documents and information overwhelmed the ability of humankind to process them. The researchers wished they had been blessed with the gift of intuition and buried themselves deeper in their work.


Molecular assembly lines all over the city carried out their operations meticulously and precisely. One after another, electrons flowed through the microchannels that had been carefully crafted to guide them. Molecules danced like millions of waltzing couples, changing partners constantly. Engineers sitting before the screens, however, weren’t in the mood to share in their joy. Their electronic folders were full of papers on control theory, engineering management, molecular assembly theory, and so on. To become an expert in any subject required years of dedication. They sighed inside, lamenting that they had been born in the wrong age, when it was almost impossible to improve upon what was known. Their ambitions frustrated, they decided to pay more attention to gourmet cooking and other hobbies.


The city policy makers were also busy and overworked. The leaders of the nine systems met frequently to discuss the contemplated uses of the water from Ceres, potentially the biggest policy change in postwar Martian history. Grave expressions on their faces, brimming with confidence and sense of responsibility, they debated in the shadow of history and with the aid of computer simulations of the future. The new mega-engineering project was about to start, and the key technologies were on the verge of breakthroughs. The final decision was about to emerge.


On the farms, the cows were unconcerned with anything except grazing. From time to time they looked up, contemplated the sun outside the glass dome, and shook their heads sadly. Carp in the aquaculture tanks had become used to the new plants in the tanks and no longer reacted with agitation when people passed by. Adapting to change was the key to life; this was a truth even they understood.


Such an ordinary day, when engineers were busy, when youths were absorbed by the Creativity Fair, when teachers were with their students, was perfect for escaping.


Warren Sangis was a low-ranking researcher with the Land System who had been assigned for the day to watch over the gate mainly used by mining vehicles entering and leaving the city. He was neither talented nor ambitious, and sought to do the bare minimum needed to maintain his position. No curiosity for the bigger picture lurked in his mind.


For Warren, however, today would be no ordinary day. For the first time, Martha, the woman he pined after, had agreed to go out with him on a date, and he had no idea he would be punished for the first time in his life for negligence as well. When he pressed the button to open the layers of airlocks, he had no idea of the implications of this tiny action. He was simply thinking about Martha, who was in the control room with him, and paid no attention to anything outside.


*


The old mining ship slowly drifted over the yellow sand. Inside, the aromas of delicious cooking permeated the air.


The ship, several generations out of date, was near retirement. The dirt-yellow hull was like a moving dune. During the first years after the war, it and its companions had been instrumental in the effort to rebuild, and a large portion of the heavy metals in the city had come out of its digging claws. Back then, a mining ship had to plan to stay out in the wild for days on each trip, and the hull was thus thick like the walls of a castle. Inside, there were cooking facilities and sleeping quarters. Though the equipment was old and outdated, everything necessary was present.


The bulkheads inside the ship had been removed so that the interior was one contiguous space used by the present crew as a feast hall. The steel racks for securing instruments had been taken off the walls and lay flat on the floor, while the partitions for the sleeping quarters had been placed atop the racks, forming two large tables that were then pushed together. The longfringed satin tablecloth had once served as curtains at the Terran Fair but had been abandoned in the Expo Center after the Terrans left.


The table was now covered by heaping plates. The flatware, taken from the cabinets of different families, made a colorful mosaic. Those who hadn’t brought plates contributed silverware, glassware, spices, and so on. The potluck meal looked as colorful and crowded as a traveling circus. Runge had stolen an internship permit to get them out of the city, and the plan was to return the permit before they were discovered.


Noise and laughter filled the ship. Bottles were opened and glasses clinked. Bubbles burst against the glass, and liquid occasionally spilled onto the tablecloth, blooming into dark flowers.


By the time Aina brought the last dish to the table and declared an official start to the feast, the crew had already consumed six bottles of Gio. Everyone got up with a loud cheer, put away the playing cards and empty bottles, and soon arranged the dishes on the table neatly.


“Cheers!”


A circle of glasses rose over their heads like a rising tide.