REINI




This was the 272nd day of the fortieth year of the Martian Republic, and also Reini’s thirty-third birthday.


Reini got up early that morning, as was his habit. After vacuuming the Registry of Files, he stood in the reading room on the second floor and looked outside. Other than the large hall for the files, this was his favorite place in the Registry. It faced the lawn in the back, and the view was peaceful and comforting. He stood between the tall rows of bookcases, facing the window, the bright sun overhead. He didn’t turn down the transparency of the glass. The decorative columns were bathed in the pellucid early-morning light. He loved to watch the light, which reminded him that life could still be bright.


Coming to the Registry was Reini’s own choice. After so many years of writing history, he was familiar with the place. Laak, the Registrar, was someone he respected. The old man needed a younger assistant, while Reini needed inner tranquility.


The windows of the room were tall and narrow, with panes that slid up and down. Above the windows hung rolled-up cloth curtains, a rarity on Mars. The green tassels draped down, an echo of the green lawn outside. Since it was his birthday, he fell into reminiscence and stood longer than usual by the window. Memories overwhelmed him like the tides, and so he didn’t realize he was no longer alone in the room.


“Dr. Reini,” said a soft voice.


Reini turned around and saw Luoying. She was dressed in black, which made her appear even more pale.


“What a surprise!” He smiled at her.


“I came to wish you a happy birthday,” said Luoying, walking up to the window.


“Thank you. I didn’t know you remembered.”


Reini was genuinely grateful. No one had wished him a happy birthday in a long time. Other than Luoying, he really couldn’t imagine who else would visit him. His acquaintances at the various sports clubs preferred to spend their leisure time at home with their families, not visiting an old bachelor like him. He didn’t like to organize parties, and anyway he had no room for guests. For years he had spent his birthdays alone. It touched him that someone had remembered.


“How’ve you been?” he asked.


“Pretty well.”


“Keeping yourself busy?”


“Very busy. With a big project.” Luoying paused and didn’t elaborate, as though deliberately adding to the mystery. Her expression was a mixture of mischievousness and pride. Then she asked, “Dr. Reini, if you get the chance to go back to an atelier, would you prefer a hospital or an engineering research institute?”


Reini was surprised. “Why are you asking?”


“Because we’re trying to find an atelier for you. There’s some hope.”


“Find an atelier for me?”


“Yes. Last week we inquired at two hospitals, in Galileo District and Watson District. Yesterday we spoke with an exploratory group within the Land System and gave them a brief description of your technology. They seemed really interested.”


Reini looked awkward. “Thank you for all your efforts . . . but I’m afraid there’s no possibility of me joining any of them.”


“Why not?”


“Because my file has been frozen. I’m not allowed a transfer.”


“But when we spoke with these ateliers, they all showed a lot of interest. Your technology can bring them renown and a bigger share of the budget. If they agree to have you, why won’t it work?”


Reini shook his head. “It’s not that simple. With my file frozen, it’s impossible for me to register to use their equipment or to apply for funds with them.”


“What if I ask my grandfather to unfreeze your file?”


“He’s the consul,” said Reini, smiling. “If he reversed himself just a month after he issued the order to punish me in the first place, the people would lose faith in him.”


Luoying refused to give up. It was as though she had anticipated his answers. “What if we started a movement to abolish the file and atelier system?”


“What?” Reini was shocked.


“We’ve been thinking about it for a while. The system unreasonably locks every person down. If someone wishes to switch ateliers, they must first receive the system’s approval to transfer their file. Without that, nothing can be done. This gives the system directors and the atelier heads too much power, and everyone has to obey them. And since the budget allocated to each atelier often depends on whether the atelier is responsible for some part of a large engineering project, the result is that everyone is dependent on their direct supervisor to assign them good projects. This becomes a problem for the whole republic. Society ossifies, loses initiative and liveliness. Techno-bureaucratism rules all.”


Reini listened carefully. Luoying explained herself in precise, deliberate phrases, her expression serious. She was like a different person from the Luoying of two months earlier, when she had first returned from Earth. Back then, she had been more confused than determined, and her expressions showed much hesitation. Now she seemed far more purposeful, and the light of conviction glinted in her eyes. She seemed thinner and paler, perhaps the result of her injury and the time spent indoors, but her bright eyes gave her whole person more spirit. She was speaking slowly and precisely, so that the unfamiliar words flowed from her smoothly and naturally. Reini wasn’t sure where her theories had come from, but he realized the youths were learning about and understanding the world at a rapid rate.


“You’re trying to change the system, then?” asked Reini when Luoying was finished.


“Yes, I suppose we are.”


“But have you thought that every system exists for specific reasons?”


“What reasons do you mean?”


“Historical ones, and ones imposed by the natural environment. There are always limits to how resources can be fairly distributed.”


“We understand. But we don’t believe we should ignore the faults of the system due to these reasons.”


“It’s impossible to construct a perfect system.”


“But our system has severe flaws. It requires the individual to submit to the system, and those who refuse cannot survive. Those who rebel are imprisoned, perhaps driven mad until they seek the solace of death. A couple of days ago I saw a man jump to his death.” “I didn’t hear about that. Where was this?”


“There’s been no report,” said Luoying. “You’ve met the suicide: the mental patient we saw on the skydeck at the hospital, striking at the glass cage.”


“Him!”


“Do you know him?”


“Yes. I’ve known him for a long time.”


“Then do you know what happened?” asked Luoying. “We tried to find out more, but no one would tell us anything. We speculated that he was trying to break free from all the bonds around him.”


Instead of answering, Reini was lost in thought. Luoying’s news left a great emptiness in his heart. The trials and tribulations of years past surfaced in his mind all at once, and he felt the full force of the unpredictability of fate. The man’s death was so unexpected. It was always hard to foretell a person’s fortune and misfortune; indeed, sometimes it was impossible to even ascertain which category an event fell into. Compared to death, the struggles that occupied the minds of most seemed so petty.


He sighed. “I’m very grateful to all of you, but please don’t trouble yourselves anymore on my behalf. I need your friendship, but that is all. I’m fine where I am.”


Luoying looked perplexed and unwilling to give up. She nodded reluctantly but added, “I respect your decision, but I still want to urge you to reconsider. I know that you’re indifferent to fame or gain, but that isn’t the same as just giving in. You’re a good man and you deserve better.”


“Thank you,” said Reini, smiling again. “I’ll think about what you said.”


Luoying lowered her gaze. “I don’t believe that a just world should exploit a man like you.”


Reini was deeply moved. When he first told Hans that he was willing to accept the responsibility for the youths’ offense and thereby reduce their punishment, he didn’t think he was doing them some kind of favor. He simply thought there was nothing wrong with the young to have an adventure. To punish them severely and ruin their prospects for the future was not a good result. He had not thought that his act would bring about such gratitude or care. He didn’t know how to express how he felt. For too long he had not expressed such tender emotions.


After a moment he recovered and asked, “What happened to you recently? You seem to have become a radical.”


“Do you really think I’m very radical?”


“A bit,” said Reini. “Last month you were still skeptical about the value of revolution.”


“That was true,” said Luoying. “But recently I’ve come to appreciate the meaning of starting a movement. I think life requires action, otherwise there is no direction. I’ve been thinking a lot about Camus’s L’Homme révolté, one of the books you gave me. It talks about the soil, the people, and the furious love of the heart strung like a tight bow. These things give life meaning. I want to do something. We’re in search of targets, and this is the only action we feel has meaning.”


“You’re doing the right thing,” said Reini.


Luoying looked at him. “Tell me the truth: Don’t you think our system is too rigid, too lacking in freedom?”


Instead of answering her directly, Reini asked another question. “Do you remember what you said to me about the distance between one person and another on Earth? The unfamiliarity, the loneliness, the mutual distrust?”


“Of course.”


“In reality, there are only two systems in the world: the solid and the liquid. A solid system features stable structure, in which every unit is fixed in its position. Between the atomic units the bonds are strong. A liquid system, on the other hand, features freedom of movement, and the units are relatively independent. Between them there is no fixed bond, and little strength.”


“Are you saying . . .” Luoying pondered this. “. . . that there is no way to have freedom and attachment both?”


“There are many values that are mutually exclusive.”


Reini understood that Mars was the very embodiment of the crystal. The city was as stable as a crystal lattice. Every family had a house, and every house, with its yard, was similar in size. Houses were arranged in neat chains like periodic necklaces. Martians rarely moved. Children grew up in the houses of their parents until they got married, when they registered for their own houses elsewhere. A whole life was spent in two houses, and people were as rooted as plants. The neighborhood was the most important social structure, a child’s whole world. Everyone they knew were the people who grew up with them and the people who, after their choice of atelier, accompanied them for the rest of their lives. While the city expanded as the population grew, each new residential district looked exactly the same as the rest of the city: the same neat chains of houses, the same peace and equality. Each house could be decorated in thousands of variations, but all of them together belonged to the same whole. Twenty million people were distributed evenly, and there was no structural center to the city.


Stability was premised on fixed bonds.


“But didn’t you speak of clouds? There’s both freedom and connection.”


“Clouds, yes.” Reini nodded. “But clouds require an external source of light and cannot last.”


“I don’t know,” said Luoying, her gaze lowered. “I just think that if you avoid all conflict, where is your direction in life? If you accept everything and see through everything, doesn’t that feel nihilistic?”


“Me?” Reini looked down, thinking, and then pointed to the other side of the reading room.


He took her through the long rows of bookcases. Old-fashioned books were arranged neatly on them, the gleaming golden letters against the red spines evoking another land. The paper had yellowed with age, like ancients living in the past. In the slanting sunlight, the room felt especially quiet. Overhead, the ceiling was decorated with the constellations turning almost imperceptibly, a reminder of unstoppable time. Reini walked through the stacks like a man walking through layers of illusions toward the heart of reality, facing the simple truth hidden in the memory banks. They walked without talking, the clicking of heels on floor the only sound in the room.


Reini stopped in front of a shelf labeled earth classics. He pointed at one of them. “L’Homme révolté.” Then he took down a thin volume right next to it, flipped through until he reached the page he was looking for, and began to read aloud.


When he was finished, he closed the book, and, as always when he read these passages, his heart became storm torn. In his mind he saw the black sea facing the characters in the book, as well as the rough and vast desert of this planet. They showed his direction, he always knew. He could see all the people passing over this world, coalescing out of the swirling sand before scattering into dust again, busily coming and going, noisily shoving and pushing. He walked among them, their joys and sorrows surrounding him. He gazed at their faces. In his heart, what they wore, what customs they followed, what system they made, what acts they committed, were unimportant; what was important was whether they stopped to face each other, to look at each other. This was what he was truly interested in.


“Not heroism, not sainthood,” Luoying muttered. “. . . you’re more interested in being a human being?”


“Yes,” Reini said. “That’s what I want.”


“But what does it mean to be a human being?”


“It means to be able to face another human being.”


Luoying pondered the meaning of his words without asking more questions. Her absorption made her black eyes seem like two deep pools. She took the book from him and gently caressed the cover, gazing at it carefully.


“La Peste,” she read.


“La Peste,” Reini repeated. “Nowhere to go.”


Luoying turned to the first page and began to read: “ ‘It is as reasonable to represent one kind of imprisonment by another, as it is to represent anything that really exists by that which exists not.’


Daniel Defoe . . .”


Reini did not explain, letting Luoying read on by herself.


Reini knew that, given how little time they had, it was impossible for her to read very far or for him to explain very clearly. More truths about life hidden in the depths of the cosmos were not even comprehensible to him. He contemplated the meaning of the movement Luoying mentioned, questioning himself whether he was too passive or reluctant to act. When he had suffered in life, he had asked himself the same kinds of questions, wondering if he had deviated from the appropriate course one should follow.


Normally, he viewed action pessimistically. In the endless ocean, he felt that hunkering on a barge that drifted with the current was a better choice than taking arms against a sea of troubles. But sometimes he berated himself for the pain he suffered as a contemplative and passive observer. Luoying’s question struck at the very conflict in his heart.


A burst of music broke the silence among the stacks. Someone was visiting.


“Oh, it’s time,” said Luoying, closing the book.


“What is it?”


Luoying looked around for a clock. “Time passes so quickly!” Reini was still confused. Luoying beckoned him to follow her.


They walked down the curving corridor on the second floor, turned at the corner with the statues of angels, descended the broad, fanning stairs until they were in the lobby of the Registry. Luoying took a deep breath and smiled enigmatically at Reini. Then she pressed the button on the wall and watched as the heavy, curved bronze doors slowly slid open. She gestured outside.


Reini looked where she was pointing and stood still in surprise. A group of youths was smiling at him, beckoning him closer. Before them were arrayed the statues he had crafted over the years, as solemn as an army ready for inspection. In the middle was the lion that he had worked on for more than a year without finishing. Someone had roughed out the tail so that, though not perfect, at least the overall structure was complete. The crouching lion, stately and powerful, its earthy exterior as rough and worn as the skin of a battle-worn chief, wore a sash like a decorated soldier. Surrounded by the smaller statues around it, the lion resembled the leader of a caravan from afar bearing wondrous gifts, even its large, bell-like eyes emitting a lifelike light. Reini had never imagined his own sculptures would look so alive. The statues supported a banner: happy birthday.


Even though there was no wind, the banner seemed to be flapping.


Luoying had returned to her friends and joined their loud cheers for his birthday. Someone explained that, since they didn’t think Reini alone could move so many things, they had moved all his sculptures and tools here so that he would be able to continue his hobby. Two of the youths in headbands danced with modeling tools, while another waved at the lion and other sculptures like a general directing a march. There was much laughter and cheer under the bright sun.


Reini didn’t know what to say. There were no words to express his emotions; it had been years since he could recall such a warm memory.


A life force that he had not felt in a long time moved him.


*


Reini had been born in year 7 of the Martian calendar, a year of divisions. He was now thirty-three, and whenever he looked back at the break that happened thirty-three years ago, he felt regret and sorrow. He knew that of all the choices that Hans Sloan had to make in his decades-long career, the division in year 7 was his most reluctant one.


Mars had not always been a crystallized world. The founders had chosen the central archive without settling on any specific social arrangement. In their idealistic fervor, they imagined a completely free world in which everyone was free to explore and discover, free to share their creations in the central archive, free to use the creations of others, supported by a stipend. But in the seventh year after the founding of the republic, the set patterns by which the world functioned pushed them to another extreme, leading to a structure that prioritized stability, regularity, and efficiency.


Usually, as a machine’s design was optimized and its construction refined, thermal motion within the system became a greater source of noise and wasted energy. It was the same with a society. A world in which everyone was free to do as they liked sounded wonderful in theory, but in practice would result in the waste of a great deal of resources. Thus, in that year, the system crystallized in the city, and the random movements caused by freedom were reduced to a minimum. Layers stacked upon layers of supervision; departments and administrative organs interconnected into chains; the system reintegrated and re-formed. In other words, the system was bureaucratized.


The decision wasn’t made by a plebiscite but in the Boule. Which matters would be submitted to a plebiscite was always a subtle decision, and the first consul of Mars, Richard Sloan, had decided on the Boule vote alone. Hans and his friends, all legislators, debated the issue heatedly. Several of his friends opposed the idea of sacrificing freedom in the name of efficiency, with Ronen and Garcia the loudest voices. Hans and Galiman, on the other hand, argued that ideals had to make compromises with reality.


Since the Boule was composed of the individuals from each system who were most dedicated to building and policy making, natural supporters of system consolidation, it was believed that support for the reforms would be overwhelming. But the result of the vote turned out to be extremely close. The bureaucratization faction won by only a very slim margin. A system inspired by circuit design in which the individual units were ateliers offered great conveniences for management and overall planning. No one could tell just what role Hans and his friends played in that vote.


In the face of such a momentous choice, everyone’s character was starkly revealed. Different individuals chose different worlds, and some entered the system, while others left.


Hans disliked the systemization. He preferred the preconsolidation arrangement in which individuals freely joined small groups to conduct cross-discipline research. But he also understood that a combination of specialization, departmentalization, and process management was the most reliable way to improve efficiency in any era. In the end, he voted for the system. He remained a part of the system, specializing in flight, and won the trust of his peers with his wartime experience and exploration of remote sectors. A decade later he was promoted to Archon of the Flight System.


Galiman, the designer of Martian housing, had already achieved much as an inventor and researcher during the war and was well known by the public. After the reform, he didn’t leave the system. Instead he became part of the glass research atelier under the Land System. He focused on scientific research as well as politics and was responsible for turning his atelier into the top research institute on the planet. Eventually he became Archon of the Land System.


Ronen and Garcia, on the other hand, refused to accept the change quietly. Ronen had a deep distaste for the new schools, which tried to specialize pupils based on their talents. Forever a generalist, there was no ready-made position for him. He turned down all management and political responsibilities and spent his time traveling between Mars and the dwarf planets, building a deep bond with Ceres.


For two years Garcia tried to work within the system, thinking that he could learn to collaborate with bureaucrats, but the effort came to naught. He couldn’t live with the system, and the system rejected him. Thus, he asked to be given the mission of developing diplomatic relations with Earth, a task that nobody else at the time wanted.


These events ultimately led to results that no one could have predicted. Hans became consul of Mars, but the system’s allocation of power led to opposition from his son, forcing Hans to punish him. Ronen’s wanderings turned into permanent exile, with no corner of his home planet able to hold his proud figure. Galiman’s system needed Ceres, and so he had to allow Ronen to take his stories with him to a grave among the stars. Garcia lived on Maearth, never setting foot on a planetary surface. He opened a window for Mars but also brought to Hans’s son the spirit of rebellion from another land and, ultimately, death. He also set Hans’s granddaughter on a spiritual journey as a perpetual vagabond.


The decision changed Reini’s life as well. After Garcia finally knocked open the door to Earth and established diplomatic relations, the first demand from Earth was the release of war prisoners. Reini’s mother thus left. She was so overjoyed at the news that she put down Reini, only three years old at the time, and returned to her home without looking back.


When Reini worked on the old files, he would from time to time read snippets from that momentous era. He would then look out the window, sighing over how a single moment could change the course of all the other moments in the river of time so irrevocably. The crystal city spread before him, at once fragile and glowing. Human forms, trapped in time, turned into silhouettes with open arms and frozen expressions, tracing out the paths of unpredictable fate step by step.


*


Reini emerged from the Registry of Files and got on the tube train heading for the Tarkovsky Film Archive.


From the train, he looked back at the Registry, wondering whether staying here was the right choice. He decided it was. Sometimes Reini felt that he was more comfortable with the people and events of the past; they were the constant presences in his life. The cobblestone streets of old Earth, lit by dim streetlamps and strewn with trash, and the ancient bridges and plazas of London, filled with bronze statues, though the memories of another planet, felt to him as real as the small red circular tables in the corners of the Registry, more familiar than the sights and sounds of his life. The wisdom of the past was always with him, giving him faith that the silent and lasting sentiments weren’t wrong.


He hadn’t been to the Tarkovsky Archive in a long time. Earlier in his life he had gone there twice a year, but more recently he had stopped doing that. Those worthy of memorializing weren’t remembered as often. Still, the way to the archive was etched in his mind, and even with a different origin station, he knew how to get there quickly by train. He called ahead so that Janet would be expecting him at her atelier.


He didn’t know how to start the conversation with her; each year, when they saw each other, he didn’t know what to say at first. Janet was twelve years older than he was, but a group of people bound them together. They never spoke of the source of their friendship. There was no need when the bond was as solid as the ground itself.


Reini never told Luoying that he had once studied under Adele, her mother. For three and a half years she taught him the art of sculpting at a community studio. Those were the most important three and a half years of his life.


When Reini saw Janet, he felt sorry for her. When the young man from Earth brought the news that Arthur had died, she had seemingly aged ten years overnight. Faith provided support to the spirit, and spirit provided support to the body. For a decade Janet had lived on a belief, a hope, but now she was without its sustaining strength.


Nonetheless, she strove to be friendly, even with the sadness that couldn’t be hidden. She led him to her atelier and poured him a cup of tea. He got to the point right away, informing her of Luoying’s description of their plan for a revolution.


As Reini had anticipated, Janet fell into a thoughtful silence as she stared out the window, her eyes unfocused.


“It’s been ten years,” said Reini with a sigh.


“Yes, it has.”


“Sometimes I think history is repeating itself.” Janet said nothing.


“Their passion and sense of justice . . . so familiar.”


Janet turned back to the room and drained her teacup in one gulp. She gazed at Reini. “If you think you’re seeing history replay itself, how do you think I feel?”