THE STUDY




Side by side, Luoying and Anka walked along the glassenclosed road. They had decided not to take the tube train from near the dance school. Instead, they’d walk directly to one of the hub stations. Both of them enjoyed walking.


The pedestrian tube was parallel to and below the tube for the train, narrow and winding. To walk through the glass tube was like walking through trouble, which naturally pushed the two closer together and forced them into the same direction. The tube was about three meters in diameter, and the bottom was suspended about half a meter above the ground. Through the transparent floor it was possible to see the red planet’s surface.


The road itself was just wide enough to allow the two of them to squeeze together, shoulder to shoulder, without touching. Irises were planted along both sides. Both put their hands in their pockets, and their steps were synced. Luoying wore the dance team’s uniform jacket, while Anka wore the uniform of his aerospace force squadron. The top of Luoying’s head reached Anka’s chin, and when she turned, she could see his firm neck and feel the rise and fall of his strong shoulders. Anka, on the other hand, could see her slender neck and smell the faint fragrance in her hair.


Luoying told Anka what was troubling her. For the first time she confessed her doubt to someone not part of her family. She had hoped to keep the secret from her friends in the Mercury Group— the very idea that she had been made one of them due to the intervention of some authority rather than because she deserved to be picked was humiliating. Since she was a little girl, she hated to be given special treatment because of who she was related to.


“Will everyone laugh at me?” she asked Anka.


Anka smiled. “Do you really think the rest of us are geniuses?”


“But you were selected because of your scores.”


“It was just a test.”


“Don’t you think I unfairly benefited from my grandfather’s power?”


“Don’t be silly,” said Anka. “You’re still you.”


Luoying felt better. Anka always had the special power to make anything that bothered her seem like not such a big deal. He wasn’t talkative and disliked making grand, abstract arguments. Any problem, big or small, turned into no problem at all after he looked at it. As they talked, she began to think she was making too much of it as well. Anka simply listened as she talked, without asking many questions. This was their habit: if either had something to say, he or she said it; but if either chose to remain silent, the other didn’t pry.


“Chania told me that you fainted after the banquet last night,” said Anka. “Are you all right?”


“I’m fine.”


“What happened?”


“Nothing. I was just too tired after the trip on Maearth.”


“Then you shouldn’t have come to practice today.”


“But the recital is in twenty days! I still haven’t even adjusted to the gravity.”


It was the truth. Luoying had virtually no confidence in her ability to perform in twenty days. Yesterday afternoon she had tried to practice, and then she had fainted after the banquet. To adjust to the sudden change in gravity was much harder than she had anticipated.


Her solo dance was one of the headline acts at the world’s fair. As a native of Mars, she was endowed with thinner bones and a strong sense of balance. Her training on Earth, on the other hand, forced her to become stronger than she would have been on Mars. A dance full of leaps and lightness under these conditions was the perfect opportunity to explore the limits of the human body. Researchers were thus very interested in her as a specimen. Terrans viewed her as an embodiment of the ancient tradition of dance developed on Earth, while the children of Mars were curious to see how a girl returning from another world had changed. She saw all these gazes—whether it was in the middle of the Boule Chamber, when she walked into the dance school, or when her image appeared on the giant screens at street corners—she saw those expectant gazes: intense, curious, judging, disapproving.


She didn’t want to let Anka know how terrible the practice today had gone. Not only did she have trouble controlling her body in the air, but she couldn’t even hit her takeoff or landing spots. She felt so light, and all the weight she had grown used to on Earth was gone. Her knees and ankles were sore and tired, like stories that had been retold so many times that they had lost all tension. A new gravity environment was not easy to adjust to: all the Terran visitors were wearing heavy metal shoes to help. But she had been forced to start to dance right away, before she had even relearned how to walk on this familiar-unfamiliar planet.


“Are you all finished with your training today?” she asked, trying to change the subject.


“No.”


“Then won’t you get in trouble for coming to meet me?”


“I just got back. I’ll be fine.”


“But you told me Captain Fitz is super strict.”


Anka chuckled. “Don’t worry about it. What’s the worst that he can do? Expel me. It’s no big deal. Anyway, we just had an argument.”


“What happened?”


“Nothing. It was just an argument.”


Luoying sensed there was more. “I thought everything was going smoothly. You even got a new uniform.”


“It wasn’t just for me. I just came back at the right time. All eleven squadrons of the aerospace force are getting new uniforms.” “Why? Are you planning some show?”


“No. The whole Flight System’s budget got a fifty percent boost, so the budget for the aerospace force went up, too.”


“But why?”


“I heard it has something to do with Ceres.”


Luoying was silent for a while. “Do you think it also has to do with Earth?”


Anka was also silent for a while. Then he nodded. “I think so, actually.”


He didn’t elaborate, and the two continued on in silence. However, Luoying’s concerns only grew. This wasn’t the first time she had heard news like this. Anka belonged to the fifth squadron, whose duties normally involved industrial missions like transporting satellites and civil patrols. But in the event of a conflict, the squadron’s aircraft could quickly be reconfigured as fighters. When she was seven, Luoying had once witnessed a cargo carrier rapidly transform into a fighter within five minutes. She was so astonished that she couldn’t close her mouth, having been given a glimpse of the underbelly of her peaceful, ordinary life.


She couldn’t tell how much Anka’s information presaged the dangers of war. She didn’t want war. Earth was where she had spent one of the most important periods of her life, no less important than her childhood on Mars. Regardless of who would win or lose, she didn’t wish to see either world invaded by the flames of interplanetary violence.


After they got on the tube train at the hub station, it took only a few minutes to arrive at her home. Anka got off the train with her and said goodbye to her at the gate to her yard. Luoying gazed at Anka. His blue eyes often seemed a bit distracted. Seeing a tiny leaf had somehow fallen on the bridge of his nose, Luoying reached up to brush it off. He touched his nose and grinned at her.


“Get some rest,” Anka said.


“I will.”


“Don’t trouble yourself with things that don’t matter,” he added. “You’re still you.”


He turned and got back on the train. Luoying remained alone in the garden and watched the train depart.


She knew he disliked drama. If he wanted to do something, he just did it instead of talking about it. He despised exaggerations. An “argument” with Captain Fitz was likely, in truth, an intense confrontation. What happened? She tried to imagine it and couldn’t.


There were some words that she had never spoken to Anka, nor he to her.


She recalled what it was like five years ago when she had first emerged from the airport terminal on Earth. A tidal wave of engine noises assaulted her ears, and she was so frightened and shocked that she literally backed up several steps. The sky was filled with private aircraft of all sizes. Shuttling back and forth, the planes swept past each other, almost brushing the skyscrapers, seemingly avoiding disaster only at the last minute. She wrapped her arms around her luggage like a drowning girl clinging to a rock in the middle of a stormy sea. The sky was gray instead of the familiar dark blue of her home, nor the orange-red of a sandstorm. Everywhere was noise: rumbling, booming, buzzing, droning. Advertisements flashed no matter where she looked. Thousands of people rushed by her, as fast as flickering images on a screen. The other children had left her behind. Her friends shouted for her to keep up, as did the Terran official assigned to chaperone them, but she couldn’t move. She was stuck where she was, hugging her luggage, drowning in the noise. Someone bumped into her, and her suitcase fell to the ground as though a mountain had collapsed.


Just then, a hand reached out and picked up her suitcase. His other hand grabbed hers and pulled her forward. He didn’t demand to know why she was frozen in place. We have to keep up, he said, and pulled her along. He guided her through the crowd, parsing signs and jumping up from time to time to see where their official had gone. He looked so calm, so focused, his eyes roaming in every direction as he muttered decisively now and then. Soon they were reunited with the rest of their group. The entire process had taken no more than two minutes.


He had safely brought her into the new world.


He had smiled at her once on that day, but from then on, his was the only smile that took up space in her heart. She had never told him how she felt, and she didn’t know how he felt about her.


The flowers of the garden bloomed in vibrant silence. The Barberton daisies, in particular, had grown so lush that the broad leaves practically covered the path through the garden.


*


As soon as Luoying opened the door to the house, she heard loud, arguing voices. She paused for a minute to listen. The voices were coming from the living room; there seemed to be a large gathering in there.


She caught a few snippets of the conversation, and her heart began to beat faster. Quietly, she tiptoed up to the door of the living room and listened as she held her breath. Eavesdropping did not come naturally to her, and shame and the fear of being discovered made her stand still, not daring to touch anything.


Most of the voices she recognized. Ever since her grandfather had moved in with her and Rudy, these men—she called all of them uncles out of respect—became regular guests. The loudest voice belonged to Uncle Roowak, Archon of the Water System. He was deaf in one ear and always shouted with his good ear turned to the interlocutor, though he disliked people drawing attention to his condition. The one who spoke the fastest was Uncle Laak, the Registrar of Files, who always spoke seriously and in long paragraphs filled with dense citations. He knew so much that it was sometimes hard to understand him. The croaking voice belonged to Uncle Lanrang, Archon of the Land System, whose speech, though apparently in the common tongue, was virtually incomprehensible to Luoying, as it was filled with acronyms and numbers, sounding like a broken robot. And of course there was the booming voice of Uncle Juan, Archon of the Flight System. He was always present for these debates.


“I’ve told you a million times,” said Juan, “what matters isn’t the present but the future!”


“And I’ve told you just as often that the possibility they would achieve such capability within fifty years is well outside of five sigmas.” That was Lanrang.


“So you’re saying it is possible,” said Juan.


“I can only say that it’s not impossible,” said Lanrang.


Roowak shouted, “By the laws of probability, nothing is entirely impossible. Given enough time, a monkey can produce Shakespeare. We can’t just sit by and do nothing because of such a remote possibility!”


“It depends on what that possibility is!” Juan didn’t back down an inch. “Even if there’s only a one-in-a-million chance that they’ll develop a controlled nuclear fusion engine, we can’t give them the technology. Don’t tell me you accept the responsibility—you can’t handle it! Do you really think they come in friendship? Let me tell you, if we give them fusion tech today, tomorrow they’ll be back in warships.”


“Then what do you suggest?” Roowak was growing agitated. “They won’t give us the plans for the hydraulic engineering hub. Without it, we can’t do anything with Ceres. What’s the point of devoting so much effort to get the asteroid here if we’re just going to park it in space? Without water, we’re doomed.”


“It’s simple.” Juan’s voice softened. “We can’t get what we want without a credible threat.”


Laak, who hadn’t spoken for a while, broke in.


“Roowak, are you sure we have to have the plans for the hub?


They’ve already agreed to give us the electrical control systems, right? What if we . . . figure out how to build the dams ourselves?”


“Figure it out?” Roowak, who was still shouting, also made an effort to control himself. “How exactly do you propose we do that? Where am I going to get the data to run the simulations? Where do I find a lab to experiment with river-flow characteristics? Do we even have a river? I must have real turbulence impact data. I can’t even run a Monte Carlo simulation without it. This is engineering, not a game. Without data, I can’t promise anything.”


Three seconds of silence. Three long seconds during which it seemed that the tension was going to explode like an overfilled balloon. Finally, Luoying heard the voice of her grandfather.


“Juan, nonviolence is a fundamental principle,” said Hans Sloan in his deep voice. “We haven’t reached a crisis point. They never mentioned fusion technology as a nonnegotiable term, and there’s no reason for us to bring it up first. Let’s pretend it isn’t an issue and see how far we get in the negotiations.”


Juan’s tone seemed to relax just a bit. “Fine, but we have to reach a consensus among ourselves on where to draw the line.”


“The consensus is nonviolence.” After a pause, Hans continued. “Of course you are still free to voice your opinion.”


A moment later Luoying heard the squeaking of chairs and shoes and the rustling of clothing, indicating that everyone was getting up. She tiptoed her way back to the entrance of the house and pretended to have just come in. Looking in the mirror, she changed out of her dance clothes and fussed with her hair.


The adults emerged from the living room. First was Roowak, followed by Laak and Lanrang, side by side. Roowak was the tallest, like a coat-tree, and the contrast with the tiny figure of Lanrang behind him made the latter seem even more shriveled. Lanrang’s beard was sparse and unkempt, but his lively eyes gave him an efficient air. Laak had the kindest face of all three. He reminded Luoying of a thoughtful professor with drooping eyes and sharp lines at the corners of his mouth, indicating long hours spent contemplating difficult dilemmas.


Rudy had told Luoying that Roowak was an engineer turned military commander, Lanrang was a math genius, and Laak was a master linguist. All three were key figures in the Martian rebuilding effort after the war.


She smiled and greeted them as though she had just come in. Her heart raced, and she was worried that her trembling voice would betray what she had done. Luckily, they were so full of their own worries that none paid any attention. They walked by her seriatim, smiled at her, patted her on the shoulder to welcome her back to Mars. Then they put on their jackets and left.


As he passed her, Laak, the Registrar of Files, paused and explained apologetically that he had received her note but hadn’t had a chance to respond. He was going to be in the office the next few days, and she was welcome to come find him.


“Thank you, Uncle Laak,” said Luoying. “I really appreciate it.”


The last one to emerge from the living room was Juan. His face, dark and leathery, and his prominent paunch made him resemble a painting of a spice merchant from India from eight hundred years before. Despite his figure, he moved with agility and efficiency. He wore a thick mustache curved up at both ends, and his dark, bushy eyebrows went some way to soften his piercing gaze. When he first came into the entrance hall, his expression was severe and wolfish; but as soon as he saw Luoying, his face cracked into a wide grin, and he picked her up just as he used to when she was a little girl.


“Look at you! My little bunny is back.” He spun her once around and set her back down. “You’re still so light! Did they starve you over there on Earth? Or were you too picky with your food?”


“I . . . I’m a dancer.”


“So? A dancer must also eat! Put on some weight and you’ll dance even better!”


“I won’t be able to leap as high then.”


“That’s no big deal. What’s the point of jumping like a grasshopper? Whatever you want to eat, eat! And if you run out of ideas, come find me. Let me tell you, your Uncle Juan has turned eating into an art. Did you enjoy the desserts last night at the banquet?”


“I sure did! I ate two helpings.”


“Aha! I was responsible for those. Put them in the oven myself.”


“I had no idea you were such a skilled baker! . . . Oh, Uncle Juan, I heard you talk about your grandmother last night—”


“Did you?” Juan laughed uproariously. Luoying was befuddled by this unexpected reaction. Juan went on. “Little bunny, you have to understand that in a negotiation someone has to play the role of the reasonable adult, while someone else has to scare them a bit, like a madman. Your grandfather loves being reasonable, which means I have to go scare people. That doesn’t seem fair, does it? I’ve complained to Hans many times that we need to switch roles once in a while.”


Juan continued to laugh. He promised to have Luoying over to his house for dinner soon and then left.


Watching his departing figure, Luoying wasn’t sure what to think. She saw how the laughter had slid off Juan’s face the moment he turned away and how his gaze had again acquired that terrifying piercing quality. As he strode away, his back was as erect as a tree and his upper body never wavered. She remembered that Uncle Juan had always called her “little bunny” and loved to tease her, asking her what she wanted to do when she was grown up.


She knew the answer now. When I’m grown up, I want to understand what lies behind the words, not just the words themselves.


The entrance hall fell quiet. She turned around and saw Rudy and Grandfather at the door to the living room, chatting in low voices. Through the floor-to-ceiling window at the end of the hall, she could see that the red surface of the planet appeared almost brown with the angle of the light, and the thorn apple flowers glowed silver. The two of them seemed to be arguing, but Luoying couldn’t be sure. She saw that Grandfather’s expression was so severe that the blood seemed to have drained from his face. Only very rarely had she seen him so troubled. In her memory, she could recall only a scene from a news broadcast, after Grandfather had pacified a brewing rebellion in the Boule, when he had looked like this. Back then, Hans Sloan had strode into the Boule Chamber and sat down in a chair in the middle. Without saying a single word, the chamber quieted down as the legislators saw his face.


“. . . but a principle isn’t the same as a line that cannot be crossed,” she heard Rudy say.


“Of course it is,” said Grandfather. “If it can be crossed, then it isn’t a principle at all.”


She realized then that her worries had been justified. There was a looming crisis. If the negotiations failed, war would follow. The Terrans wanted controlled nuclear fusion.


*


Back in her room, she dropped her backpack on the floor and slid to the floor herself. This had been a long afternoon for her. The snippets of conversation she had heard were rough, technical, and abbreviated, but they were enough to give her an outline of the situation. Distracted, she took a bath. Soaking in the tub, she allowed her mind to wander as the world disappeared in the steam.


It had been some time since she had heard such frank discussion of politics. When she was little, such discussions were a part of her daily life. Many of her parents’ friends gathered at their home to talk politics while gulping cup after cup of bitter coffee, filling the walls with projected maps. But on Earth it was rare to encounter real politics. Other than the Reversionist movement, which flared up in the year before her return to Mars, most of her time there had been spent in the pursuit of lighthearted diversions. It was as though she had lived in a bubble, a champagne-flavored, fun bubble. The bitter coffee aroma of political debates seemed unfamiliar to her now.


It wasn’t just because she had avoided the company of policy makers on Earth. It was more a consequence of mood and atmosphere. Unlike the politicians she had met on Earth, the decision-makers on Mars had a seriousness of purpose. They often spoke of universal responsibilities and the ultimate goal of humankind, but the politicians on Earth rarely uttered such phrases. On Earth the news was dominated by events such as some government filing for bankruptcy with the World Bank, a head of state somewhere making a film to boost tourism to their country, the chief diplomat of some country making a promise to buy the government bonds of another country . . . It was as though countries were just large companies, and the politicians their executives. She rarely heard the kind of news that was common on Mars: a plan to divert the orbit of some asteroid or dwarf planet; an attempt to build a new model for human survival; collecting and cataloging the fruits of human civilization; ascertaining the sources of errors in simulations of human history; and so on. She often wondered if alien visitors might, based on the news broadcast on the two planets, come to the conclusion that the population of Earth was only twenty million and that of Mars twenty billion, as opposed to the other way around.


The debate in the living room just then seemed to her unreal. When she was a little girl, she had been impressed by such grand visions and heroic words. But on Earth she had lost her enthusiasm for them. There was no one who persuaded her to abandon her faith, but she had ceased to believe. Her encounter with a far larger portion of humanity, with their chaotic and selfish desires, had confused her. She no longer saw a Humanity waiting to be changed, or a Civilization that entrusted its hope to Mars. Those visions, which had once seemed full of grandeur to her, now appeared as magnificent illusions, mere windmill giants.


She understood that she was lost. There was no question that the men who had been in her house today represented the ideal of Martian life: they were the best in the fields of scientific research, engineering, exploration, and development. They stood at the peak where all the roads on Mars—solemn and honor-strewn roads— converged. But she had no idea how they could show her the way she wanted to go for her own future.


She closed her eyes and sank deeper into the warm bathwater. Through the steam-fogged walls of the bathroom, she knew that the monitor by her bed glowed with the log-in page for her personal space. She wasn’t looking at it, but she couldn’t escape its presence.


She had to make a choice soon. She needed to register with an atelier and establish her identity. It was a step that every child on Mars had to take to become an adult. An atelier gave one an identification number, established the credentials for acquiring the necessities of life and for expressing and living a life. All jobs, passports, documents, and credits were linked to the number. She had not logged in yet; it was as though she didn’t exist, hadn’t yet returned from Earth.


But she didn’t want to choose an atelier. Just as a woman returning from a war didn’t want to go to a regular job.


For most people on Mars, the choice of an atelier was a choice for life. Yes, some did change ateliers, but most stuck with their initial decision and climbed the career ladder year by year. Luoying didn’t want to live like that, though she knew that was how everyone on Mars lived.


During her five years on Earth, she moved fourteen times and lived in twelve different cities. She tried out seven different jobs and built up five different groups of friends. She lost all certainty that she knew how to plan the rest of her life. She could no longer accept monotony, and she found hierarchy revolting. What had seemed to her the natural order of life in childhood now appeared as unbearable restraints. She wished she felt otherwise, but there it was.


The log-in screen continued to glow. She refused to go near it.


Next to the monitor, on the window ledge, was a collection of toys: a walking-singing electronic clock, a thermometer shaped like a strawberry, a mechanical doll, a lamp made from orange and green glass. Luoying stared at the collection, almost disbelieving that she had once treasured them. But there they were, a frozen memorial of the world of a thirteen-year-old girl.


She climbed out of the bathtub and dried herself in the heating booth. She put on her pajamas, and the fragrance of fresh laundry gave her some comfort. She stared at herself in the mirror as though looking as a stranger. Under her wet hair, her pale neck seemed too thin and delicate, not at all what she had hoped for herself. She wanted to be strong and clearheaded, with definite ideas about how to live, how to choose, how to live a thoughtful, determined, lucid life.


She did not want to be the confused and pale girl in the mirror.


*


Her hair pinned up, she padded out of her room. She was going down the hall to find Grandfather.


He had said yesterday that they were going to have dinner together tonight, to pray for her parents on the anniversary of their deaths. But after searching through every room, she didn’t find Rudy or Hans. Inside the kitchen, a prepared dinner was being warmed in the cooker.


She sighed, staring at the glass dishes and the empty dining room. In the end, Grandfather couldn’t keep his promise. She didn’t blame him. He was, after all, consul of Mars, and she knew now the Terran negotiations were pushing them toward a crisis.


Leaving the kitchen, she climbed the stairs to the study on the second floor.


She wanted to talk to her parents by herself, to ask them how she ought to choose her life.


Luoying was only eight when her mother and father died. There were many things she didn’t understand at the time, or perhaps she did but then forgot about them. On Earth, there was a time when she had tried to shut off her past deliberately. And unfortunately, when a door was shut for too long, it was impossible to open up again. To make herself stronger, she had cut herself off from her memories. And now, after trying to be strong for so long, she no longer had the key to go back.


The study looked just the way she had last seen it five years ago, which was the same as the way it had been ten years ago, when her parents died. This was where her father read and wrote, where her mother sculpted, and where they discussed politics with their friends. A tea service still sat on the table, with tiny spoons on saucers, as though the guests had only departed for a break and would return shortly. Her mother’s tools sat on a shelf, and an unfinished sculpture rested on the workbench.


Everything was carefully maintained. But the room was too perfect. The window ledge and the corners of the window frames were so clean that it was obvious at a glance that no one lived here anymore.


The bookcases in the study were custom designed by her father. Together, they resembled some architectural wonder: tall and short, horizontal and vertical, the beams and buttresses raised frozen words into the air like some imaginary castle. The bookcases were submerged in the evening shadow. The whole room seemed to be gazing upon the past. The people were gone, but memories remained.


Luoying remembered that her parents’ lives had always been connected with art. She could no longer recall the details, but that sense of art intermingling with life, with exchange and conversation, lingered.


Slowly, she walked along the walls, picking up and examining everything before setting it back down, trying to imagine what it was like when her parents had held it.


On a small table in the corner, she saw a photo album standing open. The photograph was one of her parents together.


She picked up the album, a memorial book, and flipped through it. There were photos from Mom’s and Dad’s childhoods: school awards, portraits taken at a dance, records of achievements in science and art. Both of them had been accomplished youths. Dad had written, directed, and starred in a historical drama. Photographs of the production showed intricate sets projected onto the stage of a small community theater, and her father, performing the role of a hero about to be executed for his beliefs, stood in front of other teenagers with a determined expression. Mom had always loved painting and sculpting, and one of her early paintings, the winner of a competition, was still on display in the community museum. Both of them had chosen to join an engineering atelier, but their love of art continued unabated unto death.


As she looked through the photos, Luoying remembered that when she was a little girl, her favorite place in the world was with her mother in here, while she sculpted.


And just like that, she seemed to see Mom standing next to one of the bookcases. Her long hair was braided, coiled, and pinned atop her head. She gazed intently at Luoying, full of love, before rushing back to the workbench and the lump of clay. Her hands kneaded and squeezed, the sculpting knife carving away the excess to reveal the outline of what she was making. Luoying saw herself sitting in the chair, a bow in her hair and a doll in her arms, staring curiously at her mother, infected by her passion for her art.


Then she saw Dad. He was next to them, leaning against one of the bookcases, wearing a brown shirt and a wool vest. One of his feet was on top of a chair, and he rested an arm against the other leg as his hand sketched something in the air with a pen. The expression on his face was one of intense concentration as he recounted a period of history to his audience. The audience, other men and women her parents’ age, discussed history and art and debated ideas that stirred the heart. She didn’t understand everything they said, but she loved listening to them.


The visions awakened her memory. Bit by bit, the past sealed in her head seeped out and filled the rest of the night-shrouded room.


She realized that she had not in fact forgotten—she just hadn’t thought of them for a long time.


On a page of the memorial book she saw the following: From that day on, Adele officially became a person without an atelier.


How could her mother be without an atelier? Luoying glanced at the date on the page: it was the year she turned six. There was no explanation elaborating the statement. She flipped back to the front of the book, where there was a copy of her mother’s curriculum vitae. Indeed, there was nothing about the last two years of Mom’s life. Everything simply came to an abrupt stop, like an unfinished play.


Mom didn’t want to register either! A bittersweet feeling filled Luoying’s heart. She felt connected to her mother’s soul, despite the yawning gulf of death. She was not alone in her confusion, and her own troubles seemed suffused with her parents’ influence and legacy. Her vagabond days and consequent anxiety were not so strange after all. She had wandered afar only to return to the path her mother had chosen.


But why had Mom done it? Her own confusion was the result of her time on Earth, but what had happened to her mother to make her fall into the same kind of self-doubt until she chose to belong to no set identity, no atelier?


She wanted to find out more about her mother’s experiences, but there was nothing more in the memorial book. Carefully, Luoying placed the album back on the table. She turned to the bookcases, thinking perhaps they held more clues.


By the moonlight, she saw a bouquet of white flowers resting in the shadow of the legs of the semicircular table at the other end of the study. This was a traditional piece of Chinese furniture, also called a crescent table. With the flat side placed against the wall, it was intended for vases and other decorations.


The flowers were lilies, their stems wrapped in green tissue. The bouquet had been so well hidden that she had missed it when she came in earlier.


She walked over and picked up the bouquet. Below it was a card.


Forgive me.


The handwriting belonged to Grandfather. Her heart pounded.


So he had been here. Even though they couldn’t have dinner together, he had kept his promise.


Luoying examined the card, perplexed. The card glowed a pale white in the moonlight, and the dark, angular strokes appeared particularly striking.


What had Hans Sloan done that he needed to beg forgiveness from her parents? She recalled how Grandfather had looked at the photograph of her parents on the day of her return. It was a look full of love and longing.


Forgive me.


She looked at the words again and froze, thunderstruck.


The scene from earlier in the afternoon, when Grandfather had looked so severe while talking to Rudy, came to her mind. Her heart seemed to stop as she finally remembered where she had seen that broadcast of her grandfather in the Boule Chamber.


It was just before she left for Earth. She was in the living room, trying to find a film she wanted to watch. By happenstance, she triggered a recording that someone else in the house had just finished playing.


She had stared, fascinated, as Grandfather strode across the Boule Chamber, full of rebellious agitation, and sat down. She saw his cold face as the chamber quieted.


And then the real Hans Sloan had appeared in the door of the living room. She rushed to turn off the recording as though caught doing something forbidden.