PROLOGUE




Exile became fact only at the moment of returning home.


For more than a thousand and eight hundred days, when Luoying was away from home, she didn’t realize she had been exiled. Home was an imagined place in her heart; she could only think of its warmth, its memories, its openness and acceptance, but she never thought of its shape. Imagination took what it needed based on her mood, like the air around her. Since air never conflicted with the person it surrounded, there was no seam between her and home. The distance between them was merely physical.


Before she left home, home had no shape. It was merely a presence far larger than she was. Because she was embedded within it, she could never see its limits or its borders. When she was away from home, home also had no shape. It was on the other side of the sky. Compared to the sky of the foreign land, it was too small a presence, merely a point of light. There were no details, no outlines.


Home in those moments was always a smooth and kind presence. Whether too big or too small, there were no sharp edges, no thorns or spurs, no instances where an encounter ripped away her skin and flesh to reveal the white bone beneath. She could always immerse herself in the concept of home, whether with her body or her heart.


But all the mismatches came to the fore the moment she arrived home after a long time away. In that moment, the cracks became real: visible, tangible, as clear as the distance between one person and another. She was like a puzzle piece that had fallen off the picture of home, thinking that after her sojourn abroad she would be able to fit right back in. But at the moment of return, she realized that there was no spot left for her. Her shape did not fit the hole left in the puzzle when she left. It was only in that moment that she truly lost her home.


Luoying and her friends were fated never to return home. The ship they were on was forever vacillating on the Lagrangian point between the two worlds. To vacillate was also never to belong. It was their fate to be cosmic vagabonds.