CHAPTER EIGHTEEN


I must now admit that I adapted myself with remarkable ease to-the
conditions of life in my cage. From the material point of view, I was living in
perfect felicity: during the day the apes attended to my every need; at night
I shared my Utter with one of the loveliest girls in the cosmos. I even grew
so accustomed to this situation that for more than a month, without feeling
how outlandish or degrading it was, I made no attempt to put an end to it. I
learned hardly any new words of the simian language. I did not continue my
spiritual nature, had no doubt since yielded to Zaius' opinion and regarded
me as a man of her planet, that is, an animal: an intelligent animal, perhaps,
but by no means an intellectual one.


  My superiority over the other prisoners, which I no longer exercised to the
point of startling the warders, made me the most brilliant subject in the
establishment. This distinction, I am ashamed to admit, sufficed my present
ambitions and even filled me with pride. Zoram and Zanam were friendly
toward me, taking pleasure in seeing me smile, laugh, and pronounce a few
words. Having exhausted all the classic tests with me, they racked then*
brains to invent other, more subtle ones, and all three of us made merry
whenever I discovered the solution to a problem* They never forgot to
bring me some tidbit, which I always shared with Nova. We were a
privileged couple. I was fatuous enough to believe that my mate was aware
of all she owed to my talents, and I spent part of my time showing off in
front of her.




One day, however, after several weeks, I felt a sort of nausea. Was it the
gleam in Nova's eyes, which had seemed to me that night particularly
lacking in expression? Was it the lump of sugar that Zira came to give me
that suddenly acquired a bitter taste? The fact is that I was shamed by my
cowardly resignation. What would Professor Antelle think of me, if he
chanced to be still alive and found me in this state? This thought soon
became unbearable, and I forthwith made up my mind to behave like a
civilized man.






While' stroking Zira's arm by way of expressing my thanks, I snatched
away her notebook and fountain pen. I braved her gentle remonstrances, sat
down on the straw, and started a drawing of Nova. I am a fairly good
draftsman and, being inspired by the model, managed to turn out a
reasonable likeness, which I then handed to the she-ape.






  This promptly reawakened her emotion and uncertainty about me. Her
muzzle became red and she peered at me closely, trembling slightly. Since
she made no further move, I again calmly seized her notebook, which this
time she yielded to me without protest. Why had I not thought of this
simple solution before? Mustering my school-day memories, I drew the
geometrical figure illustrating the theorem of Pythagoras. It was not at
random that I chose this proposition: I remembered reading hi my youth a
prophetic book in which such a procedure had been used by an old scientist
to enter into communication with the spirits of another world. I had even
discussed this during the voyage with Professor Antelle, who approved of
the method. He had added, I distinctly remembered, that the Euclidean
rules, being completely false, were no doubt for that very reason universal.






  In any case, the effect it had on Zira was extraordinary. Her muzzle went
purple and she gave a sharp exclamation. She did not recover her
composure until Zoram and Zanam came up, intrigued by her attitude. Then
she reacted in a way that I found extremely odd—after darting a furtive
glance at me, she carefully hid the drawing I had just completed. She spoke
to the gorillas, who then left the hall, and I realized she had sent them off on
some pretext or other. Then she turned back to me and took my hand, the
pressure of her fingers having quite a different significance from when she
flattered me like a young animal after a successful trick. Finally she handed
me the notebook and fountain pen with an air of entreaty.






  Now it was she who appeared eager to establish contact. I gave thanks to
Pythagoras and embarked once more on my geometry. On one page of the
notebook I drew to the best of my ability the three conic sections with their
axes and centers: an ellipse, a parabola, and an hyperbola. Then, on the
opposite page, I drew a right circular cone. Let me remind the reader that
the intersection of such a body by a plane produces one of the three conic
sections, depending on the angle of the cut. In this case I drew the figure to
illustrate an ellipse, then, reverting to my first diagram, pointed out the
corresponding curve to my astonished she-ape.






  She snatched the notebook out of my hands and in turn drew another cone,
intersected at a different angle, and pointed out the hyperbola with her long
finger. I felt such intense emotion that tears came to my eyes and I clasped
her hands convulsively. Nova whimpered with rage at the far end of the
cage. Her instinct did not deceive her as to the meaning of these
demonstrations. It was a spiritual communion that had just been established
betw%en Zira and me through the medium of geometry. I derived an almost
sensual satisfaction from this and felt that the she-ape was also deeply
moved.






 She broke free with a sudden jerk and rushed from the hall. She was
absent only a few minutes, but during this time I remained lost in thought
without daring to look
at Nova, about whom I felt almost guilty and who turn her back on me with
a growl.






  When Zira came back she handed me a large sheet of paper fixed to a
drawing board. I thought for a second or two and made up my mind to
deliver a decisive blow. In one corner of the sheet I sketched the system of
Betelgeuse, as we had discovered it on our arrival, with the giant central
body, and its four planets. I marked Soror down in its exact position together
with its own little satellite; I indicated it to Zira, then pointed my forefinger
at her repeatedly. She signaled to me that she had understood completely.


  Then in another corner of the sheet I drew our dear old solar system with
its principal planets. I indicated the Earth and pointed my finger at my own
chest.




  This time Zira was slower to understand. She, too, indicated the Earth, then
pointed her finger upward. I gave an affirmative nod. She was flabbergasted
and her mental turmoil was plain to see. I did my best to help her by
drawing another dotted line between Earth and Soror and marking in our
vessel, on a different scale, on the trajectory. This made her see the light. I
was now certain that my true nature and origin were known to her. She was
about to draw closer to me but at that moment Zaius appeared at the end of
the corridor for his periodical inspection.






  A look of terror came into the she-ape's eyes. She quickly crumpled up the
paper, put her notebook back in her pocket, and, before the orangutan had
reached us, placed her forefinger on her mouth with an air of entreaty. She
was counseling me not to show myself in my true colors to Zaius. I obeyed
her without understanding the reason for these mysteries and, convinced
that I had an ally in her, promptly resumed my intelligent animal attitude.