CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

I shall not give a detailed account of the scenes that took place in the cages
during the weeks that followed. As I had guessed, the apes had taken it into
their heads to study the amorous behavior of humans, and they tackled this
task in their usual methodical manner, noting the slightest developments,
struggling to provoke relationships, making use of their pikes now and then
to correct a recalcitrant subject's conduct.


  I had begun to make a few observations myself, hoping to include them in
the account I intended publishing on my eventual return to Earth, but I soon
grew tired of this, finding nothing very intriguing to note—nothing, that is,
apart from the strange manner in which each man courted his woman before
approaching her. He indulged in a display similar in every way to that
executed by certain birds: a sort of slow, hesitant dance consisting of steps
forward, backward, and sideways. He moved thus in an ever-decreasing
circle, a circle whose center was occupied by the woman, who merely
pivoted around without shifting from her position. I witnessed with interest
several of these displays, the essential ritual of which was always the same,
the details varying only occasionally. As for the copulation that concluded
these preliminaries, even though I was slightly astonished when I first
witnessed it, I soon ended up by paying no more attention to it than the rest
of the captives. The only surprising element in these displays was the
scientific ardor with which the apes followed them, never omitting to make
copious notes on the procedure.


 It was a different matter when, noticing I did not indulge in these frolics
—I had sworn that nothing would induce me to make such an exhibition of
myself—the gorillas took it into their heads to compel me by force and to
belabor me with their pikes—me, Ulysse Merou, a man created in the
image of God! I resisted them energetically. These brutes persisted and I
don't know what would have become of me had it not been for the arrival
of Zira, to whom they reported my lack of cooperation.






 She pondered for a long time; then, looking at me with her fine intelligent
eyes, came up and started stroking the back of my neck, meanwhile
addressing me in terms that I assumed to signify something like this:


  "Poor little man," she seemed to be saying. "How odd you are! No one of
your species has ever behaved like this before. Look at the others all
around you. Do what you have been asked to do and you will be rewarded."


  She took a lump of sugar out of her pocket and offered it to me. I was in
despair. So she too regarded me as an animal, perhaps a slightly more
intelligent one than the others. I shook my head furiously and went and lay
down ha a corner of the cage, far from Nova, who gazed at me in
incomprehension.


  That would doubtless have been the end of the business had not Zaius
reappeared at that moment, looking more overbearing than ever. He had
come to see the outcome of his experiments and as usual he inquired first
about me. Zira was obliged to tell him of my recalcitrance. He seemed
extremely displeased, paced up and down for a minute or two with his hands
behind his back, then gave some decisive orders. Zoram and Zanam
opened my cage, took Nova away from me, and brought back instead an
elderly matron. That idiot Zaius, steeped in scientific method, was
determined to try the same experiment with a different subject.


  Worse was to come, however, and I did not even think of my own sad
fate. In anguish I watched my friend Nova being bundled off and was
horrified to see her put into the cage directly opposite, delivered to a man
with hefty shoulders, a sort of hairy-chested colossus, who started dancing
around her, embarking with frenzied ardor on the curious love display I have
already described.




  As soon as I saw what this brute was up to, I forgot my good resolutions.
I lost my head and once again behaved like a madman. As a matter of fact,
I was literally mad with rage. I screamed and yelled like the men of Soror,
showing my fury as they did by hurling myself against the bars, biting
them, foaming at the mouth, grinding my teeth, behaving in short in a
thoroughly bestial fashion.






  And the most surprising thing about this outburst waits unexpected
  outcome. Seeing me behave like this, Zaius smiled. It was the first mark
  of benevolence he had bestowed on me. He had finally detected in me
  human behavior and found himself on familiar ground. His theory was
  vindicated. This put him in such a good mood that he even consented, at a
  remark from Zira, to cancel his orders and give me one last chance. The
  dreadful old matron was led away and Nova was restored to me before
  the hefty brute had touched her. The group of monkeys then stood back
  and all three watched me closely from a distance.






  What more can I say? These emotions had broken down my resistance. I
felt I would never be able to bear the sight of my nymph at the mercy of
another man. I resigned myself like a coward to the victory of the
orangutan, who was now smiling with pleasure at his astuteness. Hesitantly I
attempted a step of the dance.






  Yes, I, one of the kings of creation, started circling around my beauty—I,
the ultimate achievement of millennial evolution, in front of this collection
of apes eagerly watching me, in front of an old orangutan dictating notes to
his secretary, in front of a female chimpanzee smiling with self-satisfaction,
in front of a couple of chuckling gorillas —I, a man, excusing myself on the
grounds of exceptional cosmic circumstances, and persuading myself for the
moment that there are more things on the planets and in the heavens than
have ever been dreamed of in human philosophy, I, Ulysse Merou, embarked
like a peacock around the gorgeous Nova on the love display.




part two