CHAPTER 34

I entered the room and at first could see nothing to justify this air of
mystery. The equipment was the same as in the previous room: generators,
transformers, electrodes. There were only two subjects, a man and a woman,
lying strapped down on two parallel divans. As soon as we arrived they started
observing us with a strange intensity.
  The gorilla assistant welcomed us with an inarticulate grunt. Helius and
he exchanged a few words in deaf-mute language. It was a far from
commonplace experience to see a gorilla and a chimpanzee moving then"
fingers like this. I do not know why, but it seemed to me the height of
absurdity and I almost burst out laughing.


  "All is well. They are quite calm. We can begin a test right away."




"What sort of test?" I implored.






  "I'd rather keep it as a surprise for you," Cornelius grinned.


  The gorilla anesthetized the two patients, who presently fell asleep, and
started up various machines. Helius went up to the man, carefully unrolled
the bandage that covered his skull, and, aiming at a certain spot, applied the
electrodes. The man remained absolutely still. I was questioning Cornelius
with my eyes when the miracle happened.


  The man began to talk. His voice echoed around the room with an
abruptness that made me start, rising above the buzz of the generator. It
was not an hallucination on my part. He was expressing himself in simian
language, with the voice of a man from Earth or that of an ape on this
planet.


 The faces of the two scientists were a study in triumph. They looked at me
with a mischievous glint in their eyes and reveled in my stupefaction. I was
about to utter an exclamation, but they motioned me to keep quiet and listen.
The man's words were incoherent and devoid of originality. He must have
been captive in the institute for a long time and kept repeating snatches of
sentences he had heard spoken by the nurses or the scientists. Cornelius
presently put a stop to the experiment.


 "We'll get nothing more out of this chap. But the main point is, he talks."




 "It's amazing," I stammered.






 "You haven't seen anything yet," said Helius. "He talks like a parrot or a
gramophone. But I've done much better with her."






He indicated the woman, who was sleeping peacefully.






 "Much better?"






  "A thousand times better," said Cornelius, who showed the same
excitement as his colleague. "Just listen. This woman also talks, as you'll
soon hear. But she doesn't merely repeat the words she has heard hi
captivity. Her talk has an exceptional significance. By a combination of
physico-chemical processes, of which I shall spare you the details, this
genius Helius has succeeded hi awakening hi her not only her own
individual memory but the memory of the species. Under electrical impulse
her recollections go back to an extremely distant line of ancestors: atavistic
memories reviving a past several thousands of years old. Do you realize
what that means, Ulysse?"


  I was so amazed by this extravagant claim that for a moment I really
believed the learned Cornelius had gone mad; for madness exists among
the apes, particularly among the intellectuals. But the other chimpanzee
was already handling his electrodes and applying them to the woman's
brain. The latter remained inert for some time, just like the man, then she
heaved a deep sigh and started talking. She likewise expressed herself in
simian language in a rather low but extremely distinct voice that changed
from time to time, as though it belonged to a number of different persons.
Every sentence she uttered has remained engraved on my memory.




  "For some time," said the voice in a slightly anxious tone, "these apes, all
these apes, have been ceaselessly multiplying, although it looked as though
then" species was bound to die out at a certain period. If this goes on, they
will almost outnumber us . . : and that's not all. They are becoming
arrogant. They look us straight in the eye. We have been wrong to tame
them and to grant those whom we use as servants a certain amount of
liberty. They are the most insolent of all. One day I was jostled hi the street
by a chimpanzee. As I raised my hand, he looked at me hi such a menacing
manner that I did not dare strike him.






 "Anna, who works at the laboratory, tells me there have been a great
many changes there as well. She dares not enter the cages alone any more.
She says that at night a sort of whispering and chuckling can be heard. One
of the gorillas makes fun of the boss behind his back and imitates his
nervous tics."






The woman paused, heaved several anguished sighs, then went on:




 "It's happened! One of them has succeeded in talking. It's certain; I read
about it in Woman's Journal. There's a photograph of him, too. He's a
chimpanzee."


  "A chimpanzee, the first! Just as I thought," Cornelius exclaimed.


 "There are several others. The papers report fresh cases every day.
Certain biologists regard this as a great scientific success. Don't they
realize where it may lead? It appears that one of these chimpanzees has
uttered some ugly threats. The first use they make of speech is to protest
when they are given an order."


 The woman fell silent again and resumed in a different voice, a somewhat
pedantic man's voice:


  "What is happening could have been foreseen. A cerebral laziness has
taken hold of us. No more books; even detective novels have now become
too great an intellectual effort. No more games; at the most a hand or two
of cards. Even the childish motion picture does not tempt us any more.
Meanwhile the apes are meditating in silence. Their brain is developing in
solitary reflection . . . and they are talking. Oh! not very much, and to us
hardly at all, apart from a few words of scornful refusal to the more
intrepid men who still dare to give them orders. But at night, when we are
not there, they exchange impressions and mutually instruct one another."


 After a long silence a woman's voice continued, in anguish:


 "I was too frightened. I could not go on living like this. I preferred to
hand the place over to my gorilla. I left my own house.




  "He1 had been with me for years and was a loyal servant. He started
going out in the evening to attend meetings. He learned to talk. He refused
to do any work. A month ago he ordered me to do the cooking and washing
up. He began to use my plates and knives and forks. Last week he chased
me out of my bedroom. I had to sleep in an armchair in the sitting room.
Not daring to scold him or punish him, I tried to win him over by kindness.
He laughed in my face and his demands increased. I was too miserable. I
abdicated.






"I have taken refuge in a camp with other women where they are in the
same plight. There are some men here as well; most of them have no more
courage than we have. It's a wretched life we lead outside the town. We feel
ashamed and scarcely speak to one another. During the first few days I
played a few games of patience. I haven't the energy any more."






The woman broke off again and a male voice took over:


"I had found, I believe, a cure for cancer. I wanted to put it to the test, like
all my previous discoveries. I was careful, but not careful enough. For some
time the apes have been reluctant to lend themselves to these experiments.
Before going into Georges', the chimpanzee's, cage I had him held down by
my two assistants. I got ready to give him the injection—the cancer-producing one. I had to give it to him in order to be able to cure him.
Georges' eyes looked resigned. He did not move, but I saw his crafty eyes
glance over my shoulder. I realized too late. The gorillas, the six gorillas I
was holding in reserve for the infection, had escaped. A plot. They seized
us. Georges directed the operation. He copied my movements exactly. He
ordered us to be tied down on the table, and the gorillas promptly obeyed
him. Then he picked up the hypodermic and injected all three of us with the
deadly liquid. So now I have cancer. It's certain, for though there may be
doubt as to the efficacy of the cure, the fatal serum has long since been
tested and proved effective.






  "After emptying the hypodermic, Georges gave me a friendly pat on the
cheek, as I often did to my apes. I had always treated them well. From me
they received more caresses man blows. A few days later, in the cage in
which they had locked me up, I recognized the first symptoms of the
disease. So had Georges, and I heard him tell the others that he was going
to begin the cure. This gave me a new fright. What if it killed me off more
quickly! I know I am condemned, but now I lack confidence in this new
cure. During the night I succeeded hi forcing the bars of my cage and
escaping. I have taken refuge in the camp outside the town. I have two
months to live. I am spending them playing patience and dozing."
Another feminine voice succeeded his:






 "I was a lady animal tamer. I used to do an act with a dozen orangutans,
magnificent beasts. Today I'm inside the cage instead of them, together
with some other circus performers.




  'To give them their due, the apes treat us well and give us plenty to eat.
  They change the straw of our bedding when it becomes too dirty. They are
  not unkind; they punish only those of us who show reluctance and refuse
  to perform the tricks they have taken it into their heads to teach us. These
  are extremely advanced! I walk on all fours; I turn somersaults. So they are
  very good to me. I'm not unhappy. I have no more worries or
  responsibilities. Most of us are adapting ourselves to this regime."






  This time the woman fell silent for a long time, during which Cornelius
gazed at me with embarrassing insistence. I could read his thoughts only too
well. Had it not been high time for such a feeble race of men, who gave in
so easily, to make way for a nobler breed? I grew flushed and looked away.
The woman continued in a more and more anguished tone:






  "They now hold the whole town. There are only a few hundred of us left in
this redoubt and our situation is precarious. We form the last human nucleus in
the vicinity of the city, but the apes will not tolerate us at liberty so close to
them. In the other camps some of the men have fled far off, into the jungle;
the others have surrendered in order to get something to relieve their
hunger. Here we have stayed put, mainly from laziness. We sleep; we are
incapable of organizing ourselves for resistance. . . .
  "This is what I feared. I can hear a barbaric din, something like a parody of a
military band. . . . Help! It's them, it's the apes! They are surrounding us.
They are led by enormous gorillas. They have taken our bugles, our drums
and uniforms, our weapons, too, of course. . . . No, they haven't any weapons.
Oh, what bitter humiliation, the final insult! Their army is upon us and all they
are carrying are whips!"

