CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
I woke early after a restless night. I turned over three or four times in my bed and rubbed my eyes before fully recovering
consciousness, still unaccustomed to the civilized I life I had been leading for a month, feeling anxious every morning at not hearing
the straw creak and not feeling Nova's warmth against me.








     I eventually came to my senses. I was living in one of the most comfortable apartments in the institute. The apes had proved
  extremely generous. I had a bedroom, a bathroom, clothes, books, a television set. I read all the papers, I was free, I could go out, walk
  about the streets, attend any entertainment. My presence in a public place still provoked considerable interest, but the emotion of the
  first few days had started to die down.








     Cornelius was now the scientific head of the institute. Zaius had been dismissed—he had been given another post, however, and a new
  decoration—and Zira's fianc6 installed in his place. This had resulted in a reorganization of the personnel, a general promotion of
  the chimpanzee element, and renewed activity in every department Zira had become the new director's assistant.




     As for me, I took part in the scientist's research work, no longer as a guinea pig but as a collaborator. However, it was only
  with great difficulty and after much hesitation on the part of the Grand Council that Cornelius had been granted this favor. The
  authorities still appeared reluctant to admit my nature and origin.


   I dressed quickly, left my room, and walked over to the wing of the institute where I had once been a prisoner: the department
 under Zira, who was still directing it in addition to her new duties. With Cornelius' permission ; I had embarked there on a systematic
 study of the men.




     Here I am in the room with the cages, walking along the corridor in front of the bars like one of the masters of this planet.
  Shall I admit that I come here frequently, more frequently than my duties demand? There are times when I feel burdened by
  constantly simian surroundings, and here I find a sort of refuge.




     The captives are well acquainted with me now and recognize my authority. Do they see any difference between me, Zira, and the
  warders who bring them their food? I should like to think so, but I doubt it. For the last month, despite my patience and efforts, I,
  too, have been unsuccessful in making them achieve any higher level of performance than that of well-trained animals. A secret
  intuition tells me, however, that their potentialities are enormous.




     I should like to teach them to talk. This is my great ambition. I have not succeeded, I admit. It is only with the utmost
  difficulty that some of them manage to repeat a monosyllabic sound or two, which certain chimpanzees on Earth can do. It is
  not much, but I am persevering. What encourages me is the new persistence with which their eyes try to meet mine, eyes which
  for some time have seemed to be gradually changing in expression. I fancy I can see in them a spark of curiosity, associated with a
  superior mentality, breaking through the animal mindlessness.
   I move slowly around the room, stopping in front of each of the captives. I speak to them; I speak to them gently, patiently. They
are now accustomed to this unusual behavior on my part. They seem to listen. I go on for several minutes, then stop speaking in whole
sentences and pronounce a few simple words, repeating them over and over again, hoping for an echo. One of them clumsily
articulates a syllable, but this is as far as he will go today. The subject soon gets tired, abandons the superhuman task, and lies
down on the floor as though after some exhausting effort. I sigh and pass on to the next one. I finally come to the cage in which
Nova is at present vegetating in solitary sadness. Sadness—this at least is what I, with my Earthman's conceit, wish to believe, and I
struggle to detect this emotion on her beautiful but inexpressive features. Zira has not given her another mate, and I am grateful for that








I often think of Nova. I cannot forget the hours I spent in her company. But I have never again entered her cage; human self-respect
forbids me. Is she not an animal? I now live in the highest scientific circles; how could I let myself indulge hi such a relationship? I
blush at the thought of our former intimacy. Since I have changed camps I have even forbidden myself to show her more affection than
I show to her fellows.








    Nevertheless I cannot help noting that she is an exceptional subject and I am glad of that. With her I obtain better results than with
the others. She presses up against the bars as soon as she sees me, and her mouth twists into a grimace that could almost pass as a
smile. Even before I have opened my mouth she tries to pronounce the three or four syllables she has learned. Her diligence is
evident. Is she naturally more gifted than the others? Or has contact with me polished her and given her a capacity to benefit more
from my lessons? I like to think, with a certain complacency, that this is the case.








    I say her name, then my own, pointing my finger alternately at her and myself. She imitates the gesture. But I see her expression
change suddenly and she bares her teeth as I hear a gentle chuckle behind me.








  It is Zira, who laughs not unkindly at my efforts; her presence always rouses the girl to anger. Zira is accompanied by Cornelius, who
is interested in my efforts and often comes to see the results for himself. Today he has come to see me for another reason. He looks rather
excited.








"Would you like to go on a little trip with me, Ulysse?"
"A trip?"








"Quite a long one; almost to the antipodes. Some archeolo-gists have discovered some extremely curious ruins out there, if the reports
reaching us are to be believed. An orangutan is directing the excavations and he can scarcely be relied upon to interpret the vestiges
correctly. There's something strange about them that fascinates me and that may afford decisive material for my research. The Academy is
sending me out there on an official mission and I think your presence would be most useful."








   I do not see how I can help him, but I welcome this opportunity to see further aspects of Soror. He takes me to his office to give me
more details.




  I am delighted by this diversion, which is an excuse for not completing my rounds; for there is one more prisoner for me to see—
Professor Antelle. He is still in the same state, which makes his release impossible. Thanks to me, however, he is now on his own,
isolated in a fairly comfortable cell. It is a painful duty for me to visit him. He replies to none of my earnest requests and still behaves like
a perfect animal.








CHAPTER T W E N T Y-E I G H T




We set off a week later. Zira came with us, but she was to return after a few days to look after the institute in Cornelius' absence.
The latter intended staying much longer on the site of the excavations, if these proved to be as interesting as he expected.








  A special plane had been put at our disposal, a jet machine rather like our first models of this type of aircraft, but very comfortable and
equipped with a small soundproof compartment in which we could talk easily. It was here we were sitting, Zira and I, shortly after
our departure. I was looking forward to the journey. By now I was completely accustomed to the simian world. I had been neither
surprised nor frightened at seeing this big aircraft being piloted by an ape. My only thought was to enjoy the view and the spectacular
                     to a height of about thirty thousand feet. The air was
sight of Betelgeuse rising. We had climbed
remarkably pure, and the giant star could be seen on the horizon like our
own sun observed through a telescope. Zira was enchanted by it.


 "Are there such beautiful dawns as this on Earth?" she asked. "Is your sun
as lovely as ours?"
  I told her it was neither as big nor as red, but it sufficed us. On the other
hand, our nocturnal heavenly body was bigger and shed a more intense pale
light than Soror's. We felt as happy as school children on a holiday, and I
laughed and joked with her as with a very close friend. When Cornelius
came and joined us after a moment I almost resented his intrusion on our
tete-a-tete. He was pensive. For some time, moreover, he had seemed rather
nervous. He worked prodigiously on his own research, which absorbed him
to the point of occasionally causing him to be totally absent-minded. He
still kept the subject of this research a secret, and I believe Zira knew as
little about it as I diS. I only knew it concerned the origin of ape and that
the learned chimpanzee tended more and more to reject the classical
theories. This morning, for the first time, he revealed certain aspects of it to
me, and it did not take me long to understand why my existence as a
civilized man was so important to him. He began by reverting to a subject
we had discussed together a thousand times.


 "You did say, didn't you, Ulysse, that on your Earth the apes are utter
animals? That man has risen to a degree of civilization equal to our own and
which, in certain respects, even . . . ? Don't be frightened of making me
angry; the scientific spirit ignores all self-esteem."


  "Which, in many respects, even surpasses it—yes, that's undeniable. One
of the best proofs is that I am here. It seems to me you have only reached
the stage . . ."




  "I know, I know," he broke in wearily. "We've discussed all that. We are
now penetrating the secrets you discovered centuries ago. . . . And it's not
only your statements that disturb me," he went on, nervously pacing up and
down the little cabin. "For some time I've been harassed by a feeling—a
feeling supported by certain concrete indications— that the key to these
secrets, even here on our planet, has been held by other brains in the distant
past."


 I might have replied that this impression of rediscovery had also affected
certain minds on Earth. Perhaps it even prevailed universally and possibly
served as the basis for our belief in God. But I was careful not to interrupt
him.






He was following a train of thought that was still confused, which he
expressed in an extremely reticent manner.
 "Other brains," he repeated pensively, "that maybe were not ..."


 He broke off abruptly. He looked miserable, as though tortured by the
perception of a truth his mind was unwilling to admit.


 "You did say, didn't you, that your apes possess a highly developed sense
of mimicry?"




"They mimic us in everything we do, I mean in every act that does not
demand a rational process of thought. So much so that with us the verb ape
is synonymous with imitate."






 "Zira," Cornelius murmured, as though depressed, "is it not this sense of
aping that characterizes us as well?"
 Without giving Zira time to protest, he went on excitedly, "It begins in
childhood. All our education is based on imitation."




 "It's the orangutans . . ."






  "That's it. They are of tremendous importance, since it is they who mold
our youth through their" books. They force every young monkey to repeat
all the errors of his ancestors. That explains the slowness of our progress. For
the last two thousand years we have remained similar to ourselves."
  This slow development among the apes deserves a few comments. I had
been struck by it while reading their history, noticing in it some important
differences from the soaring flight of the human mind. True, we also have
known a period of semi-stagnation. We, too, have had our orangutans, our
falsified education and ridiculous curricula, and this period lasted a long
time.






  Not so long, however, as in the apes' case, and above all not at the same
stage of evolution. The dark ages that the chimpanzee deplored had lasted
about ten thousand years. During this period no notable progress had been
achieved except, perhaps, during the last half century. But what I found
extremely curious was that their earliest legends, their earliest chronicles,
then-earliest memories bore witness to a civilization that was already well
advanced and in fact was more or less similar to that of the present day.
These documents, ten thousand years old, afforded proof of general skills
and achievements comparable to the skills and achievements of today; and,
before them, there was a total blank: no tradition either oral or written, not a
single clue. In essence, it seemed as though the simian civili
zation had made a miraculous appearance out of the bhu, ten thousand years
before and had since been preserved more or less without modification. The
ordinary ape had grown accustomed to finding this quite natural, never
imagining a different state of mental development, but a perceptive brain like
Cornelius' sensed an enigma there and was tormented by it.


"There are apes capable of original creation," Zira protested.






"Certainly," Cornelius agreed. "That's true, especially in recent years. In the long
run, mind is able to embody itself hi gesture. It has to, in fact; that's the
natural course of evolution. . . . But what I'm passionately seeking, Zira, what
I'm trying to find out, is how it all began. . . . At present it strikes me as not
impossible that it was through simple imitation at the beginning of our era."






  "Imitation of what, of whom?"






  He had reverted to his reticent manner and lowered his eyes as though
regretting he had said too much.
  "I can't answer that question yet," he finally said. "I need certain evidence.
Perhaps we shall find it in the ruins of the buried city. According to the
reports, it existed much earlier than ten thousand years ago, in a period about
which we know nothing."




CHAPTER T W E N T Y-N I N E
Cornelius has not told me anything more and I feel he is reluctant to do so,
but what I already detect in his theories gives me a strange elation.




  The archeologists have laid bare a whole city, buried in the sands of a
desert, a city of which nothing remains, alas, but ruins. But these ruins, I am
convinced, hold an extraordinary secret that I have vowed to solve. This
should be possible for anyone who can observe and deduce, which the
orangutan who is directing the excavations s'eems hardly capable of doing. He
welcomed Cornelius with the respect due his senior position but with barely
concealed contempt for his youth and the original ideas he sometimes expressed.






Digging among stones that crumble at every move and in sand that sinks
under every step is no easy job. It is now a month since we have been at it.
Zira left us some tune ago, but Cornelius insists on prolonging his stay. He is as
enthusiastic as I am and convinced that only here, among these relics of the
past, is to be found the solution to the great problems tormenting him.


  The extent of his knowledge is really remarkable. First of all, he insisted
on verifying personally the antiquity of the city. For this the apes have a
process similar to our own, involving deep-rooted principles of chemistry,
physics, and geology. On this point the chimpanzee is in agreement with
the official scientists: the city is very, very old indeed. It is much more than
ten thousand years old, and therefore constitutes a unique record, tending
to show that simian civilization did not burst forth miraculously out of the
void.




 Something existed before this present era. But what? After this month of
feverish investigation we are disappointed, for it seems that this prehistoric
city was not very different from those of the present day. We have
discovered remnants of houses, traces of factories, vestiges showing that
these forebears had motor cars and airplanes, just as apes of today do.
These remains indicate that the origins of mind can be traced far back into
the past. This is less than Cornelius was expecting, I feel; it is less than I
was hoping for.




This morning Cornelius has gone ahead of me to the spot where the
workmen have laid bare a house with thick walls made of a sort of
reinforced concrete, which seems better preserved than the rest. The inside
is filled with sand and debris that they have undertaken to sift. Until
yesterday they had found nothing more than in the other sections: fragments
of piping, household appliances, kitchen equipment. I am still idling outside
the tent that I share with the scientist. From here I can see the orangutan
giving his orders to the foreman, a chimpanzee with a crafty look in his eye.
I cannot see Cornelius. He is hi the trench with the workmen. He often
takes a hand in the digging, for fear they might do something stupid and
thereby lose an interesting item.






 Here he is emerging from the hole, and it does not take me long to realize
 he has made an exceptional discovery. He is holding in his hand a small
 object that I cannot make out. He thrusts aside the old orangutan who tries
 to take it from him and puts it down on the ground with infinite care. He
 looks in my direction and beckons me over. As I approach I am struck by
 the change in his expression. "Ulysse. Ulysse!"




  Never have I seen him in such a state. He can barely talk. The workmen,
 who have also climbed out of the trench, gather around the find and
 prevent me from seeing it. They point it out to one another but they seem
 merely amused. Some of them laugh out loud. They are almost all hefty gorillas. Cornelius tells them to keep their
 distance.








"Ulysse!"
   "Whatever is it?"








  I see the object lying in the sand at the same moment that he mutters in a strangled voice:








   "A doll, Ulysse, a doll!"








  It is a doll, an ordinary china doll. By a miracle it has been preserved almost intact, with vestiges of hair and eyes that still reveal
a few chips of color. It is such a familiar sight to me that at first I cannot understand Cornelius' emotion. It takes me several
seconds to realize . . . then I've got it! Its strangeness dawns on me and immediately I am overwhelmed. It is a human doll
representing a little girl, a little girl like one on Earth. But I refuse to let myself be taken in. Before proclaiming a miracle, every
possibility of a more commonplace cause must be examined. A scientist like Cornelius must have done so already. Let us seer
The-dolls of child apes do include a few—a very few, but nevertheless a few—that have an animal or even human form. So it
cannot be the mere presence of this one that moves my chimpanzee so deeply. . . . Let us go a step further: The toys of child apes
representing animals are not made of china; and above all they are not usually clothed; in any case, not clothed like rational
creatures. And this doll, I tell you, is clothed like a doll at home—the remnants of a frock, a blouse, a skirt and knickers can still
be clearly seen—dressed with the taste that a little girl on Earth might show in adorning her favorite doll, with the care that a little
she-ape on Soror would take to clothe her ape doll, a care that she would never, never show to dress up an animal figure like the
human figure. I realize, I realize more and more clearly, the reason for my clever chimpanzee's emotion.








   And this is not all. The toy presents another anomaly, another oddity that makes all the workmen laugh and even provokes a
smile from the solemn orangutan directing the excavations. The doll talks. It talks like a doll at home. In putting it down,
Cornelius happened to press the mechanism, which has been preserved intact, and it talked. Oh, it was not much of a speech! It
uttered one word, one simple word of two syllables: pa-pa. "Papa," the doll repeats as Cornelius picks it up again and turns it
round and round hi his nimble hands. The word is the same in French and in the simian language, and no doubt in many other
languages of this mysterious cosmos, and it has the same meaning.








"Papa," the little human doll repeats, and this, above all, is what makes my learned companion's muzzle turn red; this is what
affects me s'o deeply that I have to make an effort not to cry aloud as he leads me aside, bringing his precious discovery with him.
"The monstrous imbecile!" he mutters after a long silence.








  I know whom he means and I share his indignation. The old orangutan with all his decorations has seen nothing more in it than
a simple child ape's toy that an eccentric manufacturer living in the distant past has endowed with speech. It is useless to suggest
another explanation to him. Cornelius does not even try to do so. The one that comes naturally 'to his mind, however, seems so
disturbing that he keeps it to himself. He does not breathe a word of it even to me, but he knows that I have guessed it.




  He remains wrapped in thought and silent for the rest of the day. I have the impression he is now frightened of pursuing his
research and is regretting his semi-revelations. Now that his excitement has subsided, he is sorry I have witnessed his discovery.




  On the very next day I am given proof that he regrets having brought me here with him. After a night's reflection he informs
me, avoiding my eyes, that he has decided to send me back to the institute, where I shall be able to continue with more important
work than in these ruins. My seat on the aircraft is booked. I shall be leaving in twenty-four hours.








CHAPTER THIRTY