CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO


Zira has secretly lent me a flashlight and has slipped me some books that I
keep hidden under the straw. I now read and speak the apes' language
fluently. I spend several hours every night studying their civilization. Nova
protested at first. She came over and sniffed at one of the books, baring her
teeth as though it were a dangerous adversary. I only had to focus the beam
of my flash on her to see her dash back into her corner, trembling and
whimpering. I am the absolute master at home, now that I possess this
instrument, and no longer need any arguments more striking to keep her
quiet. I feel she looks upon me as a redoubtable being, and I notice from
many signs that the other captives also regard me as such. My prestige has
increased considerably, and I take unfair advantage of this. Sometimes I have
an unreasoning desire to terrified,-Jova by brandishing the flashlight, after
which she creeps back to pardon me for my cruelty.




I flatter myself that I now have a fairly clear idea of the simian world.






The apes are not divided into nations. The whole planet is administered by a
council of ministers, at the head of which is a triumvirate consisting of one
gorilla, one orangutan, and one chimpanzee. In conjunction with this
government, there is also a parliament composed of three chambers: the
Chamber of Gorillas, of Orangutans, and of Chimpanzees, each of which
attends to the interests of its respective members.






In fact, this division into three races is the only one that exists. In principle
they all have equal rights and are allowed to occupy any position. Yet, with
certain exceptions, each species confines itself to its own specialty.






  From far back in the past, when they used to reign by force, the gorillas
have preserved a taste for authority and still form the most powerful class.
They do not mingle with the herd, they are never seen at popular
demonstrations, but it is they who administer at very high level most of the
great enterprises. Rather ignorant as a rule, they know by instinct how to
make use of their skills. They excel in the art of drawing up general
directives and handling the other apes. When a technician makes an
interesting discovery—a luminous tube, for instance, or some new
combustible fuel—it is almost always a gorilla who undertakes to exploit it
and derive every possible benefit from it. Without being really intelligent,
they are much more cunning than the orangutans. They get whatever they
want out of the latter by playing on their pride. Thus, at the head of our
institute, above Zaius who is the scientific director, there is a gorilla
administrator who is rarely seen. He has come into our room only once. He
looked me up and down with his particular air of authority, and I almost
automatically rose to my feet and stood to attention. I noticed Zaius' servile
attitude, and Zira herself seemed impressed by his grand manner.






 The gorillas who do not occupy positions of authority are usually engaged
on lesser jobs requiring physical strength. Zoram and Zanam, for instance,
are there only for the rough work and especially for maintaining law and
order when necessary.
Or else the gorillas are hunters. This is a function more or less reserved for
them. They capture wild animals and, in particular, men. I have already
pointed out the enormous numbers of men required for the apes'
experiments. These experiments play a part in their lives that I find more
disconcerting as I discover their importance. A large section of the simian
population seems to be engaged on biological study, but I shall come back
to this oddity later. However it may be, the supplying of human material
necessitates an organized enterprise. A whole tribe of hunters, beaters,
porters, and tradesmen is devoted to this industry, at the head of which there
are always gorillas. I believe this is a prosperous business, for man fetches a
high price.






  By the side of the gorillas—I was going to say below them, although any
form of hierarchy is contested—are the orangutans and the chimpanzees.
The former, who are by far the least numerous, were described to me by
Zira in a single phrase: they are official science.




  This is partly true, but some of them occasionally indulge in politics, the
arts, and literature. They bring the same characteristics to all these
activities. Pompous, solemn, pedantic, devoid of originality and critical
sense, intent on preserving tradition, blind and deaf to all innovation, they
form the substratum of every academy. Endowed with a good memory, they
learn an enormous amount by heart and from books. Then they themselves
write other books, in which they repeat what they have read, thereby
earning the respect of their fellow orangutans. Perhaps I am slightly biased
in my attitude toward them by the opinion of Zira and her fianc6, who
detest them, as do all the chimpanzees. Moreover, they are equally despised
by the gorillas, who laugh at their lack of initiative but who exploit them for
the benefit of their own schemes. Almost every orangutan has behind him a
gorilla or a council of gorillas who support him and maintain him in an
honorable post, seeing to it that he is granted the titles and decorations that
are dear to his heart—until the day he ceases to give satisfaction. Then he is
dismissed without mercy and replaced by another ape of the same species.
  There remain the chimpanzees. These seem to represent the intellectual
element of the planet. It is not an idle boast that all the great discoveries
have been made by them, as Zira first told me. This is a slightly exaggerated
generalization, for there are a few exceptions. In any case, they write most
of the interesting books and on a great variety of subjects. They seem
animated by a powerful spirit of research.






 I have mentioned the sort of works the orangutans produce. The
unfortunate thing is, as Zira frequently deplores,


they thus write all the educational books, propagating grotesque errors
among simian youth. Not long ago, she assures me, these school textbooks
still stated that the planet Soror was the center of the world, although this
heresy had been rejected long before by every ape of even mediocre
intelligence; and the only reason for this was that there once existed on
Soror, thousands of years ago, an ape of considerable authority called
Haristas who held such beliefs and whose dogmas have been repeated by
the orangutans ever since. It is easier to understand Zira's attitude toward
me now that I have learned that this Haristas believed that apes alone can
have a soul. The chimpanzees, fortunately, have a far more critical mind. In
the last few years, it seems, they have embarked on a regular campaign to
disparage the old idol's axioms.






As for the gorillas, they write very few books, and these are noteworthy
more because of their appearance than their subject matter. I have glanced
through some of them, and remember their titles: The Need for Sound
Organization as the Basis of Research, The Benefits of Social Politics, or
The Organization of the Large Man Hunts on the Green Continent. These
works are always well documented, each chapter being written by a
specialized technician, and contain diagrams, tables, and sometimes attractive
photographs.
  The unification of the planet, the absence of war and military expenditures
—there is no army, only a police force—strike me as being factors that
would foster rapid progress in every realm of the simian world. This is not
the case. Although Soror is probably slightly older than the Earth, it is clear
that the apes lag behind us in any number of ways.




 They have electricity, industries, motor cars, and airplanes, but, as far as
the conquest of space is concerned, they have reached only the stage of
artificial satellites. In pure science I think their knowledge of the infinitely
great and the infinitely small is inferior to ours. This backwardness is
perhaps due to mere chance, and I have no doubt they will catch up with us
one day, when I consider their capacity for application and the spirit of
research shown by the chimpanzees. In fact, it seems to me they have been
through a dark period of stagnation that has lasted a very long time, far
longer than with us, and have only recently entered an age of considerable
achievement.






  This spirit of research, I must once again point out, is directed principally
in one direction: the biological sciences and in particular the study of ape,
man being the instrument they use to this end. The latter thus plays an
essential, albeit rather humiliating, part in their existence. It is lucky that
there is a considerable supply of men on their planet I have read a paper
proving there are more men here than apes. But the number of the latter is
on the increase, whereas the human population is falling off, and already
some scientists are anxious about future supplies for their laboratories.






All this does not explain the secret of simian evolution. On the other hand,
perhaps there is no mystery about it. Their emergence is no doubt as natural
as our own. Yet I cannot entirely accept this idea, and I now know that some
of their scientists also consider that the phenomenon of simian ascendency is
by no means clear. Cornelius belongs to this school, and I believe he is
seconded by the keenest brains. Unaware of where they come from, who
they are, or where they are going, they no doubt suffer from this lack of
knowledge. Might it not be this feeling that inspires them with a sort of frenzy
for biological research and that gives such a special slant to their scientific
pursuits? My nighttime meditation concludes with these questions.