CHAPTER THIRTY

Suppose, I argue, that men once reigned as masters on this planet. Suppose that a human civilization similar to ours flourished on Soror
more than ten thousand years ago.




  This is no longer a senseless hypothesis—quite the contrary. No sooner do I formulate it than I feel the excitement produced by
picking up the right scent among so many false ones. It is on this track, I know, that the solution to the irritating simian mystery is
to be found, I realize my subconscious has always been dreaming of some explanation of this sort.




   I am in the aircraft taking me back to the capital, accompanied by Cornelius' secretary, a rather talkative chimpanzee. I don't
feel like chatting with him. I always tend to meditate when I'm hi an airplane. I shall find no better opportunity than this voyage to
put my thoughts in order.








  Suppose, then, the existence in the distant past of a civilization on the
planet Soror similar to our own. Is it possible that creatures devoid of
intelligence could have perpetuated it by a simple process of imitation? The
answer to this question seems risky, but after thinking it over, a host of
arguments occur to me that gradually lessen its aspect of unreasonableness.
That perfected machines may one day succeed us is, I remember, an
extremely commonplace notion on Earth. It prevails not only among poets
and romantics but in all classes of society. Perhaps it is because it is so
widespread, born spontaneously in popular imagination, that it irritates
scientific minds. Perhaps it is also for this very reason that it contains a
germ of truth. Only a germ: Machines will always be machines; the most
perfected robot, always a robot. But what of living creatures possessing a
certain degree of intelligence, like apes? And apes, precisely, are endowed
with a keen sense of imitation. . . .






  I close my eyes. I let myself be lulled by the drone of the engines. I feel
the need to commune with myself in order to justify my position.






What is it that characterizes a civilization? Is it the exceptional genius? No,
it is everyday life. . . . Hmm! Let us give intelligence its due. Let us
concede that it is principally the arts, and first and foremost, literature. Is the
latter really beyond the reach of our higher apes, if it is admitted-that they
are capable of stringing words together? Of what is our literature made?
Masterpieces? Again, no. But once an original book has been written—and
no more than one or two appear in a century—men of letters imitate it, in
other words, they copy it so that hundreds of thousands of books are
published on exactly the same theme, with slightly different titles and
modified phraseology. This should be able to be achieved by apes, who are
essentially imitators, provided, of course, that they are able to make use of
language.






In fact, language represents the only valid objection. But wait a moment! It is
not essential that apes should understand what they are copying hi order to
produce a hundred thousand volumes from a single original. It is clearly no
more necessary for them than it is for us. Like us, they merely need to be
able to repeat sentences after having heard them. All the rest of the literary
process is purely mechanical. It is at this point that the opinion of certain
learned biologists assumes its full value: There is nothing in the anatomy of
the ape, they maintain, that precludes the use of speech—nothing, that is,
except the necessary urge. It is not difficult to conceive that this urge
came to him one day as a result of some sudden mutation.






  The perpetuation of a literature like ours by talking apes does not,
therefore, conflict with common sense in any way. Subsequently, perhaps,
some apes of letters raised themselves a step or two higher on the
intellectual ladder. As my learned friend Cornelius said, mind embodies
itself in gesture—in this case, in the mechanism of speech—and a few
original ideas were able to appear in the new simian world at the rate of one
every century—as in our own case.


Cheerfully pursuing this train of thought, I soon succeeded in convincing
myself that well-trained animals might well have been able to produce the
paintings and sculptures I had admired in the museums of the capital and, in
general, become expert in all the human arts, including the art of
cinematography.




  Having first considered the highest manifestations of intelligence, it was
only too easy to extend my thesis to other areas. That of industry quickly
succumbed to my analysis. It seemed absolutely clear that industry did not
require the presence of a rational being to maintain itself. Basically,
industry consisted of manual laborers, always performing the selfsame
tasks, who could easily be replaced by apes; and, at a higher level, of
executives whose function was to draft certain reports and pronounce
certain words under given circumstances. All this was a question of
conditioned reflexes. At the still higher level of administration, it seemed
even easier to concede the quality of aping. To continue our system, the
gorillas would merely have to imitate certain attitudes and deliver a few
harangues, all based on the same model.


 I thus came to view the most diverse activities of our Earth with a new
eye and to imagine them performed by apes. I indulged with a certain
satisfaction in this game, which demanded no intellectual effort. I called to
mind a number of political meetings I had attended as a journalist. I
remembered the stock remarks made by the personalities I had had to
interview. I recalled with particular intensity a celebrated trial I had followed
several years before.




 The defense counsel was one of the masters of his profession. Why did he
appear to me now in the guise of a proud gorilla, as did also the advocate
general, another celebrity? Why did I compare then-gestures and actions to
conditioned reflexes resulting from intensive training? Why did the president
of the tribunal remind me of a solemn orangutan reciting sentences learned
by heart, the utterance of which was automatic and likewise inspired by
some statement from a witness or some murmur in the crowd?






  I thus spent the last part of the journey obsessed by comparisons that
seemed to me significant. When I came to the world of finance and
business, my final mental picture was a thoroughly simian vision, a recent
recollection of the planet Soror. It was during a visit to the stock exchange,
where my friend Cornelius had insisted on bringing me, for it was one of
the curiosities of the capital. This is what I saw—a picture I recalled with
extraordinary vividness during the last minutes of my flight.






The stock exchange was a large building, outwardly imbued with a strange
atmosphere created by a vague buzz of voices that grew progressively
louder as one approached, until it was a deafening roar. We went inside and
were forthwith caught up in the turmoil. I wedged myself against a pillar. I
was accustomed to individual apes but was always somewhat stupefied
when surrounded by a compact mob, as now. I found the sight even more
incongruous than that of the learned assembly during the famous congress.
Imagine a hall of vast proportions crammed full of apes, screaming,
gesticulating, and running hither and thither in a completely disorganized
manner, apes in hysteria, apes who not only rushed about and bumped into
one another on the floor but who formed a swarming mass right up to the
ceiling, which was at a giddy height from the ground. The place was
equipped with ladders, trapezes, and ropes that they used constantly hi order
to move from one spot to another. They thus filled the entire volume of the
building, which assumed the aspect of a cage specially designed for a
grotesque exhibition of four-handed creatures.






The apes literally flew to and fro across this space, always catching hold of
some piece of equipment just when I thought they were about to fall; all this
in a hubbub of infernal exclamations, shouts, cries, and even sounds that
recalled no civilized language. There were monkeys there who were
barking—yes, barking for no apparent reason— swinging themselves from
one end of the room to the other on long ropes.






"Have you ever seen anything like it?" my friend Cornelius asked me
proudly.






  I readily admitted I had not. It needed all my previous acquaintance with
the apes to convince me that these were rational creatures. No one in his
right mind who watched this circus could escape the conclusion that he was
witnessing the frolics of madmen or animals gone wild. Not a glimmer of
intelligence could be seen in their eyes, and they ali looked alike. I could
not tell one from another. All of them were dressed in the same way and
wore the same mask, which was the mask of madness.




  The most disturbing part of my present image was that contrary to the
phenomenon that shortly before had made me assign the form of gorillas or
orangutans to the figure? in the earthly scene, I now saw the members of this
insane-crowd in the guise of human beings. It was men I thus saw shrieking,
barking, and swinging about on ropes to reach their destination as fast as
possible. In excitement I recalled other aspects of this scene. I remembered
tha* after looking on for some time, I had begun to notice certain details
suggesting vaguely that this hubbub did nevertheless form part of a civilized
system. An articulate word could occasionally be heard above the bestial
shrieks. Perched on a scaffolding at a giddy height above us, a gorilla,
without interrupting the hysterical gestures of his hands, would pick up a
piece of chalk in his foot and write some probably significant figure on a
blackboard. To this gorilla, too, I assigned human features.






I managed to rid myself of this hallucination only by coming back to my
rough outline of a theory on the origins of the simian civilization, and in this
remembrance of the world of finance I found fresh arguments to support it.






The aircraft touched down. I was back in the capital. Zira had come to meet
me at the airport. From far off I saw her scarf pulled down over her ears,
and the sight of it filled me with joy. When I eventually joined her after the
customs formalities I had to restrain myself from flinging my arms around her.





