CHAPTER 36

The periodic visits that I force myself to pay Professor Antelle are a more and
more painful duty. He is still in the institute, but he has had to be moved from
the fairly comfortable cell where I had arranged for him to be kept. He was
pining away there and from time to time gave vent to outbursts of temper
that made him dangerous. He attempted to bite his warders. So Cornelius
then tried out another system. He had him put in an ordinary straw-lined cage
and gave him a mate: the girl with whom he used to sleep in the zoo. The
professor welcomed her noisily with an animal demonstration of joy, and
immediately his manner changed. He has now taken a new lease on life.
It is in her company that I now find him. He appears to be quite happy. He
has put on weight and looks younger. I have done all I can to enter into
communication with him. I try again today, but without success. He is
interested only in the cakes I offer him. When the bag is empty he goes back
and lies down beside his mate, who starts licking his face..






 "Now you can see how intelligence can melt away just as it can be
acquired," someone behind me mutters.


 It is Cornelius. He is looking for me, but not to talk about the professor.
There is something serious he wants to discuss. I follow him into his office,
where Zira is waiting. Her eyes are red, as though she has been weeping.
They seem to have bad news for me, but neither of them dares to speak.






"My son?"


 "He's very well," Zira says abruptly.


 "Too well," Cornelius mutters with a frown.






  I know he is a splendid baby, but it is a month since I have seen him. The
security measures have been tightened still more. Zira, who is suspect by
the authorities, is under close surveillance.




"Much too well," Cornelius repeats. "He smiles. He cries like a baby ape . . .
and he has begun to talk."






 "At three months of age!"
  "Baby words, but there's everything to indicate that he will talk properly
later. In fact, he is miraculously precocious."


 I am delighted. Zira is annoyed by my doting-father manner.


  "But don't you realize this is a disaster? The others will never leave him in
liberty."


  "I know from a reliable source that some extremely important decisions
are going to be taken about him by the Grand Council, which is to meet in
two weeks' time," Cornelius remarks quietly.




 "Important decisions?"






  "Very important. There's no question of doing away with him . . . not for
the moment, at least; but he'll be taken away from his mother."




"And I, wouldn't I be allowed to see him?"






  "You least of all . . . no, don't interrupt me," the chimpanzee continues
emphatically. "We didn't come here to feel sorry for ourselves but to work
out a plan of action. Well, now I have some definite information. Your son is
going to be placed in a sort of fortress under the surveillance of the
orangutans. Yes, Zaius has been plotting for some time and he is going to get
the better of us."






At this point Cornelius clenches his fists in rage and mutters some ugly
oaths. Then he continues:
  "Needless to say, the Council knows perfectly well how little that old fool's
scientific views can be trusted, but they are pretending to believe he is more
qualified than I am to study this exceptional subject, because the latter is
regarded as a danger to our race. They are counting on Zaius to make it
impossible for him to do any harm."






 I am dumbfounded. It is not possible to leave my son in the hands of that
dangerous imbecile. But Cornelius has not yet finished.




 "It's not only the child that is menaced."






 I remain speechless and look at Zira, who hangs her head.




  "The orangutans hate you because you are the living proof of their
scientific aberrations, and the gorillas consider you too dangerous to be
allowed at liberty much longer. They are frightened you might found a new
race on this planet. But apart from this eventuality, they are frightened that
your mere example might sow unrest among the men. Unusual nervousness
has been reported among the ones with whom you are dealing."






  This is true. In the course of my last visit to the room with the cages, I
noticed a marked change among the men. It was as though some mysterious
instinct had notified them of the miraculous birth. They had greeted my
appearance with a concert of howls.






   "To tell the truth," Cornelius abruptly concludes, "I'm very much afraid
that within the next two weeks the Council might decide to eliminate you
. . . or at least remove part of your brain on the pretext of some experiment.
As for Nova, I believe it will be decided to put her out of the way as well,
because she has been in such close contact with you."






It's not possible! I who believed' myself entrusted with a semi-divine
mission! I feel I am once again the most wretched creature living and give
way to the most dreadful despair. Zira puts her hand on my shoulder.






  "Cornelius is quite right not to have concealed anything from you. But
what he has not told you is that we will not abandon you. We have decided
to save all three of you, and we'll be helped by a small group of brave
chimpanzees."




 "What can I do, the only member of my species?"






  "You must get away. You must leave this planet, to which you should
never have come. You must go back where you belong, to Earth. Your son's
safety and your own demand it."






Her voice breaks as though she is on the verge of tears. She is even more
attached to me than I thought. I am also deeply upset, no less at her sorrow
than at the prospect of leaving her forever. But how to escape from this
planet? Cornelius has a plan.






   "It's true," he says. "I've promised Zira to help you escape, and so I shall,
 even if it means losing my job. I shall thus feel I have not evaded my duty
 as an ape. For if a danger threatens us, it will be averted by your return to
 Earth. . . . You once said, I believe, that your spacecraft was still intact and
 could take you home?"
"Without the slightest doubt. It contains enough fuel, oxygen, and supplies
to take us to the edge of the universe. But how am I to reach it?"






  "It's still orbiting around our planet. An astronomer friend of mine has
tracked it down and knows every detail of its trajectory. As to the means of
reaching it? Now listen. In exactly ten days' time we are going to launch an
artificial satellite, manned by humans, of course, on whom we want to test
the effect of certain rays. . . . No, don't interrupt! The number of passengers
will be limited to three: one man, one woman, and one child."






I grasp his scheme in a flash and appreciate his ingenuity —but what
obstacles!






"Some of the scientists responsible for this launching are friends of mine, and
I have won them over to your cause. The satellite will be placed on the
trajectory of your craft and will be navigable within certain limits. The
human couple have been trained to carry out certain motions through
conditioned reflexes. I think you'll be even more skillful than they are. . . .
For this is our plan: you three will take the place of the passengers. That
shouldn't be too difficult. As I said, I've already got the necessary
accomplices: chimpanzees regard assassination with repugnance. The others
won't even notice the trick that's played on them."






   This indeed is more than likely. To most of the apes, a man is a man and
 nothing more. The differences between one individual and another do not
 strike them.
  "I'll put you through an intensive course of training during these ten
 days. Do you think you'll be able to board your craft?"






   It ought to be possible. But it's not the difficulties and dangers I am
 thinking about at the moment. I cannot shake off the melancholy that
 assailed me just now at the thought of leaving the planet Soror, Zira, and
 my fellows, yes, my fellow humans. Toward them I feel I am something !
 of a deserter. Yet above all I must save my son and Nova. i But I shall
 come back. Yes, later, I swear it on the heads ' of the captives in the cages,
 I shall come back with trump cards in my hand.






I am so bewildered that I voice my thoughts out loud.






 Cornelius smiles.






  "In four or five years of your time, your traveling time, but in more
than a thousand years as far as we stay-at-homes are concerned. Don't
forget that we, too, have discovered relativity. In the meantime I've
discussed the risk with my chimpanzee friends and we have decided to take
it."


  We leave one another after making arrangements to meet on the
following day. Zira goes out first. Remaining behind with Cornelius for a
moment, I take the opportunity of thanking him with all my heart.
Inwardly I'm wondering why he is doing all this for me. He reads my
thoughts.


 "Zira's the one you ought to thank," he says. "It's to her you will owe
your life. On my own, I don't know if I should have gone to so much
trouble or taken so many risks. But she would never forgive me for being
a party to murder . . . and anyway . . ."


  He pauses. Zira is waiting for me in the corridor outside. He makes sure
she cannot hear and quickly whispers:
  "Anyway, for her as well as me, it is better that you should vanish from
this planet."


 He closes the door after me as I leave the room. I am alone with Zira
and we take a few steps along the corridor.


 "Zira!"






  I stop and take her in my arms. She is as upset as I am. I see a tear
coursing down her muzzle while we stand locked in a tight embrace. Ah,
what matter this horrid material exterior! It is her soul that communes
with mine. I shut my eyes so as not to see her grotesque face, made
uglier still by emotion. I feel her shapeless body tremble against mine. I
force myself to rub my cheek against hers. We are about to kiss like
lovers when she gives an instinctive start and thrusts me away violently.


  While I stand there speechless, not knowing what attitude to adopt, she
hides her head in her long hairy paws and this hideous she-ape bursts
into tears and announces in despair:


  "Oh, darling,, it's impossible. It's a shame, but I can't, I can't. You are
really too unattractive!"

