CHAPTER EIGHT

EEN


I must now admit that I adapted myself with remarkable ease to-the
conditions of life in my cage. From the material point of view, I was living in
perfect felicity: during the day the apes attended to my every need; at night
I shared my Utter with one of the loveliest girls in the cosmos. I even grew
so accustomed to this situation that for more than a month, without feeling
how outlandish or degrading it was, I made no attempt to put an end to it. I
learned hardly any new words of the simian language. I did not continue my
spiritual nature, had no doubt since yielded to Zaius' opinion and regarded
me as a man of her planet, that is, an animal: an intelligent animal, perhaps,
but by no means an intellectual one.


  My superiority over the other prisoners, which I no longer exercised to the
point of startling the warders, made me the most brilliant subject in the
establishment. This distinction, I am ashamed to admit, sufficed my present
ambitions and even filled me with pride. Zoram and Zanam were friendly
toward me, taking pleasure in seeing me smile, laugh, and pronounce a few
words. Having exhausted all the classic tests with me, they racked then*
brains to invent other, more subtle ones, and all three of us made merry
whenever I discovered the solution to a problem* They never forgot to
bring me some tidbit, which I always shared with Nova. We were a
privileged couple. I was fatuous enough to believe that my mate was aware
of all she owed to my talents, and I spent part of my time showing off in
front of her.




One day, however, after several weeks, I felt a sort of nausea. Was it the
gleam in Nova's eyes, which had seemed to me that night particularly
lacking in expression? Was it the lump of sugar that Zira came to give me
that suddenly acquired a bitter taste? The fact is that I was shamed by my
cowardly resignation. What would Professor Antelle think of me, if he
chanced to be still alive and found me in this state? This thought soon
became unbearable, and I forthwith made up my mind to behave like a
civilized man.






While' stroking Zira's arm by way of expressing my thanks, I snatched
away her notebook and fountain pen. I braved her gentle remonstrances, sat
down on the straw, and started a drawing of Nova. I am a fairly good
draftsman and, being inspired by the model, managed to turn out a
reasonable likeness, which I then handed to the she-ape.






  This promptly reawakened her emotion and uncertainty about me. Her
muzzle became red and she peered at me closely, trembling slightly. Since
she made no further move, I again calmly seized her notebook, which this
time she yielded to me without protest. Why had I not thought of this
simple solution before? Mustering my school-day memories, I drew the
geometrical figure illustrating the theorem of Pythagoras. It was not at
random that I chose this proposition: I remembered reading hi my youth a
prophetic book in which such a procedure had been used by an old scientist
to enter into communication with the spirits of another world. I had even
discussed this during the voyage with Professor Antelle, who approved of
the method. He had added, I distinctly remembered, that the Euclidean
rules, being completely false, were no doubt for that very reason universal.






  In any case, the effect it had on Zira was extraordinary. Her muzzle went
purple and she gave a sharp exclamation. She did not recover her
composure until Zoram and Zanam came up, intrigued by her attitude. Then
she reacted in a way that I found extremely odd—after darting a furtive
glance at me, she carefully hid the drawing I had just completed. She spoke
to the gorillas, who then left the hall, and I realized she had sent them off on
some pretext or other. Then she turned back to me and took my hand, the
pressure of her fingers having quite a different significance from when she
flattered me like a young animal after a successful trick. Finally she handed
me the notebook and fountain pen with an air of entreaty.






  Now it was she who appeared eager to establish contact. I gave thanks to
Pythagoras and embarked once more on my geometry. On one page of the
notebook I drew to the best of my ability the three conic sections with their
axes and centers: an ellipse, a parabola, and an hyperbola. Then, on the
opposite page, I drew a right circular cone. Let me remind the reader that
the intersection of such a body by a plane produces one of the three conic
sections, depending on the angle of the cut. In this case I drew the figure to
illustrate an ellipse, then, reverting to my first diagram, pointed out the
corresponding curve to my astonished she-ape.






  She snatched the notebook out of my hands and in turn drew another cone,
intersected at a different angle, and pointed out the hyperbola with her long
finger. I felt such intense emotion that tears came to my eyes and I clasped
her hands convulsively. Nova whimpered with rage at the far end of the
cage. Her instinct did not deceive her as to the meaning of these
demonstrations. It was a spiritual communion that had just been established
betw%en Zira and me through the medium of geometry. I derived an almost
sensual satisfaction from this and felt that the she-ape was also deeply
moved.






 She broke free with a sudden jerk and rushed from the hall. She was
absent only a few minutes, but during this time I remained lost in thought
without daring to look
at Nova, about whom I felt almost guilty and who turn her back on me with
a growl.






  When Zira came back she handed me a large sheet of paper fixed to a
drawing board. I thought for a second or two and made up my mind to
deliver a decisive blow. In one corner of the sheet I sketched the system of
Betelgeuse, as we had discovered it on our arrival, with the giant central
body, and its four planets. I marked Soror down in its exact position together
with its own little satellite; I indicated it to Zira, then pointed my forefinger
at her repeatedly. She signaled to me that she had understood completely.


  Then in another corner of the sheet I drew our dear old solar system with
its principal planets. I indicated the Earth and pointed my finger at my own
chest.




  This time Zira was slower to understand. She, too, indicated the Earth, then
pointed her finger upward. I gave an affirmative nod. She was flabbergasted
and her mental turmoil was plain to see. I did my best to help her by
drawing another dotted line between Earth and Soror and marking in our
vessel, on a different scale, on the trajectory. This made her see the light. I
was now certain that my true nature and origin were known to her. She was
about to draw closer to me but at that moment Zaius appeared at the end of
the corridor for his periodical inspection.






  A look of terror came into the she-ape's eyes. She quickly crumpled up the
paper, put her notebook back in her pocket, and, before the orangutan had
reached us, placed her forefinger on her mouth with an air of entreaty. She
was counseling me not to show myself in my true colors to Zaius. I obeyed
her without understanding the reason for these mysteries and, convinced
that I had an ally in her, promptly resumed my intelligent animal attitude.






CHAPTER N I N E T E E N


From then on, thanks to Zira, my knowledge of the simian world and
language increased rapidly. She contrived to see me alone almost every day
on the pretext of some test and undertook my education, instructing me in
the language and at the same time learning mine with a rapidity that amazed
me. In less than two months we were capable of holding a conversation on
a variety of subjects. Little by little I came to understand the planet Soror,
and it is the characteristics of this strange civilization that I am now going to try
to describe.






  As soon as we could converse together, Zira and I, I directed the
conversation toward the principal object of my curiosity: Were the apes the
only rational beings, the kings of creation on the planet?






  "What do you think?" she said. "Ape is of course the only rational
creature, the only one possessing a mind as well as a body. The most
materialistic of our scientists recognize the supernatural essence of the
simian mind."


Phrases like this always gave me a start in spite of myself.






 "Well then, Zira, what are men?"






  We were then speaking French, for, as I have said, she was quicker to
learn my language than I hers. At the outset there were some difficulties of
interpretation, the words "man" and "ape" not evoking the same creatures
for us; but this snag was quickly smoothed out. Each time she said "ape," I
mentally translated "superior being, the height of evolution." When she
spoke about men, I knew she meant bestial creatures endowed with a
certain sense of imitation and presenting a few anatomical similarities to
apes but of an embryonic psyche and devoid of the power of thought.






"It was only a century ago," she said dogmatically, "that we made some
remarkable progress in the science of origins. It used to be thought that
species were immutable, created with their present characteristics by an all-
powerful God. But a line of great thinkers, all of them chimpanzees, have
modified our ideas on this subject completely. Today we know that all
species are mutable and probably have a common source."






 "So that apes probably descend from men?"






  "Some of us thought so; but it is not exactly that. Apes and men are two
separate branches that have evolved from a point in common but in
different directions, the former gradually developing to the stage of
rational thought, the others stagnating in their animal state. Many
orangutans, however, still insist on denying this obvious fact."


"You were saying, Zira . . . a line of great thinkers, all of them chimpanzees?"






I am reporting these conversations as they occurred, in nonconsecutive
snatches, my eagerness to learn leading Zira into countless lengthy
digressions.
"Almost all the great discoveries," she stated vehemently, . "have been
made by chimpanzees."






 "Are there different classes among the apes?"






  "There are three distinct families, as you have noticed, each of which has
its own characteristics: chimpanzees,


gorillas, and orangutans. The racial barriers that used to exist have been
abolished and the disputes arising from them have been settled, thanks
mainly to the campaigns launched by the chimpanzees. Today, in principle,
there is no difference at all between us."






 "But most of the great discoveries," I persisted, "were made by the
chimpanzees."




"That is true."






"What about the gorillas?"






  "They are meat eaters," she said scornfully. "They were overlords and
many of them have preserved a lust for power. They enjoy organizing and
directing. They love hunting and life in the open air. The poorest of them are
engaged on work that requires physical strength."




"And the orangutans?"
Zira looked at me for a moment, then burst out laughing.






  "They are Official Science," she said. "You must have noticed this already
and you'll have plenty of opportunities to confirm it. They learn an
enormous amount from books. They are all decorated. Some of them are
looked upon as leading lights in a narrow specialized field that requires a
good memory. Apart from that . . ."


  She made a gesture of contempt. I did not pursue this subject, but made a
mental note to come back to it later. I led the conversation to more general
ideas. At my request she drew the genealogical tree of the ape, insofar as
the best specialists had determined it. This bore a close resemblance to the
diagrams that with us represent the evolutionary process. From a single
trunk, whose roots faded away at the base into the unknown, various limbs
branched out in succession: vegetables, unicellular organisms, then coelen-
terata and echinoderms; higher up one arrived at fish, reptiles, and finally
mammals. The tree was extended to include a class analogous to our
anthropoids, and at this point a new limb branched out: that of men. This
branch stopped short, whereas the central stem went on rising, giving birth to
different species of prehistoric apes with barbaric names, to culminate
eventually in Simius sapiens, forming the three extreme points of evolution:
the chimpanzee, the gorilla, and the orangutan. It was absolutely clear.






 "Ape's brain," Zira concluded, "has developed, is complex and organized,
whereas man's has hardly undergone any transformation."






 "And why, Zira, has the simian brain developed in this way?"
Language had undoubtedly been an essential factor. But why did apes talk
 and not men? Scientific opinion differed on this point. There were some
 who saw in it a mysterious divine intervention. Others maintained that
 ape's mind was primarily the result of the fact that he had four agile hands.






  "With only two hands, each with short, clumsy fingers," said Zira, "man is
probably handicapped at birth, incapable of progressing and acquiring a
precise knowledge of the universe. Because of this he has never been able
to use a tool with any success. Oh, it's possible that he once tried, clumsily.
. . . Some curious vestiges have been found. There are a number of research
projects going on at this moment into that particular subject. If you're
interested in these questions, I will introduce you someday to Cornelius. He
is much more qualified than I am to discuss them."




 "Cornelius?"






 "My fiance' said Zira, blushing. "A very great, a real scientist."




 "A chimpanzee?"






 "Of course. . . . Anyway," she concluded, "that's what I think, too: our
being equipped with four hands is one of the most important factors in our
spiritual evolution. It helped us in the first place to climb trees, and thereby
conceive the three dimensions of space, whereas man, pegged to the ground
by a physical malformation, slumbered On the flat. A taste for tools came to
us next because we had the potentiality of using them with dexterity.
Achievement followed, and it is thus we have raised ourselves to the level
of wisdom."
  On Earth I had frequently heard precisely the opposite argument used to
explain the superiority of man. After thinking it over, however, Zira's
reasoning struck me as being neither more nor less convincing than ours.


I should have liked to pursue this conversation, and I still had a thousand
questions to ask, when we were interrupted by Zoram and Zanam bringing
the evening meal. Zira bade me a hasty good night and went off.






  I remained in my cage with Nova as my only companion. We had finished
eating. The gorillas had left, after putting out the lights, except the one over
the entrance which gave a feeble gleam. I looked at Nova and thought
about what I had learned during the day. It was obvious that she did not
care for Zira and was vexed by these conversations. At first she had even
protested in her usual manner and tried to come between Zira and me,
leaping about the cage, tearing up handfuls of straw, and flinging them in
the in-
truder's face. I had had to resort to force to keep her quie After receiving a
few thundering slaps across her beautiful face, she had eventually calmed
down. I had allowed myself to indulge in this brutal behavior almost
without thinking; afterward I felt sorry, but she appeared not to hold it
against me.




  The intellectual effort I had made to assimilate the simian theories of
evolution left me worn out. I was happy when I saw Nova creep over to me
in the dark and in her usual fashion beg for the half-human, half-animal
caresses for which we had gradually worked out the code: a singular code,
the details of which are of little importance, composed of compromise and
reciprocal concessions to the manners of the civilized world and to the
customs of this outlandish human race that populated the planet Soror.




CHAPTER T W E N T Y


It was a red-letter day for me. Yielding to my entreaties, Zira had agreed to
take me out of the Institute for Advanced Biological Study—that was the
name of the establishment—and show me around the town.






  She had consented to this only after much hesitation. It had taken me
some time to convince her finally of my origin. Until then, though admitting
the evidence while in my company, she would later begin doubting again. I
tried to put myself in her place. She could only be profoundly shocked by my
description of the men and above all of the apes on our Earth. She
subsequently told me that for a long time she had preferred to regard me as
a sorcerer or a charlatan rather than accept my statements. Yet, confronted
with the facts and the evidence I accumulated, she eventually had complete
confidence in me and even began to work out a plan to enable me to recover
my liberty, which was not easy, as she explained to me that day. Meanwhile
she came to fetch me at the beginning of the afternoon to go on our outing.






  I felt my heart thumping at the thought of being in the open air again. My
enthusiasm was slightly curbed when I saw she was going to keep me on a
lead. The gorillas took me out of the cage, banged the door shut in Nova's
face, and put around my neck a leather collar to which a strong chain was
fixed. Zira took the other end and led me off, while a heart-rending whine
from Nova stirred my compassion. But when I showed her a little pity and
gave her a friendly wave, Zira looked angry and tugged me forward by the
neck. Since she was now convinced I had an ape's mind, my intimacy with
the young girl vexed and shocked her.






Her bad temper evaporated when we were alone together in the dark,
deserted corridor.






"I don't suppose," she laughed, "that men on Earth are used to being held on
a lead like this by apes?"






  I assured her they were not at all used to it. She apologized, explaining that
even though there were a few tame men who could be taken out like this
without causing a scene, it was more normal if I was tied up. Subsequently,
if I proved harmless, she might possibly be able to relieve me of my fetters.






And partly forgetting my true condition, as she still often did, she began
advising me about my behavior, which humiliated me deeply.
"Above all, do be careful not to turn on passers-by or bare your teeth or
scratch a trustful child who might come up and pet you. I didn't want to
muzzle you, but . . ."






She stopped short and burst out laughing.






  "Forgive me, forgive me!" she cried. "I keep forgetting you have a mind
like an ape."




She gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder by way of apology. Her high
spirits dissolved my mounting resentment. I liked to hear her laugh. Nova's
inability to manifest her joy in this way sometimes made me sigh. I shared
the she-ape's gaiety. In the half-light of the corridor I could no longer see her
face except for the tip of her white muzzle. She had put on a smart coat and
skirt to go out and a scarf that concealed her ears. For a moment I forgot her
simian condition and took her arm. She found my gesture quite natural and
did not object. We walked along for a bit like this, side by side. At the end
of the corridor, lit by a window in the side wall, she quickly withdrew her
arm and pushed me away. Reverting to a more serious mood, she tugged on
my chain.






"You mustn't behave like this," she said, looking slightly distressed. "In the
first place, I'm engaged and—"






"You're engaged!"
  The incongruity of her remark about my gesture of familiarity struck her
at the same time as it did me. She corrected herself, blushing at the muzzle.
"I mean, no one must suspect your nature for the moment. It's in your own
interests, I assure you."






  I took her advice and allowed myself to be led along quietly. We left the
building. The porter of the institute, a big gorilla clad in a uniform, let us
out, observing me with curiosity after having saluted Zira. On the sidewalk
I staggered slightly, giddy from the exercise and dazzled by the glare of
Betelgeuse after more than three months' captivity. I inhaled the warm air
deeply; at the same time, I felt embarrassed to be walking around naked. I
had grown used to this in my cage, but here I felt grotesque and indecent
under the eyes of the apes passing by, who kept staring at me. Zira had
categorically refused to let me wear clothes, maintaining that I would have
looked even more ridiculous dressed up, like one of those tame men who
are exhibited at fairs. She was no doubt right. In fact, if the passers-by
turned around to stare at me, it was not because I was naked but simply
because I was a man, a species that in the streets roused the same sort of
curiosity as would a chimpanzee in a French city. The adults merely
grinned and continued on their way, but some young apes began to gather
around me in great glee. Zira quickly led me off toward her car, motioned
me into the back seat, sat down herself behind the steering wheel, and drove
me slowly along the streets.






  The town—the capital of an important simian region—I had barely
glimpsed on my arrival, and I now had to resign myself to seeing it peopled
by ape pedestrians, ape motorists, ape shopkeepers, ape businessmen, and
apes in uniform whose job was to maintain law and order. Apart from this,
it did not make a great impression on me. The houses were similar to ours;
the roads, which were fairly dirty, looked like our roads. The traffic was less
heavy than at home. What struck me most of all was the way the
pedestrians crossed the street. There were no marked crossings, only
overhead passages consisting of a metal frame to which they clung with all
four hands. They all wore fine leather gloves that did not interfere with their
prehension.






  When she had driven around sufficiently to give me a general picture of
the town, Zira stopped her car in front of a tall gate through which I could
see .banks of flowers.




"The park," she said. "We can go for a little stroll. I should have liked to
show you some other things—our museums, for instance, which are
outstanding—but that's not possible yet."




 I assured her that I should be delighted to stretch my legs.




"And besides," she went on, "we'll be left in peace here.






There are not many people about and it's time for us to have a serious
conversation."




CHAPTER T W E N T Y - O N E


"I don't think you realize, do you, the danger you are in here on Soror?"




"I've already had some experience of it; but I feel that if I showed myself in
my true colors—and I can do so now by providing proof—the apes ought to
admit me as their spiritual brother."






"That's where you're wrong. Now listen . . ."
  We were strolling through the park. The paths were almost deserted and we
had passed no more than one or two courting couples who were roused to a
momentary curiosity by my presence. I, on the other hand, stared at them
shamelessly, being firmly resolved not to miss a single opportunity to learn about
simian customs.


  They walked along together holding each other around the waist, the length
of their arms making this embrace a tight and complex encirclement. They
would often stop at a corner of a path to exchange a kiss or two. From time
to time also, after darting a furtive glance all around, they would take hold of
the low branches of a tree and swing themselves off the ground. This they
accomplished without separating, each of them using one hand and one foot
with an ease that I envied, and they would then disappear into the foliage.


  "Now listen," said Zira. "Your launch"—I had told her in detail how we had
arrived on the planet—"your launch has been discovered; at least what's left of
it after being pillaged. It has aroused the curiosity of' our researchers.


 They realize it was not manufactured here."




"Do you build similar machines?"






  "Yes, but not so perfected. From what you've told me, we're a long way behind
you. We have, however, already launched artificial satellites around our planet,
the last one even being occupied by a living being: a man. We had to destroy it
in flight because we were unable to recover it."






"I see," I said, lost in thought. "So men also serve you for this sort of
experiment."
"It can't be helped. . . . Anyway, your rocket has been discovered."


 "What about our spaceship, which has been in orbit around Soror for the last
 few months?"




  "I haven't heard anything about it. It must have escaped the notice of our
astronomers . . . but do stop interrupting me. Some of our scientists have
put forward the theory that the machine comes from another planet and that
it was inhabited. They are unable to go a step further and imagine intelligent
beings in human form."






 "But you must tell them, Zira!" I cried. "I've had enough of living like a
prisoner, even in the most comfortable of cages, even looked after by you.
Why are you hiding me away? Why not reveal the truth to everyone?"




Zira stopped short, glanced all about her, and put her hand on my arm.






"Why? It's purely in your own interests that I'm doing this. You know
Zaius?"






"Of course. I wanted to talk to you about him. Well?"






 "Did you notice the effect your first attempts at rationality produced on
him? Do you know I've tried a hundred times to tell him about you and to
suggest—ever so carefully!—that perhaps you were not a beast in spite of
appearances?"
"I've seen you having long conversations together and noticed you didn't
agree."




   "He's as stubborn as a mule and as stupid as a man!" Zira burst out. "Alas!
it's the same with almost all the orangutans. He has decreed once and for all
that your talents are due to a highly developed animal instinct, and nothing
will make him change his opinion. The unfortunate thing is, he has already
prepared a long theses on you in which he asserts that you are a tame man,
in other words, a man who has been trained to perform certain tricks
without understanding them, probably during a former period of captivity."






"The stupid beast!"






  "Certainly. The only snag is, he represents official science and he's
powerful. He is one of the highest authorities in the institute, and all my
reports have to go through him. I'm almost certain he would accuse me of
scientific heresy if I tried to reveal the truth in your case, as you suggest. I
should be dismissed. That's unimportant, but do you realize what might then
happen to you?"




 "What fate could be worse than living in a cage?"






  "Be thankful for small mercies! Do you know how I've had to scheme and
plot to prevent him from having you transferred to the encephalic section?
Nothing could restrain him if you insisted on claiming to be a rational
creature."
 "What's the encephalic section?" I asked in alarm.
"That's where we perform certain extremely tricky operations on the brain:
grafting; observation and alteration of the nervous centers; partial and even
total ablation."






"And you carry out these experiments on men!"






  "Of course. Man's brain, like the rest of his anatomy, is the one that bears
the closest resemblance to ours. It's a lucky chance that nature has put at
our disposal an animal on whom we can study our own bodies. Man serves
us in many other fields of research, as you'll come to realize. . . . At this
very moment we are undertaking an extremely important series of
experiments."


 "For which you need a considerable amount of human material."


  "A very considerable amount—which explains those drives we carry out in
the jungle to renew our supplies. Unfortunately, it's the gorillas who
organize them, and we can't stop them indulging in their favorite pastime,
which is shooting. A large number of subjects have thus been lost to
science."




"What a terrible shame," I muttered, biting my lip. "But to get back to me . .
."






"Do you know why I've insisted on keeping our secret?"






 "Am I then condemned to spend the rest of my life in a cage?"
  "Not if the plan I have in mind succeeds. But you must not drop your
mask until the time is ripe and you hold all the cards. This is what I suggest:
in a month from now we're holding our annual biological conference. It's an
important event. A large public is admitted to it and the representatives of
all the leading papers attend. Now, for us public opinion is a more powerful
element than Zaius, more powerful than all the orangutans combined, more
powerful even than the gorillas. This will be your chance. It's when this
congress is in full session that you must lift the veil; for you're going to be
introduced by Zaius, who, as I've told you, is preparing a long report on you
and your famous instinct. The best thing then would be for you to speak up
yourself to explain your case. This would cause such a sensation that Zaius
wouldn't be able to stop you. It will be up to you to explain yourself clearly
to the assembly and convince the crowd and the journalists, as you have
already convinced me."






 "And if Zaius and the orangutans put their foot down?"






 "Once the gorillas are forced to bow before public opinion,
they'll soon make those idiot orangutans see reason. Many of them, after all,
are not so stupid as Zaius; and there are also, among the scientists, a few
chimpanzees whom the Academy has been obliged to admit because of
their sensational discoveries. One of these is Cornelius, my fiance. He's the
only one to whom I have spoken about you. He has promised to do all he
can for you. Naturally, he wants to see you beforehand so as to check the
incredible account I have given him. That's partly why I've brought you
here today. I've arranged to meet him and he shouldn't be long."






  Cornelius was waiting for us near a bank of giant ferns. He was a fine-
looking chimpanzee, older than Zira certainly, but extremely young for a
learned academician. As soon as I saw him I was struck by his
exceptionally keen and intense expression.






"What do you think of him?" Zira whispered to me hi French.






  I realized from her question that I had definitely won the confidence of
this she-ape. I muttered some complimentary remark and we went up to him.


  The engaged couple embraced in the manner of the lovers in the park. He
had opened his arms wide without glancing hi my direction. In spite of
what she had told him about me, it was clear that my presence counted no
more for him than that of a pet animal. Zira herself forgot me for a moment
and they exchanged long kisses on the muzzle. Then she stiffened, broke
free from him, and bashfully lowered her eyes.




 "Darling, we are not alone."
    "Yes, I am here," I said with dignity in my best simian language.


    "What's that?" Cornelius exclaimed with a start.


 "I said, I am here. I am sorry to have to remind you of the fact. Your
demonstrations do not embarrass me in the least, but you might hold it
against me later."


  "Well, I never!" exclaimed the learned chimpanzee. Zira burst out
laughing and introduced us.


  "Dr. Cornelius of the Academy," she said. "Ulysse Merou, an inhabitant of
the solar system or, to be more precise, the Earth."




"I am delighted to make your acquaintance," I said. "Zira has told me about
you. I congratulate you on having such a charming fiancee.


"


  And I held out my hand. He shied away as though a snake had just raised
its head in front of him.






    "So it's true?" he muttered, looking at Zira in utter bewilderment.




    "Darling, am I in the habit of telling you lies?"






 He pulled himself together. He was a man of science. After a moment's
hesitation he shook my hand.
"How do you do?"






  "How do you do?" I replied. "Once more I must apologize for appearing hi
this state of undress."


 "That's all he can think of," said Zira with a laugh. "It's a complex with
him. He does not realize the effect he would have if he were dressed."




"And you really come from . . . from?"






"From Earth, a planet of the Sun."






  He had evidently given little credit till now to Zira's confidences,
preferring to believe in some hoax. He started firing questions at me. We
were strolling along, the two of them a few paces ahead and arm in arm, I
following on the end of my chain so as not to attract the attention of the
passers-by we chanced to meet. But my replies roused his scientific
curiosity to such a pitch that he would often stop short, let go of his fiancee,
and we would embark on a discussion face to face with sweeping gestures,
tracing diagrams in the sand on the path. Zira did not mind. She appeared,
on the contrary, delighted with the impression I had made.






 Cornelius was particularly interested, of course, in the emergence of
Homo sapiens on Earth and made me tell him again and again everything I
knew about this subject. Then he pondered over it for some time. He told
me that my revelations undoubtedly constituted a document of capital
importance to science and particularly to him, as he was then engaged on
some extremely arduous research into the simian phenomenon. From what I
understood, this was still an unsolved problem to him and he did not agree
with the generally, accepted theories. But he became reticent on this subject
and did not let me know his views completely during this first encounter.




 However it might be, I was an object of great interest to him and he would
have given a fortune to have me in his laboratory. We then spoke about my
present situation and about Zaius, whose stupidity and blindness he fully
appreciated. He approved of Zira's plan. He would himself prepare the
ground by alluding to the mystery of my case in die presence of some of his
colleagues.






When he left us he held out his hand without a moment's hesitation, after
first making sure the path was deserted.






Then he kissed his fiance'e and went off, not without turning. around several
times to convince himself that I was not an hallucination.


 "A charming young ape," I said as we made our way back to the car.




"And a very great scientist. With his support I'm sure you will persuade the
congress."






 "Zira," I murmured in her ear when I was in the back seat, "I shall owe you
my liberty and my life."


  I was thinking of all she had done for me since my capture. Without her I
should never have been able to come into contact with the simian world.
Zaius would have been quite capable of having my brain removed to
demonstrate that I was not a rational being. Thanks to her, I now had some
allies and could face the future with a little more optimism.
"I did it out of love for science," she said, blushing. "You are a unique case
that must be preserved at all costs."






My heart overflowed with gratitude. I yielded to the soulfulness of her
expression, managing to overlook her physical appearance. I put my hand on
her long hairy paw. A shiver went down her spine and I discerned in her
eyes a gleam of affection. We were both deeply moved and remained silent
all the way back. When she returned me to my cage, I roughly rebuffed
Nova, who was indulging in some sort of childish demonstration to welcome
me back.






CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO


Zira has secretly lent me a flashlight and has slipped me some books that I
keep hidden under the straw. I now read and speak the apes' language
fluently. I spend several hours every night studying their civilization. Nova
protested at first. She came over and sniffed at one of the books, baring her
teeth as though it were a dangerous adversary. I only had to focus the beam
of my flash on her to see her dash back into her corner, trembling and
whimpering. I am the absolute master at home, now that I possess this
instrument, and no longer need any arguments more striking to keep her
quiet. I feel she looks upon me as a redoubtable being, and I notice from
many signs that the other captives also regard me as such. My prestige has
increased considerably, and I take unfair advantage of this. Sometimes I have
an unreasoning desire to terrified,-Jova by brandishing the flashlight, after
which she creeps back to pardon me for my cruelty.




I flatter myself that I now have a fairly clear idea of the simian world.






The apes are not divided into nations. The whole planet is administered by a
council of ministers, at the head of which is a triumvirate consisting of one
gorilla, one orangutan, and one chimpanzee. In conjunction with this
government, there is also a parliament composed of three chambers: the
Chamber of Gorillas, of Orangutans, and of Chimpanzees, each of which
attends to the interests of its respective members.






In fact, this division into three races is the only one that exists. In principle
they all have equal rights and are allowed to occupy any position. Yet, with
certain exceptions, each species confines itself to its own specialty.






  From far back in the past, when they used to reign by force, the gorillas
have preserved a taste for authority and still form the most powerful class.
They do not mingle with the herd, they are never seen at popular
demonstrations, but it is they who administer at very high level most of the
great enterprises. Rather ignorant as a rule, they know by instinct how to
make use of their skills. They excel in the art of drawing up general
directives and handling the other apes. When a technician makes an
interesting discovery—a luminous tube, for instance, or some new
combustible fuel—it is almost always a gorilla who undertakes to exploit it
and derive every possible benefit from it. Without being really intelligent,
they are much more cunning than the orangutans. They get whatever they
want out of the latter by playing on their pride. Thus, at the head of our
institute, above Zaius who is the scientific director, there is a gorilla
administrator who is rarely seen. He has come into our room only once. He
looked me up and down with his particular air of authority, and I almost
automatically rose to my feet and stood to attention. I noticed Zaius' servile
attitude, and Zira herself seemed impressed by his grand manner.






 The gorillas who do not occupy positions of authority are usually engaged
on lesser jobs requiring physical strength. Zoram and Zanam, for instance,
are there only for the rough work and especially for maintaining law and
order when necessary.
Or else the gorillas are hunters. This is a function more or less reserved for
them. They capture wild animals and, in particular, men. I have already
pointed out the enormous numbers of men required for the apes'
experiments. These experiments play a part in their lives that I find more
disconcerting as I discover their importance. A large section of the simian
population seems to be engaged on biological study, but I shall come back
to this oddity later. However it may be, the supplying of human material
necessitates an organized enterprise. A whole tribe of hunters, beaters,
porters, and tradesmen is devoted to this industry, at the head of which there
are always gorillas. I believe this is a prosperous business, for man fetches a
high price.






  By the side of the gorillas—I was going to say below them, although any
form of hierarchy is contested—are the orangutans and the chimpanzees.
The former, who are by far the least numerous, were described to me by
Zira in a single phrase: they are official science.




  This is partly true, but some of them occasionally indulge in politics, the
arts, and literature. They bring the same characteristics to all these
activities. Pompous, solemn, pedantic, devoid of originality and critical
sense, intent on preserving tradition, blind and deaf to all innovation, they
form the substratum of every academy. Endowed with a good memory, they
learn an enormous amount by heart and from books. Then they themselves
write other books, in which they repeat what they have read, thereby
earning the respect of their fellow orangutans. Perhaps I am slightly biased
in my attitude toward them by the opinion of Zira and her fianc6, who
detest them, as do all the chimpanzees. Moreover, they are equally despised
by the gorillas, who laugh at their lack of initiative but who exploit them for
the benefit of their own schemes. Almost every orangutan has behind him a
gorilla or a council of gorillas who support him and maintain him in an
honorable post, seeing to it that he is granted the titles and decorations that
are dear to his heart—until the day he ceases to give satisfaction. Then he is
dismissed without mercy and replaced by another ape of the same species.
  There remain the chimpanzees. These seem to represent the intellectual
element of the planet. It is not an idle boast that all the great discoveries
have been made by them, as Zira first told me. This is a slightly exaggerated
generalization, for there are a few exceptions. In any case, they write most
of the interesting books and on a great variety of subjects. They seem
animated by a powerful spirit of research.






 I have mentioned the sort of works the orangutans produce. The
unfortunate thing is, as Zira frequently deplores,


they thus write all the educational books, propagating grotesque errors
among simian youth. Not long ago, she assures me, these school textbooks
still stated that the planet Soror was the center of the world, although this
heresy had been rejected long before by every ape of even mediocre
intelligence; and the only reason for this was that there once existed on
Soror, thousands of years ago, an ape of considerable authority called
Haristas who held such beliefs and whose dogmas have been repeated by
the orangutans ever since. It is easier to understand Zira's attitude toward
me now that I have learned that this Haristas believed that apes alone can
have a soul. The chimpanzees, fortunately, have a far more critical mind. In
the last few years, it seems, they have embarked on a regular campaign to
disparage the old idol's axioms.






As for the gorillas, they write very few books, and these are noteworthy
more because of their appearance than their subject matter. I have glanced
through some of them, and remember their titles: The Need for Sound
Organization as the Basis of Research, The Benefits of Social Politics, or
The Organization of the Large Man Hunts on the Green Continent. These
works are always well documented, each chapter being written by a
specialized technician, and contain diagrams, tables, and sometimes attractive
photographs.
  The unification of the planet, the absence of war and military expenditures
—there is no army, only a police force—strike me as being factors that
would foster rapid progress in every realm of the simian world. This is not
the case. Although Soror is probably slightly older than the Earth, it is clear
that the apes lag behind us in any number of ways.




 They have electricity, industries, motor cars, and airplanes, but, as far as
the conquest of space is concerned, they have reached only the stage of
artificial satellites. In pure science I think their knowledge of the infinitely
great and the infinitely small is inferior to ours. This backwardness is
perhaps due to mere chance, and I have no doubt they will catch up with us
one day, when I consider their capacity for application and the spirit of
research shown by the chimpanzees. In fact, it seems to me they have been
through a dark period of stagnation that has lasted a very long time, far
longer than with us, and have only recently entered an age of considerable
achievement.






  This spirit of research, I must once again point out, is directed principally
in one direction: the biological sciences and in particular the study of ape,
man being the instrument they use to this end. The latter thus plays an
essential, albeit rather humiliating, part in their existence. It is lucky that
there is a considerable supply of men on their planet I have read a paper
proving there are more men here than apes. But the number of the latter is
on the increase, whereas the human population is falling off, and already
some scientists are anxious about future supplies for their laboratories.






All this does not explain the secret of simian evolution. On the other hand,
perhaps there is no mystery about it. Their emergence is no doubt as natural
as our own. Yet I cannot entirely accept this idea, and I now know that some
of their scientists also consider that the phenomenon of simian ascendency is
by no means clear. Cornelius belongs to this school, and I believe he is
seconded by the keenest brains. Unaware of where they come from, who
they are, or where they are going, they no doubt suffer from this lack of
knowledge. Might it not be this feeling that inspires them with a sort of frenzy
for biological research and that gives such a special slant to their scientific
pursuits? My nighttime meditation concludes with these questions.






CHAPTER T W E N T Y - T H R E E


Zira took me for outings in the park fairly often. Sometimes we would meet
Cornelius there, and together we would prepare the speech I was to give
before the congress. The date was fast approaching, which made me quite
nervous. Zira assured me that all would be well. Cornelius was eager for my
state to be recognized and my liberty restored so that he could study me
closely—collaborate with me, he corrected himself, at the gesture of
annoyance that escaped me when he spoke like this.




  One day her fiance was absent. Zira suggested going to the zoo adjoining
the park. I should have liked to go to a theater or a museum, but these
entertainments were still forbidden me. Only from books had I been able to
acquire a few ideas about simian art. I had admired some reproductions of
classical paintings, portraits of celebrated apes, country scenes with lascivious
she-apes around whom fluttered a little winged monkey representing Cupid,
military paintings dating from the time when there were still wars and
depicting terrifying gorillas wearing flamboyant uniforms. The apes had also had
their impressionists, and a few contemporaries indulged in abstract art. All this
I had discovered in my cage, by the light of my flashlight. I could decently
attend only open-air entertainments. Zira had taken me to see a game
resembling our football, a boxing match, which had made me shudder,
between two gorillas, and an athletic meet in which air-borne chimps
launched themselves to prodigious heights by means of a springboard.






I welcomed a visit to the zoo. At first I felt no surprise. The animals bore
many similarities to those on Earth. There were felines, pachyderms,
ruminants, reptiles, and birds. If I noticed a sort of camel with three humps
and a wild boar with horns like a stag, they could in no way astonish me
after what I had already seen on the planet Soror.






 My amazement began with the section devoted to man. Zira tried to
dissuade me from going there, regretting having brought me, I believe, but
my curiosity was too strong and I tugged on my lead until she yielded.


  The first cage at which we stopped contained at least fifty individuals,
men, women, and children, exhibited there to the great glee of the ape
spectators. They displayed a feverish and immoderate activity, leaping
about, jostling one another, making an exhibition of themselves, indulging
in all sorts of frolics.






  It was certainly a sight. They were all intent on winning favor with the
little apes surrounding their cage, who now and then threw them some fruit
or pieces of cake sold by an old she-ape at the entrance. It was the man,
either adult or child, who did the best trick—climbing up the bars, walking
on all fours or on his hands—who obtained the reward, and when this fell
in the middle of a group, there was a scuffle involving scratched faces and
torn-out hair, the whole punctuated by the shrill cries of animals in a temper.






  There were some men who were more composed and did not take part in
this fracas. They sat apart, near the bars, and when they saw an ape brat
plunge his fingers into a bag they would stretch out an imploring hand. The
ape, if he was very young, would often draw back in fright, but his parents
or his friends would tease him until he decided, still trembling, to pass the
reward from hand to hand.
  The appearance of a man outside the cage provoked some surprise, no less
among the captives than in. the simian audience. The former interrupted
their play for a moment to examine me with suspicion, but since I stood
quite still refusing with dignity the offerings that the youngster tried to hand
me, apes and men alike lost interest in m« and I was able to observe
everything in peace. The silliness of these creatures sickened me, and I felt
myself hot with shame when I once again noted how closely they
resembled me physically.


  The other cages provided the same degrading spectacle. I was about to let
myself be led off by Zira, with -a heavy heart, when suddenly, and with a
great effort, I stifled a cry of surprise. There in front of me, among the herd,
I saw none other than my traveling companion, the leader and mastermind
of our expedition, the famous Professor Antelle. Like me, he had been
captured and, no doubt less fortunate, had then been sold to the zoo.




  My joy at knowing he was alive and seeing him again was such that tears
came into my eyes; then I shuddered at the condition to which this learned
man had been reduced. My emotion gradually changed to a painful
numbness when I noticed that his behavior was identical to the other men's.
I could not doubt the evidence of my own eyes, hi spite of the improbability
of this behavior. He was among the group of quiet ones who did not take
part in the scuffles but stretched their hands through the bars with a begging
grimace. I watched him while he was doing this, and there was nothing in
his attitude to reveal his true nature. A little ape gave him some fruit. The
scientist took it, sat down, crossed his legs, and began to devour it greedily,
looking at his benefactor with an eager eye, as though he hoped for another
gesture of generosity. I wept anew at this sight. In a low voice I told Zira
the reason for my tears. I should have liked to go up and speak to him, but
she dissuaded me vigorously. I could do nothing for him at the moment,
and, in the emotion of meeting again, we risked causing a scene that would
prejudice our common interests and might well ruin my own plans.
"After the congress," she told me, "when you have been recognized and
accepted as a rational being, we will see about him."




  She was right and I regretfully let myself be dragged away. On the way
back to the Car I told her all about the professor and his reputation on Earth
in the scientific world. She pondered over this for some time and promised
to do her best to get him out of the zoo. I was therefore a little more
cheerful on my return to the institute, but that evening I refused the food the
gorillas brought me.








 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR


 During the week preceding the congress Zaius paid me several visits,
 multiplying the ridiculous tests, while his secretary filled several notebooks
 with observations and conclusions concerning me. I hypocritically did my
 best not to appear more intelligent than he wished.




  The long-awaited date finally arrived, but it was only on the third day of the
congress that they came to fetch me, the first two having been devoted to
theoretical debates. I was kept informed of the proceedings by Zira. Zaius
had already read a long report about me, presenting me as a man with
particularly sharp instincts but totally devoid of the capacity for thought.
Cornelius asked him a few leading questions to discover how, in that case, he
explained certain aspects of my behavior. This revived old disputes, and the
last discussion had been a stormy one. The scientists were divided into two
groups: those who refused to acknowledge that an animal had a soul of any
sort, and those who saw only a difference of degree between the mentality
of beasts and that of apes. No one of course suspected the real truth, except
Cornelius and Zira. Yet Zaius' report described such surprising
characteristics that, even though this imbecile was not aware of the fact, it
made a deep impression on certain impartial observers, if not on the
decorated scientists, and a rumor began to spread around the town that an
absolutely extraordinary man had been discovered.






Zira whispered in my ear as she took me out of the cage, "There'll be a vast
crowd and the whole of the press. They're all on tenterhooks and know there's
something unusual afoot. It's excellent for you. Take courage!"


I badly needed her moral support. I felt terribly nervous. I had rehearsed my
speech all night. I knew it by heart and it was bound to convince the most
limited minds; but I was haunted by the fear that I might not be allowed to
speak.






   The gorillas led me off to a caged-in truck and I found myself among
 several other human subjects, likewise considered worthy of being
 introduced to the learned assembly because of some peculiarity or other.
 We arrived outside an enormous building surmounted by a cupola. Our
 guards led us into a room furnished with cages, adjoining the assembly
 hall. There we waited at the scientists' pleasure. Every now and then a
 majestic gorilla, clothed hi a sort of black uniform, pushed open the door
 and shouted out a number. Then the guards would put one of the men on a
 lead and drag him off. My heart thundered at each appearance of the usher.
 Through the half-open door I could hear the hubbub in the hall, an
 occasional exclamation, and also bursts of applause.






  Since the subjects were driven away immediately after their introduction, I
eventually found myself alone in the room with the guards, feverishly going
over the main passages of my speech. They had kept me till the end, like a
star performer. The black gorilla appeared for the last time and called out
my number. I rose to my feet quickly, took from the hands of a
flabbergasted ape the^ lead he was about to fasten to my collar, and
adjusted it myself. Then, flanked by two bodyguards, I entered the
assembly hall with a firm tread. As soon as I had crossed the threshold I
halted, dazzled and abashed.






  I had seen many a strange sight since my arrival on Soror. I thought I was
so accustomed to the apes and their actions that I could no longer be
astonished by them. Yet confronted with the singularity and proportions of
the scene before my eyes, I was seized with giddiness and once again asked
myself if I was not dreaming.


  I was in a gigantic amphitheater (which put me strangely in mind of
Dante's conical inferno) of which every row of seats both around and
above me was swarming with apes. There were several thousands of them.
Never before had I seen so many apes gathered together; their multitude
transcended the wildest dreams of my poor terrestrial imagination; their
numbers overwhelmed me.


  I stumbled and tried to pull myself together by looking for some guiding
light in this crowd. The guards pushed me toward the center of a circle,
resembling a circus arena, where a platform had been erected. I slowly
glanced all around me. The tiers of apes rose as high as the ceiling, to a
height that seemed to me incredible. The seats nearest me were occupied by
the members of the congress, all of them learned scientists dressed in
striped trousers and dark frock coats, all of them wearing decorations,
almost all of a venerable age, and almost all orangutans. I made out,
however, among their group a small number of gorillas and chimpanzees. I
looked for Cornelius among the latter, but could not see him.


  Beyond the authorities and behind a balustrade were several rows reserved
for the junior colleagues of the scientists. A gallery at this level was for the
journalists and photographers. Finally, still higher up and behind another
barrier, surged the crowd, a simian public which, from the loud murmurs
that greeted my appearance, was evidently in a state of great excitement.


 I also tried to see Zira, who was bound to be sitting among the assistants. I
felt I needed the support of a glance from her. There again I was
disappointed and could not discern a single familiar face among the hellish
throng of apes surrounding me.


 I switched my gaze to the pontiffs. Each of them was seated in an armchair
draped in red, whereas the rest were entitled only to stools or benches. Their
appearance reminded me forcefully of Zaius. Their heads sunk almost to
the level of their shoulders, one immensely long arm half folded and placed
in front of them on a blotter, they scribbled down an occasional note or
perhaps a childish drawing. In contrast to the excitement prevailing on the
higher benches, they looked utterly listless. I had the feeling that my
entrance and the announcement about me that had been made over a loud-
speaker were only just sufficient to revive their flagging attention. In fact, I
distinctly remember seeing three of these orangutans give a start and
suddenly shake their heads, as though roused from a deep sleep.


  Yet they were now all wide awake. My introduction was no doubt the high
spot of the meeting, and I felt I was the cynosure of thousands of pairs of
simian eyes with a variety of expressions ranging from indifference to
enthusiasm.


  My guards made me mount the platform where an impressive-looking
gorilla was sitting. Zira had told me that the congress was presided over not
by a scientist, as had once been the case—in those days the apes -of
science, left to then- own devices, used to lose themselves in endless
discussions without ever coming to a conclusion— but by an organizer. To
the left of this important figure was his secretary, a chimpanzee, who was
making a verbatim report of the meeting. To her right was a seat occupied
in turn by each of the scientists who was to read a paper or introduce a
subject. Zaius had just taken this seat amidst some lukewarm applause.
Thanks to a system of loudspeakers in conjunction with some powerful
projectors, nothing happening on the platform was lost even at the
uppermost levels of the hall.






The president gorilla rang his -bell, obtained silence, and announced he was
giving the illustrious Zaius leave to speak for the purpose of introducing the
man about whom he had already addressed the assembly. The orangutan
then rose to his feet and began on his discourse. During this time I was
doing my best to assume as intelligent an attitude as possible. When he
spoke about me I bowed, putting my hand to my breast, which at first gave
rise to some laughter that was promptly stifled by the bell. I quickly realized
I was not advancing my cause by indulging in these tricks, which might be
interpreted as the mere result of good training. I stood still, waiting for the
end of his speech.




  He summarized the conclusions of his report and described the tricks he
was going to make me perform, the equipment for his damnable tests
having been set up on the platform. He ended by declaring that, like certain
birds, I was also capable of repeating a few words, and he hoped to be able
to make me do this in front of the assembly. Then he turned around to me,
picked up the box with its multiple fastenings, and handed it to me. But
instead of manipulating the locks, I embarked on another sort of exercise.


 My hour had come. I raised my hand, then, tugging gently on the lead
held by a guard, I approached the microphone and addressed the president.


  "Illustrious President," I said in my best simian language, "it is with the
greatest pleasure that I shall open this box; it is with the utmost willingness,
too, that I shall perform all the tricks in the program. Before beginning this
task, however, which is rather an easy one for me, I beg permission to make
an announcement that, I swear, will astonish this learned assembly."


  I had articulated very clearly and each of my words drove home. The
result was what I had anticipated. All the apes remained glued to their seats,
dumbfounded, holding their breath. The journalists even forgot to take
notes, and none of the photographers had the presence of mind to record
this historic moment.




The president gaped at me. As for Zaius, he seemed to be in a towering rage.
"Mr. President," he yelled, "I protest . . ."






 But he stopped short, overwhelmed by the ridiculousness of a discussion
with a man. I took advantage of this to go on with my speech.




  "Mr. President, I insist with the greatest respect, but also with the utmost
firmness, that this favor be granted me. Once I have explained myself, I
swear on my honor that I shall bow to the demands of the very illustrious
Zaius."


  After a moment's silence, a hurricane shook the assembly.






A raging storm swept the rows of seats, transforming all the apes into a
hysterical mass hi which were mingled exclamations, bursts of laughter,
sobs, and cheers, all this in me midst of a continuous flash of magnesium,
the photographers having at last recovered the use of then- limbs. The
tumult lasted a good five minutes, during which the president, who had
recovered some of his composure, never took his eyes off me. He
eventually came to a decision and rang his bell.






"I . . ." he stammered, "I really don't know how to address you."






 "Just call me monsieur," I said.






 "Yes, well, er . . . monsieur, I think that, in view of the exceptional nature
of the case, the scientific congress over which I have the honor to preside is
entitled to listen to your announcement."
  A fresh wave of applause greeted this decision. I did not ask for more. I
stood bolt upright hi the middle of the platform, adjusted the microphone to
my height, and started the following speech.




CHAPTER T W E N T Y - F I V E


"Illustrious President,


 "Noble Gorillas,


 "Learned Orangutans,


 "Wise Chimpanzees,


 "O Apes!


 "I, a man, beg leave to address you.






  "I know my appearance is grotesque, my figure repulsive, my features
bestial, my smell sickening, the color of my skin disgusting. I know the
sight of this ridiculous body of mine offends you, but I also know I am
addressing the wisest and most learned apes of all, those whose minds are
capable of rising above mere sensory impressions and of perceiving the
essential substance of a being apart from his wretched material exterior. . .
."


  The pompous humility of this opening had been suggested by Zira and
Cornelius, who knew it was liable to touch the orangutans. I went on in a
silence that was complete:




  "Listen to me, O Apes! For I can talk, and not, I assure you, like a
mechanical toy or a parrot. I can think, I can talk, I can understand what
you say just as well as what I myself say. Presently, if Your Lordships deign
to question me, I shall deem it an honor to reply to your questions to the best
of my ability.
"But first I should like to reveal this astounding truth to you: not only am I a
rational creature, not only does a mind paradoxically inhabit this human
body, but I come from a distant planet, from Earth, that Earth on which, by
a whim of nature that has still to be explained, it is men who are the
repositories of wisdom and reason. I beg permission to point out the place
of my Origin, not of course for the benefit of the illustrious doctors whom I
see all around me, but for those of my audience who perhaps are not so well
acquainted with the various stellar systems."


  I went up to a blackboard and by means of a few diagrams described the
solar system to the best of my ability and indicated its position in the
galaxy. My lecture was listened to hi profound silence. But when, having
finished my sketches, I clapped my hands together to get rid of the chalk
dust on them, this simple gesture provoked an enthusiastic murmur among
the crowd in the upper rows. I went pn, facing my public:




"Thus on Earth the intellect is embodied in the human race. This is a fact
and I can do nothing about it. Whereas the apes—and since discovering
your world I am deeply upset about this—whereas the apes have remained in
a state of savagery, it is the men who have evolved. It is in man's cranium
that the brain has developed and flourished. It is man who hi vented
language, discovered fire, 3 made use of tools. It is man who settled my
planet and 5 changed its face, man, in fact, who established a civilization so
refined that in many respects, O Apes, it resembles your own."






  At this point I quoted several examples of our finest achievements. I
described our cities, our industries, our means of communication, our
governments, our laws, our entertainments. Then I addressed myself more
specifically to the learned authorities and tried to give them an idea of our
conquests in the noble fields of the sciences and arts. My voice became
firmer the longer I spoke. I began to feel a sort of intoxication, like an
owner taking stock of his possessions.
  I then embarked on the account of my own adventures, j I described the
means by which I had reached the world of Betelgeuse and landed on the
planet Soror, how I had been captured and locked up in a cage, how I tried
to enter into contact with Zaius, and how, doubtless as a result of my lack of
ingenuity, all my efforts had been in vain. Lastly I mentioned Zira's
perspicacity, her valuable assistance and that of Dr. Cornelius. I
concluded with the following words:






"This is what I wanted to tell you, O Apes! It is up to you now to decide
whether I should be treated like an animal and end my days in a cage after
such astonishing adventures. It remains for me to say that I voyaged here
without any hostile intent, inspired solely by the spirit of discovery. Since I
have come to know you I find you extraordinarily congenial and I admire
you with all my heart. This, then, is the plan I suggest to the great minds of
this planet. I can certainly be useful to you by virtue of my earthly
knowledge; for my part, I have learned more things during a few months'
captivity among you than in all my previous existence. Let us unite our
efforts! Let us establish contacts with the Earth! Let us march forward hand
in hand, apes and men together, and no power, no secret of the cosmos will
be able to resist us!"






 I stopped speaking; exhausted, in • total silence. I turned automatically to
the president's table, picked up the glass of water standing there, and
drained it in a gulp. Like the act of clapping my hands together, this simple
gesture produced an amazing effect and was the signal for an absolute
uproar. The whole hall spontaneously gave vent to an enthusiastic outburst
that no pen could ever describe. I knew I had won over my audience, but I
would never have thought it possible for any assembly in the world to break
into such commotion. I was deafened by it, retaining just enough composure
to observe one of the reasons for this fantastic din: apes, who are exuberant
by nature, clap with all four hands when they are pleased. I was thus
surrounded by a seething mass of frantic1 creatures balancing on their rumps
and waving their four limbs in a frenzy of applause punctuated by wild
yells in which the gorillas' deep voices predominated. This was one of my
last glimpses of this memorable session. I felt unsteady on my feet. I looked
anxiously around me. Zaius had just risen from his seat in fury and was
striding up and down the platform with his hands behind his back, as he did
in front of my cage. As though hi a dream, I saw the vacant chair and
collapsed into it. A fresh burst of applause, which I barely heard before
fainting dead away, greeted this gesture.






CHAPTER                  TWENTY-SIX




It was some time before I recovered consciousness, so intense had been the strain of this session. I found myself lying on a bed in a room.
Zira and Cornelius were attending me, while some gorillas in uniform held back a crowd of journalists and curious onlookers who were
trying to approach me.








"Magnificent!" Zira whispered in my ear. "You've won."








"Ulysse," said Cornelius, "together we're going to do great things."








   He told me that the Grand Council of Soror had just held a special meeting and had decided on my immediate release.




   "There were some who opposed it," he added, "but public opinion demanded it and they had to yield."




   Having himself requested and obtained permission to take me on as his collaborator, he was rubbing bis hands at the thought of the
assistance I would provide in his research.




    "This is where you'll be living. I hope this apartment will suit you. It is quite close to mine, in a wing of the institute reserved for
the senior personnel."




   I looked around in bewilderment, thinking I was dreaming. The room was provided with every comfort; it was the beginning of a new
epoch. After hoping so long for this moment, I was suddenly overwhelmed by an odd feeling of nostalgia. My eyes met Zira's and I
saw that the clever she-ape had read my thoughts. A rather ambiguous smile came over her face.




    "Here, of course," she said, "you won't have Nova with you."
   I blushed, shrugged my shoulders, and sat up. I had recovered my strength and was eager to embark on my new life.








"Do you feel well enough to attend a little party?" Zira asked. "We've invited a few friends, all of them chimpanzees, to celebrate this
great day."








   I replied that nothing would give me greater pleasure, but I was no longer willing to appear stark naked. I then noticed I was
wearing some pajamas, Cornelius having lent me his. But though I was able, hi a pinch, to wear a chimpanzee's pajamas, I should
have looked grotesque in one of his suits




   .




    "We'll fit you out completely tomorrow and you'll have a decent suit for this evening. Here's the tailor."








A little chimpanzee came in and greeted me with great courtesy. I discovered that while I was still lying unconscious, the best tailors
had competed for the honor of dressing me. This one, the most famous of all, had the most noted • gorillas in the capital as clients.








       I admired his speed and dexterity. In less than two hours he had succeeded hi making me an acceptable suit. It felt quite strange
 to be wearing clothes again, and Zira looked at me as though she had never seen me before. While the artist was making the final
 adjustments Cornelius admitted the journalists who were hammering at the door. I was put through a catechism for over an hour,
 riddled with questions, under fire from the photographers, and required to furnish the most intriguing details about the Earth and
 the life men led on that planet. I lent myself willingly to this ceremony. A journalist myself, I realized the scoop I represented to
 these colleagues and knew what a powerful support the press could be.




    It was late by the tune they left. We were just on our way to join Cornelius' friends when we were detained by the arrival of
 Zanam. He was obviously acquainted with the latest developments, for he gave me an obsequious bow. He had come to tell Zira that
 things were not going too well in her department. Furious at my long absence, Nova was making a great racket. Her mood had
 infected all the other captives, and no amount of pike blows would calm them down.








       "I'll go and see," said Zira. "Wait for me here."
  I looked at her with a pleading expression. She hesitated, then shrugged her shoulders.




  "Come along if you like," she said. "After all, you're free and perhaps you'll be able to calm them down better than I can."








  Together we entered the room with the cages. The captives calmed down as soon as they saw me, and the uproar was followed by a
strange silence. They recognized me in spite of my clothes and seemed to understand that they were in the presence of something
miraculous.








  Trembling with emotion, I walked over to Nova's cage, my own cage. I went right up to her, I smiled at her, I spoke to her. For
a moment I had the impression that she was following my train of thought and was about to answer me. This was impossible, but
my mere presence had calmed her down like the others. She accepted a lump of sugar that I handed to her and ate it while I made
my
way out of the room with a heavy heart.






 Of that party, which took place in a smart night club— Cornelius had
decided to launch me forthwith into simian society, since in any case I was
now destined to live in it—I have only a confused and rather disturbing
memory.






The confusion was caused by the alcohol that I started swilling as soon as I
arrived, and to which my system was no longer accustomed. The disturbing
effect was an odd sensation that was to come over me later on many other
occasions. I can only describe it by saying that the nature of the figures
around me became progressively less simian, whereas then- function or the
position they held in society became dominant. The head waiter, for
instance, who came up obsequiously to show us our table, I saw only as the
head waiter, and the fact that he was a gorilla tended to be obscured. The
figure of an elderly she-ape with an outrageously painted face was replaced
by that of an old coquette, and when I danced with Zira I forgot her
condition completely, and my arm merely encircled the waist of a dancer.
The chimpanzee orchestra was nothing more than an orchestra, and the
elegant apes exchanging witticisms all around me were simply men about
town.






I shall not dwell on the sensation caused by my presence among them. I was
the focus of all eyes. I had to give my autograph to a number of fans, and
the two gorillas whom Cornelius had had the prudence to bring along were
hard-pressed to protect me from the swarm of she-apes of every age who
competed for the honor of having a drink or dancing with me.
It was getting late and I was already fairly tipsy when the thought of
Professor Antelle crossed my mind. I felt steeped in black remorse. I was
not far from shedding a tear or two over my own infamy as I reflected that
here I was making merry and drinking with a lot of apes while my
companion was shivering on some straw in a cage.






  Zira asked me why I was looking so sad. I told her. Cornelius then
informed me that he had made inquiries about the professor and that he was
hi good health. There would be no opposition now to his being released. I
insisted that I could not wait a minute longer before bringing him this good
news.




"After all," Cornelius agreed, after thinking it over, "one can't refuse you
anything on a day like this. Let's go. I know the director of the zoo."




 The three of us left the nightclub and drove to the garden. On being
 waked up, the director bestirred himself. He knew all about me. Cornelius
 told him the true identity of one of the men he held locked up in a cage.
 He could hardly believe his ears, but he, too, was eager to do all he could
 for me. We should have to wait, of course, until the next day and go
 through various formalities before he could release the professor, but
 meanwhile there was nothing against our having a talk with him at once.
 He offered to accompany us.




Day was breaking when we reached the cage In which the luckless scientist
lived like an animal in the midst of fifty men and women. These were still
asleep, huddled together in couples or in groups of four or five. They
opened their eyes as soon as the director switched on the lights.
It did not take me long to find my companion. He was stretched out on the
ground like the others, huddled against the" body of a girl who looked quite
young. I shuddered to see him like this, and at the same time was moved by
the debasement to which I, too, had been reduced for four months.






 I was so upset that I could not speak. The men, who were now awake,
showed no sign of surprise. They were tame and well trained; they began
performing their usual tricks in the hope of some reward. The director
threw them some pieces of cake. Immediately scuffles and disputes broke
out, as they did during the day, while the quietest of them assumed their
favorite position, squatting by the bars and stretching out an imploring hand.




Professor Antelle followed their example. He came up as close as possible
to the director and begged for a titbit. This humiliating behavior gave me a
sickening feeling that soon became an unbearable anguish. He was three
paces away; he was looking at me and appeared not to recognize me. In
fact, his eyes, which had once been so keen, had lost all their gleam and
suggested the same spiritual void as those of the other captives. I was
horrified to see in them no more emotion than that aroused among the other
captives by the presence of a man in clothes.






  I made a great effort and managed at last to speak in order to put an end to
this nightmare.




"Professor," I said, "Master, it is I, Ulysse Merou. We are saved. I came
here to tell you . . ."






I stopped hi sheer amazement. At the sound of my voice he had reacted in
the same way as the men of the planet Soror. He had suddenly lowered his
head and shrunk away.
"Professor, Professor Antelle," I beseeched him, "it's I, Ulysse Merou, your
traveling companion. I am free, and in a few hours you will be too. These apes you see here are our friends. They know who we are
and welcome us like brothers."








   There was no response. He showed not the slightest sign of comprehension but, with another frightened gesture like that of a startled
beast, recoiled still further.








I was in despair, and the apes seemed extremely puzzled. Cornelius wrinkled his brow, as he did when he was trying to find the
solution to a problem. It crossed my mind that the professor, frightened by their presence, might well be pretending to be witless. I
asked them to move away and leave me alone with him, to which they readily agreed. When they had disappeared, I walked around
the cage to reach the corner in which the scientist had taken refuge and again I spoke to him:








   "Master," I implored him, "I understand your caution. I know the danger to which men from Earth are exposed on this planet.
But we are alone, I give you my word of honor, and our ordeals are over. You must believe me, your companion, your disciple, your
friend, Ulysse Merou."








    He shrank back still further, darting furtive glances in my direction. Then, while I stood there trembling, not knowing what else to
say, he half opened his mouth.








   Had I succeeded at last in convincing him? I watched him, hoping against hope. But I remained speechless with horror at the
manner in which he expressed his emotion. I said that he had half opened his mouth, but this was not the spontaneous gesture of a
creature preparing to speak. He emitted from it a gurgling sound similar to those uttered by the strange men on this planet to express
satisfaction or fear. There in front of me, without moving his lips, while my heart went numb with horror, Professor Antelle gave
vent to a long-drawn-out howl.








part three
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
I woke early after a restless night. I turned over three or four times in my bed and rubbed my eyes before fully recovering
consciousness, still unaccustomed to the civilized I life I had been leading for a month, feeling anxious every morning at not hearing
the straw creak and not feeling Nova's warmth against me.








     I eventually came to my senses. I was living in one of the most comfortable apartments in the institute. The apes had proved
  extremely generous. I had a bedroom, a bathroom, clothes, books, a television set. I read all the papers, I was free, I could go out, walk
  about the streets, attend any entertainment. My presence in a public place still provoked considerable interest, but the emotion of the
  first few days had started to die down.








     Cornelius was now the scientific head of the institute. Zaius had been dismissed—he had been given another post, however, and a new
  decoration—and Zira's fianc6 installed in his place. This had resulted in a reorganization of the personnel, a general promotion of
  the chimpanzee element, and renewed activity in every department Zira had become the new director's assistant.




     As for me, I took part in the scientist's research work, no longer as a guinea pig but as a collaborator. However, it was only
  with great difficulty and after much hesitation on the part of the Grand Council that Cornelius had been granted this favor. The
  authorities still appeared reluctant to admit my nature and origin.


   I dressed quickly, left my room, and walked over to the wing of the institute where I had once been a prisoner: the department
 under Zira, who was still directing it in addition to her new duties. With Cornelius' permission ; I had embarked there on a systematic
 study of the men.




     Here I am in the room with the cages, walking along the corridor in front of the bars like one of the masters of this planet.
  Shall I admit that I come here frequently, more frequently than my duties demand? There are times when I feel burdened by
  constantly simian surroundings, and here I find a sort of refuge.




     The captives are well acquainted with me now and recognize my authority. Do they see any difference between me, Zira, and the
  warders who bring them their food? I should like to think so, but I doubt it. For the last month, despite my patience and efforts, I,
  too, have been unsuccessful in making them achieve any higher level of performance than that of well-trained animals. A secret
  intuition tells me, however, that their potentialities are enormous.




     I should like to teach them to talk. This is my great ambition. I have not succeeded, I admit. It is only with the utmost
  difficulty that some of them manage to repeat a monosyllabic sound or two, which certain chimpanzees on Earth can do. It is
  not much, but I am persevering. What encourages me is the new persistence with which their eyes try to meet mine, eyes which
  for some time have seemed to be gradually changing in expression. I fancy I can see in them a spark of curiosity, associated with a
  superior mentality, breaking through the animal mindlessness.
   I move slowly around the room, stopping in front of each of the captives. I speak to them; I speak to them gently, patiently. They
are now accustomed to this unusual behavior on my part. They seem to listen. I go on for several minutes, then stop speaking in whole
sentences and pronounce a few simple words, repeating them over and over again, hoping for an echo. One of them clumsily
articulates a syllable, but this is as far as he will go today. The subject soon gets tired, abandons the superhuman task, and lies
down on the floor as though after some exhausting effort. I sigh and pass on to the next one. I finally come to the cage in which
Nova is at present vegetating in solitary sadness. Sadness—this at least is what I, with my Earthman's conceit, wish to believe, and I
struggle to detect this emotion on her beautiful but inexpressive features. Zira has not given her another mate, and I am grateful for that








I often think of Nova. I cannot forget the hours I spent in her company. But I have never again entered her cage; human self-respect
forbids me. Is she not an animal? I now live in the highest scientific circles; how could I let myself indulge hi such a relationship? I
blush at the thought of our former intimacy. Since I have changed camps I have even forbidden myself to show her more affection than
I show to her fellows.








    Nevertheless I cannot help noting that she is an exceptional subject and I am glad of that. With her I obtain better results than with
the others. She presses up against the bars as soon as she sees me, and her mouth twists into a grimace that could almost pass as a
smile. Even before I have opened my mouth she tries to pronounce the three or four syllables she has learned. Her diligence is
evident. Is she naturally more gifted than the others? Or has contact with me polished her and given her a capacity to benefit more
from my lessons? I like to think, with a certain complacency, that this is the case.








    I say her name, then my own, pointing my finger alternately at her and myself. She imitates the gesture. But I see her expression
change suddenly and she bares her teeth as I hear a gentle chuckle behind me.








  It is Zira, who laughs not unkindly at my efforts; her presence always rouses the girl to anger. Zira is accompanied by Cornelius, who
is interested in my efforts and often comes to see the results for himself. Today he has come to see me for another reason. He looks rather
excited.








"Would you like to go on a little trip with me, Ulysse?"
"A trip?"








"Quite a long one; almost to the antipodes. Some archeolo-gists have discovered some extremely curious ruins out there, if the reports
reaching us are to be believed. An orangutan is directing the excavations and he can scarcely be relied upon to interpret the vestiges
correctly. There's something strange about them that fascinates me and that may afford decisive material for my research. The Academy is
sending me out there on an official mission and I think your presence would be most useful."








   I do not see how I can help him, but I welcome this opportunity to see further aspects of Soror. He takes me to his office to give me
more details.




  I am delighted by this diversion, which is an excuse for not completing my rounds; for there is one more prisoner for me to see—
Professor Antelle. He is still in the same state, which makes his release impossible. Thanks to me, however, he is now on his own,
isolated in a fairly comfortable cell. It is a painful duty for me to visit him. He replies to none of my earnest requests and still behaves like
a perfect animal.








CHAPTER T W E N T Y - E I G H T




We set off a week later. Zira came with us, but she was to return after a few days to look after the institute in Cornelius' absence.
The latter intended staying much longer on the site of the excavations, if these proved to be as interesting as he expected.








  A special plane had been put at our disposal, a jet machine rather like our first models of this type of aircraft, but very comfortable and
equipped with a small soundproof compartment in which we could talk easily. It was here we were sitting, Zira and I, shortly after
our departure. I was looking forward to the journey. By now I was completely accustomed to the simian world. I had been neither
surprised nor frightened at seeing this big aircraft being piloted by an ape. My only thought was to enjoy the view and the spectacular
                     to a height of about thirty thousand feet. The air was
sight of Betelgeuse rising. We had climbed
remarkably pure, and the giant star could be seen on the horizon like our
own sun observed through a telescope. Zira was enchanted by it.


 "Are there such beautiful dawns as this on Earth?" she asked. "Is your sun
as lovely as ours?"
  I told her it was neither as big nor as red, but it sufficed us. On the other
hand, our nocturnal heavenly body was bigger and shed a more intense pale
light than Soror's. We felt as happy as school children on a holiday, and I
laughed and joked with her as with a very close friend. When Cornelius
came and joined us after a moment I almost resented his intrusion on our
tete-a-tete. He was pensive. For some time, moreover, he had seemed rather
nervous. He worked prodigiously on his own research, which absorbed him
to the point of occasionally causing him to be totally absent-minded. He
still kept the subject of this research a secret, and I believe Zira knew as
little about it as I diS. I only knew it concerned the origin of ape and that
the learned chimpanzee tended more and more to reject the classical
theories. This morning, for the first time, he revealed certain aspects of it to
me, and it did not take me long to understand why my existence as a
civilized man was so important to him. He began by reverting to a subject
we had discussed together a thousand times.


 "You did say, didn't you, Ulysse, that on your Earth the apes are utter
animals? That man has risen to a degree of civilization equal to our own and
which, in certain respects, even . . . ? Don't be frightened of making me
angry; the scientific spirit ignores all self-esteem."


  "Which, in many respects, even surpasses it—yes, that's undeniable. One
of the best proofs is that I am here. It seems to me you have only reached
the stage . . ."




  "I know, I know," he broke in wearily. "We've discussed all that. We are
now penetrating the secrets you discovered centuries ago. . . . And it's not
only your statements that disturb me," he went on, nervously pacing up and
down the little cabin. "For some time I've been harassed by a feeling—a
feeling supported by certain concrete indications— that the key to these
secrets, even here on our planet, has been held by other brains in the distant
past."


 I might have replied that this impression of rediscovery had also affected
certain minds on Earth. Perhaps it even prevailed universally and possibly
served as the basis for our belief in God. But I was careful not to interrupt
him.






He was following a train of thought that was still confused, which he
expressed in an extremely reticent manner.
 "Other brains," he repeated pensively, "that maybe were not ..."


 He broke off abruptly. He looked miserable, as though tortured by the
perception of a truth his mind was unwilling to admit.


 "You did say, didn't you, that your apes possess a highly developed sense
of mimicry?"




"They mimic us in everything we do, I mean in every act that does not
demand a rational process of thought. So much so that with us the verb ape
is synonymous with imitate."






 "Zira," Cornelius murmured, as though depressed, "is it not this sense of
aping that characterizes us as well?"
 Without giving Zira time to protest, he went on excitedly, "It begins in
childhood. All our education is based on imitation."




 "It's the orangutans . . ."






  "That's it. They are of tremendous importance, since it is they who mold
our youth through their" books. They force every young monkey to repeat
all the errors of his ancestors. That explains the slowness of our progress. For
the last two thousand years we have remained similar to ourselves."
  This slow development among the apes deserves a few comments. I had
been struck by it while reading their history, noticing in it some important
differences from the soaring flight of the human mind. True, we also have
known a period of semi-stagnation. We, too, have had our orangutans, our
falsified education and ridiculous curricula, and this period lasted a long
time.






  Not so long, however, as in the apes' case, and above all not at the same
stage of evolution. The dark ages that the chimpanzee deplored had lasted
about ten thousand years. During this period no notable progress had been
achieved except, perhaps, during the last half century. But what I found
extremely curious was that their earliest legends, their earliest chronicles,
then- earliest memories bore witness to a civilization that was already well
advanced and in fact was more or less similar to that of the present day.
These documents, ten thousand years old, afforded proof of general skills
and achievements comparable to the skills and achievements of today; and,
before them, there was a total blank: no tradition either oral or written, not a
single clue. In essence, it seemed as though the simian civili
zation had made a miraculous appearance out of the bhu, ten thousand years
before and had since been preserved more or less without modification. The
ordinary ape had grown accustomed to finding this quite natural, never
imagining a different state of mental development, but a perceptive brain like
Cornelius' sensed an enigma there and was tormented by it.


"There are apes capable of original creation," Zira protested.






"Certainly," Cornelius agreed. "That's true, especially in recent years. In the long
run, mind is able to embody itself hi gesture. It has to, in fact; that's the
natural course of evolution. . . . But what I'm passionately seeking, Zira, what
I'm trying to find out, is how it all began. . . . At present it strikes me as not
impossible that it was through simple imitation at the beginning of our era."






  "Imitation of what, of whom?"






  He had reverted to his reticent manner and lowered his eyes as though
regretting he had said too much.
  "I can't answer that question yet," he finally said. "I need certain evidence.
Perhaps we shall find it in the ruins of the buried city. According to the
reports, it existed much earlier than ten thousand years ago, in a period about
which we know nothing."




CHAPTER T W E N T Y - N I N E
Cornelius has not told me anything more and I feel he is reluctant to do so,
but what I already detect in his theories gives me a strange elation.




  The archeologists have laid bare a whole city, buried in the sands of a
desert, a city of which nothing remains, alas, but ruins. But these ruins, I am
convinced, hold an extraordinary secret that I have vowed to solve. This
should be possible for anyone who can observe and deduce, which the
orangutan who is directing the excavations s'eems hardly capable of doing. He
welcomed Cornelius with the respect due his senior position but with barely
concealed contempt for his youth and the original ideas he sometimes expressed.






Digging among stones that crumble at every move and in sand that sinks
under every step is no easy job. It is now a month since we have been at it.
Zira left us some tune ago, but Cornelius insists on prolonging his stay. He is as
enthusiastic as I am and convinced that only here, among these relics of the
past, is to be found the solution to the great problems tormenting him.


  The extent of his knowledge is really remarkable. First of all, he insisted
on verifying personally the antiquity of the city. For this the apes have a
process similar to our own, involving deep-rooted principles of chemistry,
physics, and geology. On this point the chimpanzee is in agreement with
the official scientists: the city is very, very old indeed. It is much more than
ten thousand years old, and therefore constitutes a unique record, tending
to show that simian civilization did not burst forth miraculously out of the
void.




 Something existed before this present era. But what? After this month of
feverish investigation we are disappointed, for it seems that this prehistoric
city was not very different from those of the present day. We have
discovered remnants of houses, traces of factories, vestiges showing that
these forebears had motor cars and airplanes, just as apes of today do.
These remains indicate that the origins of mind can be traced far back into
the past. This is less than Cornelius was expecting, I feel; it is less than I
was hoping for.




This morning Cornelius has gone ahead of me to the spot where the
workmen have laid bare a house with thick walls made of a sort of
reinforced concrete, which seems better preserved than the rest. The inside
is filled with sand and debris that they have undertaken to sift. Until
yesterday they had found nothing more than in the other sections: fragments
of piping, household appliances, kitchen equipment. I am still idling outside
the tent that I share with the scientist. From here I can see the orangutan
giving his orders to the foreman, a chimpanzee with a crafty look in his eye.
I cannot see Cornelius. He is hi the trench with the workmen. He often
takes a hand in the digging, for fear they might do something stupid and
thereby lose an interesting item.






 Here he is emerging from the hole, and it does not take me long to realize
 he has made an exceptional discovery. He is holding in his hand a small
 object that I cannot make out. He thrusts aside the old orangutan who tries
 to take it from him and puts it down on the ground with infinite care. He
 looks in my direction and beckons me over. As I approach I am struck by
 the change in his expression. "Ulysse. Ulysse!"




  Never have I seen him in such a state. He can barely talk. The workmen,
 who have also climbed out of the trench, gather around the find and
 prevent me from seeing it. They point it out to one another but they seem
 merely amused. Some of them laugh out loud. They are almost all hefty gorillas. Cornelius tells them to keep their
 distance.








"Ulysse!"
   "Whatever is it?"








  I see the object lying in the sand at the same moment that he mutters in a strangled voice:








   "A doll, Ulysse, a doll!"








  It is a doll, an ordinary china doll. By a miracle it has been preserved almost intact, with vestiges of hair and eyes that still reveal
a few chips of color. It is such a familiar sight to me that at first I cannot understand Cornelius' emotion. It takes me several
seconds to realize . . . then I've got it! Its strangeness dawns on me and immediately I am overwhelmed. It is a human doll
representing a little girl, a little girl like one on Earth. But I refuse to let myself be taken in. Before proclaiming a miracle, every
possibility of a more commonplace cause must be examined. A scientist like Cornelius must have done so already. Let us seer
The- dolls of child apes do include a few—a very few, but nevertheless a few—that have an animal or even human form. So it
cannot be the mere presence of this one that moves my chimpanzee so deeply. . . . Let us go a step further: The toys of child apes
representing animals are not made of china; and above all they are not usually clothed; in any case, not clothed like rational
creatures. And this doll, I tell you, is clothed like a doll at home—the remnants of a frock, a blouse, a skirt and knickers can still
be clearly seen—dressed with the taste that a little girl on Earth might show in adorning her favorite doll, with the care that a little
she-ape on Soror would take to clothe her ape doll, a care that she would never, never show to dress up an animal figure like the
human figure. I realize, I realize more and more clearly, the reason for my clever chimpanzee's emotion.








   And this is not all. The toy presents another anomaly, another oddity that makes all the workmen laugh and even provokes a
smile from the solemn orangutan directing the excavations. The doll talks. It talks like a doll at home. In putting it down,
Cornelius happened to press the mechanism, which has been preserved intact, and it talked. Oh, it was not much of a speech! It
uttered one word, one simple word of two syllables: pa-pa. "Papa," the doll repeats as Cornelius picks it up again and turns it
round and round hi his nimble hands. The word is the same in French and in the simian language, and no doubt in many other
languages of this mysterious cosmos, and it has the same meaning.








"Papa," the little human doll repeats, and this, above all, is what makes my learned companion's muzzle turn red; this is what
affects me s'o deeply that I have to make an effort not to cry aloud as he leads me aside, bringing his precious discovery with him.
"The monstrous imbecile!" he mutters after a long silence.








  I know whom he means and I share his indignation. The old orangutan with all his decorations has seen nothing more in it than
a simple child ape's toy that an eccentric manufacturer living in the distant past has endowed with speech. It is useless to suggest
another explanation to him. Cornelius does not even try to do so. The one that comes naturally 'to his mind, however, seems so
disturbing that he keeps it to himself. He does not breathe a word of it even to me, but he knows that I have guessed it.




  He remains wrapped in thought and silent for the rest of the day. I have the impression he is now frightened of pursuing his
research and is regretting his semi-revelations. Now that his excitement has subsided, he is sorry I have witnessed his discovery.




  On the very next day I am given proof that he regrets having brought me here with him. After a night's reflection he informs
me, avoiding my eyes, that he has decided to send me back to the institute, where I shall be able to continue with more important
work than in these ruins. My seat on the aircraft is booked. I shall be leaving in twenty-four hours.








CHAPTER THIRTY




Suppose, I argue, that men once reigned as masters on this planet. Suppose that a human civilization similar to ours flourished on Soror
more than ten thousand years ago.




  This is no longer a senseless hypothesis—quite the contrary. No sooner do I formulate it than I feel the excitement produced by
picking up the right scent among so many false ones. It is on this track, I know, that the solution to the irritating simian mystery is
to be found, I realize my subconscious has always been dreaming of some explanation of this sort.




   I am in the aircraft taking me back to the capital, accompanied by Cornelius' secretary, a rather talkative chimpanzee. I don't
feel like chatting with him. I always tend to meditate when I'm hi an airplane. I shall find no better opportunity than this voyage to
put my thoughts in order.








  Suppose, then, the existence in the distant past of a civilization on the
planet Soror similar to our own. Is it possible that creatures devoid of
intelligence could have perpetuated it by a simple process of imitation? The
answer to this question seems risky, but after thinking it over, a host of
arguments occur to me that gradually lessen its aspect of unreasonableness.
That perfected machines may one day succeed us is, I remember, an
extremely commonplace notion on Earth. It prevails not only among poets
and romantics but in all classes of society. Perhaps it is because it is so
widespread, born spontaneously in popular imagination, that it irritates
scientific minds. Perhaps it is also for this very reason that it contains a
germ of truth. Only a germ: Machines will always be machines; the most
perfected robot, always a robot. But what of living creatures possessing a
certain degree of intelligence, like apes? And apes, precisely, are endowed
with a keen sense of imitation. . . .






  I close my eyes. I let myself be lulled by the drone of the engines. I feel
the need to commune with myself in order to justify my position.






What is it that characterizes a civilization? Is it the exceptional genius? No,
it is everyday life. . . . Hmm! Let us give intelligence its due. Let us
concede that it is principally the arts, and first and foremost, literature. Is the
latter really beyond the reach of our higher apes, if it is admitted-that they
are capable of stringing words together? Of what is our literature made?
Masterpieces? Again, no. But once an original book has been written—and
no more than one or two appear in a century—men of letters imitate it, in
other words, they copy it so that hundreds of thousands of books are
published on exactly the same theme, with slightly different titles and
modified phraseology. This should be able to be achieved by apes, who are
essentially imitators, provided, of course, that they are able to make use of
language.






In fact, language represents the only valid objection. But wait a moment! It is
not essential that apes should understand what they are copying hi order to
produce a hundred thousand volumes from a single original. It is clearly no
more necessary for them than it is for us. Like us, they merely need to be
able to repeat sentences after having heard them. All the rest of the literary
process is purely mechanical. It is at this point that the opinion of certain
learned biologists assumes its full value: There is nothing in the anatomy of
the ape, they maintain, that precludes the use of speech—nothing, that is,
except the necessary urge. It is not difficult to conceive that this urge
came to him one day as a result of some sudden mutation.






  The perpetuation of a literature like ours by talking apes does not,
therefore, conflict with common sense in any way. Subsequently, perhaps,
some apes of letters raised themselves a step or two higher on the
intellectual ladder. As my learned friend Cornelius said, mind embodies
itself in gesture—in this case, in the mechanism of speech—and a few
original ideas were able to appear in the new simian world at the rate of one
every century—as in our own case.


Cheerfully pursuing this train of thought, I soon succeeded in convincing
myself that well-trained animals might well have been able to produce the
paintings and sculptures I had admired in the museums of the capital and, in
general, become expert in all the human arts, including the art of
cinematography.




  Having first considered the highest manifestations of intelligence, it was
only too easy to extend my thesis to other areas. That of industry quickly
succumbed to my analysis. It seemed absolutely clear that industry did not
require the presence of a rational being to maintain itself. Basically,
industry consisted of manual laborers, always performing the selfsame
tasks, who could easily be replaced by apes; and, at a higher level, of
executives whose function was to draft certain reports and pronounce
certain words under given circumstances. All this was a question of
conditioned reflexes. At the still higher level of administration, it seemed
even easier to concede the quality of aping. To continue our system, the
gorillas would merely have to imitate certain attitudes and deliver a few
harangues, all based on the same model.


 I thus came to view the most diverse activities of our Earth with a new
eye and to imagine them performed by apes. I indulged with a certain
satisfaction in this game, which demanded no intellectual effort. I called to
mind a number of political meetings I had attended as a journalist. I
remembered the stock remarks made by the personalities I had had to
interview. I recalled with particular intensity a celebrated trial I had followed
several years before.




 The defense counsel was one of the masters of his profession. Why did he
appear to me now in the guise of a proud gorilla, as did also the advocate
general, another celebrity? Why did I compare then- gestures and actions to
conditioned reflexes resulting from intensive training? Why did the president
of the tribunal remind me of a solemn orangutan reciting sentences learned
by heart, the utterance of which was automatic and likewise inspired by
some statement from a witness or some murmur in the crowd?






  I thus spent the last part of the journey obsessed by comparisons that
seemed to me significant. When I came to the world of finance and
business, my final mental picture was a thoroughly simian vision, a recent
recollection of the planet Soror. It was during a visit to the stock exchange,
where my friend Cornelius had insisted on bringing me, for it was one of
the curiosities of the capital. This is what I saw—a picture I recalled with
extraordinary vividness during the last minutes of my flight.






The stock exchange was a large building, outwardly imbued with a strange
atmosphere created by a vague buzz of voices that grew progressively
louder as one approached, until it was a deafening roar. We went inside and
were forthwith caught up in the turmoil. I wedged myself against a pillar. I
was accustomed to individual apes but was always somewhat stupefied
when surrounded by a compact mob, as now. I found the sight even more
incongruous than that of the learned assembly during the famous congress.
Imagine a hall of vast proportions crammed full of apes, screaming,
gesticulating, and running hither and thither in a completely disorganized
manner, apes in hysteria, apes who not only rushed about and bumped into
one another on the floor but who formed a swarming mass right up to the
ceiling, which was at a giddy height from the ground. The place was
equipped with ladders, trapezes, and ropes that they used constantly hi order
to move from one spot to another. They thus filled the entire volume of the
building, which assumed the aspect of a cage specially designed for a
grotesque exhibition of four-handed creatures.






The apes literally flew to and fro across this space, always catching hold of
some piece of equipment just when I thought they were about to fall; all this
in a hubbub of infernal exclamations, shouts, cries, and even sounds that
recalled no civilized language. There were monkeys there who were
barking—yes, barking for no apparent reason— swinging themselves from
one end of the room to the other on long ropes.






"Have you ever seen anything like it?" my friend Cornelius asked me
proudly.






  I readily admitted I had not. It needed all my previous acquaintance with
the apes to convince me that these were rational creatures. No one in his
right mind who watched this circus could escape the conclusion that he was
witnessing the frolics of madmen or animals gone wild. Not a glimmer of
intelligence could be seen in their eyes, and they ali looked alike. I could
not tell one from another. All of them were dressed in the same way and
wore the same mask, which was the mask of madness.




  The most disturbing part of my present image was that contrary to the
phenomenon that shortly before had made me assign the form of gorillas or
orangutans to the figure? in the earthly scene, I now saw the members of this
insane-crowd in the guise of human beings. It was men I thus saw shrieking,
barking, and swinging about on ropes to reach their destination as fast as
possible. In excitement I recalled other aspects of this scene. I remembered
tha* after looking on for some time, I had begun to notice certain details
suggesting vaguely that this hubbub did nevertheless form part of a civilized
system. An articulate word could occasionally be heard above the bestial
shrieks. Perched on a scaffolding at a giddy height above us, a gorilla,
without interrupting the hysterical gestures of his hands, would pick up a
piece of chalk in his foot and write some probably significant figure on a
blackboard. To this gorilla, too, I assigned human features.






I managed to rid myself of this hallucination only by coming back to my
rough outline of a theory on the origins of the simian civilization, and in this
remembrance of the world of finance I found fresh arguments to support it.






The aircraft touched down. I was back in the capital. Zira had come to meet
me at the airport. From far off I saw her scarf pulled down over her ears,
and the sight of it filled me with joy. When I eventually joined her after the
customs formalities I had to restrain myself from flinging my arms around her.






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - O N E


I spent the month following my return in bed, suffering from an infection I
had probably picked up on the site and which assumed the form of violent
bouts of fever similar to malaria. I was not in pain, but my brain was on fire
and I could not stop mulling over the elements of the fearful truth I had
glimpsed. There was no longer any doubt in my mind that a human era had
preceded the simian age on the planet Soror, and this conviction gave me a
sort of intoxication.




On second thought, however, I am not sure if I ought to feel proud of this
discovery or profoundly humiliated by it. My self-respect notes with
satisfaction that apes have invented nothing, that they are mere imitators.
My humiliation derives from the fact that a human civilization could have
been so easily assimilated by apes.
How could this have happened? In my delirium I could not keep my mind
off the problem. True, we have long known that our civilizations are mortal,
but such a complete disappearance makes the senses reel. A sudden
disaster? A cataclysm? Or else the slow decline of the one and the
progressive ascent of the other? I am inclined to the latter hypothesis, and I
find extremely significant indications of this evolution in the apes' present-
day condition and preoccupations.




  The importance they attach to biological research, for instance—well, I
am fully aware of its origin. In the old days many apes must have served as
experimental subjects for men, as is the case in our own laboratories. These
were the ones who first hoisted the flag, who were the pioneers of the
revolution. They would naturally have begun by imitating the gestures and
attitudes observed in their masters, and these masters were researchers,
learned biologists, doctors, nurses, and warders. Hence this unusual imprint
on most of their enterprises, which still persists today.


  And what about the men all this time? Enough speculation about apes!


  It is now two months since I visited my former companions in captivity,
my fellow humans. Today I feel better. I have no more fever. Yesterday I
told Zira--»-Zira has looked after me like a sister during my illness—I told
her that I was planning to resume my work in her department. She did not
seem very pleased but she raised no objection. It is time for me to pay my
visit.


  Here I am again in the room with the cages. A strange emotion makes me
pause on the threshold. I now see these creatures in a new fight. It is with
anguish that I wonder, before making up my mind to enter, if they will
recognize me after my long absence. Well, they do recognize me. All their
eyes are fixed on me, as they always used to be, and even with a sort of
deference. Am I dreaming or do I really discern a new look in them, a look
reserved for me and different from the glances they bestow on their ape
warders? A gleam impossible to describe, but in which I fancy I see an
awakened curiosity, an unusual emotion, shades of ancestral memories
trying to emerge from bestiality, and perhaps . . . an uncertain glimmer of
hope.


  This hope, I believe, I have myself unconsciously nourished for some
time. Is it not the reason why I am overwhelmed by this feverish
excitement? Is it not I, I, Ulysse Merou, the man whom destiny has brought
to this planet to be the instrument of human regeneration?


  Here, distinctly stated at last, is the hazy notion that has been haunting me
for a month. The good Lord does not shoot dice, as a certain physicist once
said. Nothing happens by mere chance in the cosmos. My voyage to the
world of Betelgeuse was decreed by a superior consciousness. It is up to me
to show myself worthy of the choice and to be the new savior of this human
race in decline.


 As before, I go slowly around the cages. I force myself not to rush over to
Nova's cage at once. Is the envoy of destiny entitled to favorites? I speak to
each of my subjects. The moment has not yet come for them to talk. I do
not mind. I have my entire lifetime in which to accomplish my mission.


  I now approach my former cage with studied negligence. I look out of the
corner of my eye, but I do not see Nova's arms stretched through the bars, I
do not hear the cries of joy with which she always used to greet me. A
strange misgiving assails me. I cannot restrain myself. I dash forward. The
cage is empty.




I summon one of the warders in an authoritative voice that makes the
captives shiver. Zanam is the one who appears. He does not like receiving
orders from me, but Zira has instructed him to put himself at my disposal.






"Where is Nova?"
  He replies in a surly manner that he does not know. She was taken away
one day without any reason being given. I repeat my question but in vain.
At this moment, luckily, Zira turns up to carry out her tour of inspection.
She sees me in front of the empty cage and realizes why I am so upset. She
looks flustered and at once starts talking about something else.


  "Cornelius has just come back. He wants to see you."


  At the moment I don't give a damn about Cornelius or the chimpanzees or
the gorillas or any other creature hi heaven or in hell. I point at the cell with
my ringer.




  "Where's Nova?"






  "She's ill," says'Zira. "She's been transferred to a special wing."


  She beckons to me and leads me aside, out of earshot of the warder.






"The administrator made me promise to keep it secret. But I feel you ought to
know."






"She's ill?" ,






"Nothing serious; but it's important enough to put the authorities on their toes.
Nova is expecting."






"She's ..."
"I mean she's pregnant," the she-ape announces, observing me with a curious
expression.






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - T W O


I am stupefied without yet fully realizing what this news implies. At first I
am assailed by a mass of trivial details and above all tormented by the
disquieting question: why was I not notified of this? Zira does not give me
time to protest.


  "I noticed two months ago, on my return from the trip. The gorillas had
not seen a thing. I phoned Cornelius, who had a long conversation with the
administrator. They agreed that it would be better to keep it secret. No one
knows about it except them and me. She's in an isolated cage and I'm looking
after her personally."




I regard this concealment as an act of treachery on Cornelius' part and I can
see that Zira is embarrassed. It looks to me as though some plot is being
hatched in the background.


, "Don't worry. She is being well treated and there's nothing she needs. I'm
doing everything I can for her. No pregnancy of a female human has ever been
so carefully watched over."




  Under her mocking gaze I lower my eyes like a schoolboy guilty of some
misdemeanor. She makes an effort to assume an ironical tone, but I can see
she is perturbed. True, I realize my physical intimacy with Nova has vexed
her ever since she recognized my true nature, but there is more than
vexation in her expression. It is her affection for me that makes her anxious.
These mysteries concerning Nova presage nothing good. I imagine she has
not told me the whole truth: that the Grand Council is well aware of the
situation and there have been discussions at a very high level. –
"When is her confinement due?"






  "In three or four months."






  The tragi-comic side of the situation overwhelms me suddenly. I am about
to become a father in the system of Betelgeuse. I am going to have a child on
the planet Soror by a woman for whom I feel a great physical attraction and
sometimes even compassion but who has the mind of an animal. No other
being in the cosmos has found himself involved in such an adventure. I feel
like weeping and laughing at the same time.




 "Zira, I want to see her!"






 She gives a little pout of annoyance.






 "I knew you would ask me that. I've already discussed it with Cornelius
and I think he will agree to it. He's waiting for you in his office."






 "Cornelius is a traitor!"






 "You've no right to say that. He is divided between his passion for science
and his duty as an ape. It is only natural that he should feel extremely
apprehensive at this impending birth."
My anguish increases as I follow her down the corridors of the institute. I
can imagine the attitude of the learned apes and their fear of seeing a new
race arise that— Good heavens! I now see exactly how the mission with
which I have been entrusted can be accomplished.






 Cornelius greets me in a friendly manner, but a permanent awkwardness
has been created between us. At times he looks at me as though in terror. I
make an effort not to broach the subject on my mind at once. I ask him
about the voyage and the end of his stay among the ruins.




"Fascinating. I have a mass of irrefutable proof."






  His clever little eyes are sparkling. He cannot prevent himself from
exulting over his success. Zira is right; he is torn between his love of
science and his duty as an ape. At the moment it is the scientist speaking,
the enthusiastic scientist for whom only the triumph of his theories counts.


 "Skeletons," he says. "Not one, but a whole collection, discovered in such
order and circumstances as to make it incontestably clear that we had come
upon a graveyard. Enough evidence to convince the most obtuse mind. Our
orangutans, of course, insist on regarding it as a mere coincidence."


 "What about these skeletons?"




"They are not simian."






 "I see."
We look each other straight in the eye. With his enthusiasm somewhat
diminished, he slowly continues, "I can't hide it from you; you've already
guessed. They are the skeletons of men."


 Zira is certainly in the know, for she shows no surprise. Both of them
again observe me closely. Cornelius finally makes up his mind to discuss the
matter frankly.


   "I am now certain," he admits, "that there once existed on our planet a
 race of human beings endowed with a mind comparable to yours and to
 that of the men who populate your Earth, a race that has degenerated and
 reverted to an animal state. . . . Furthermore, since my return here I have
 been given additional evidence to support this hypothesis."




  "Additional evidence?"






  "Yes. It was discovered by the director of the encephalic section, a young
chimpanzee with a great future. He may even be a genius. . . . You would
be wrong to think," he continued with heavy sarcasm, "that apes have
always been imitators. We have made some remarkable innovations in
certain branches of science, especially hi connection with these
experiments on the brain. I'll show you the results some day, if I can. I'm
sure you'll be amazed by them."


  He seems anxious to convince himself and expresses himself with
unusual aggressiveness. I have never attacked him on this point. He was
the one who first mentioned the lack of creative faculty in apes, two
months ago. In a boastful tone he continues:


  "Believe me, the day will come when we shall surpass men in every
field. It is not just by accident, as you might imagine, that we have
managed to succeed them. This result was foreordained in the normal
course of evolution. Rational man having had his day, a superior being was
bound to succeed him, preserve the essential results of his conquests, and
assimilate them during a period of apparent stagnation before soaring up to
even greater heights."


  This is a new way of visualizing the outcome. I might well retort that
many men on Earth have had the presentiment of a superior being who
may one day succeed them but that no scientist, philosopher, or poet has
ever imagined this superhuman in the guise of an ape. But I do not feel
inclined to pursue the point. The essential, after all, is that the mind should
embody itself in some organism. The form of the latter is of little
importance. I have many other more pressing subjects. I bring the
conversation around to Nova and her condition. He makes no comment
and tries to console me.


"Don't worry. It will be all right, I hope. It will probably be a child like any
other human child on Soror." "I certainly hope not. I'm convinced it will
talk!" I cannot help protesting indignantly. Zira gives a frown to make me
keep quiet






"Don't be too hopeful," Cornelius solemnly says, "for her sake and for your
own."






  He adds in a friendlier tone, "If he talked, I don't know if I should be able
to go on protecting you as I do. Don't you realize that the Grand Council is
on tenterhooks and that I've been given the strictest orders to keep this birth
a secret? If the authorities discovered you knew all about it, I should be
dismissed, so would Zira, and you'd find yourself alone among . . ."






"Among enemies?"
  He turns his head away. That is exactly what I thought: I am regarded as a
danger to the simian race. Nevertheless, I am happy to feel I have an ally in
Cornelius, if not a friend. Zira must have pleaded my cause more fervently
than she gave me to understand, and he will do nothing that might
displease her. He gives me permission to go and see Nova—in secret, of
course.




Zira leads me to an isolated little building to which she alone holds the key.
The room into which she shows me is not very big. It "contains only three
cages, two of which are empty. Nova occupies the third. She has heard us
coming and her instinct has warned her of my presence, for she has risen to
her feet and stretched out her arms even before seeing me. I clasp her hands
and rub my face against hers. Zira gives a contemptuous shrug, but she hands
me the key of the cage and goes to keep watch outside in the corridor. What
a good soul this she-ape is! What woman would have been capable of such
tact? She knows we must have a lot of things to say to each other and
therefore leaves us to ourselves.






A lot of things to say? Alas! I have again forgotten Nova's miserable
condition. I rush into the cage and fling my arms around her. I speak to her
as though she is able to understand—as I might speak to Zira, for instance.


Does she not understand? Does she not have at least a vague intuition of the
mission for which both of us are responsible from now on, she as well as I?






  I lie down on the straw by her side. I stroke the incipient fruit of our
outlandish passion. It seems to me nonetheless that her present condition
has given her a personality and dignity she did not have before. She
trembles as I pass my fingers over her stomach. Her eyes have certainly
acquired a new intensity. Suddenly, with a great effort, she stammers out
the syllables of my name, which I have taught her to articulate. She has-not
forgotten her lessons. I am overwhelmed with joy. But her eye dulls again
and she turns aside to devour the fruit I have brought her.
  Zira comes back; it is time to say good-by. I leave with her. Sensing my
feeling of loss, she accompanies me back to my apartment where I burst into
tears like a child.






"Oh Zira, Zira!"






 While she cradles me in her arms like a mother, I begin to speak to her, to
speak to her with affection, without stopping, relieving myself at last of the
surfeit of emotions and thoughts that Nova is unable to appreciate.




C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - T H R E E


Admirable she-ape! Thanks to her, I was able to see Nova fairly often during
this period, without the authorities knowing. I spent hours on the lookout for
the intermittent gleam in her eye, and the weeks went by in impatient
expectancy of the birth.


  One day Cornelius decided to take me to the encephalic section, the
wonders of which he had described to me. He introduced me to the head of
the department, the young chimpanzee called Helius, whose genius he had
praised to the skies, and apologized for not being able to show me around
himself because of some urgent work.


 "I'll come back in an hour's time to show you the pearl of these experiments
myself," he said, "the one that affords the evidence I told you about.
Meanwhile I'm sure you'll be interested in the classic cases."




Helius showed me into a room similar to those in the institute, equipped
with two rows of cages. On entering, I was struck by a pharmaceutical smell
reminiscent of chloroform. It was indeed an anesthetic. All the surgical
operations, my guide informed me, were now performed on subjects who
had been put to sleep. He stressed this point, as though to show the high
degree attained by simian civilization, which was at pains to suppress all useless
suffering, even in men. I could thus be reassured.






  I was only half reassured. I was still less so when he ended by mentioning
an exception to this rule: the very experiments, in fact, whose aim is to
make a study of pain and localize the nerve centers from which it derives. But
I was not to see any of these today.




  This was not calculated to appease my human sensibility. I remembered that
Zira had tried to dissuade me from visiting this section, where she herself
came only when she had to. I felt like turning around and retracing my steps;
but Helius did not give me time to do so.






"If you would like to attend an operation, you will see for yourself -that the
patient suffers no pain at all. No? Well, let's go and see the results then.


  Passing by the closed cell from which the smell emanated, he led me
toward the cages. In the first I saw a young man of fairly handsome
appearance but extreme emaciation. He was propped up on a litter. In front
of him, almost under his nose, stood a bowl containing a mash of sweetened
cereals to which all the men were partial. He was gazing at it in
bewilderment without making the slightest gesture
  "You see," said the director. "This boy is famished, he has not eaten for
twenty-four hours. Yet he does not react when confronted with his favorite
food. This is the result of partial ablation of the frontal brain, which was
performed on him some months ago. Since then he has been continuously in
this state and has to be fed by force. You can see how thin he is.


 He signaled to a nurse, who went into the cage and plunged the young
man's face into the basin. The latter then began lapping up the mash.
"A fairly commonplace case. Here are some more interesting ones. On each
of these subjects we've performed an operation affecting various areas of the
cerebral tissue."


 We walked past a series of cages occupied by men and women of all ages.
At the door of each of these was a panel specifying the operation
performed, with a wealth of technical details.


 "Some of these areas are related to the natural reflexes; others to the
acquired reflexes. This one, for instance—"


  This one, according to the case history, had had a whole zone of the
occipital area removed. He could no longer distinguish the distance or
shape of objects, a disability he manifested by a series of disorganized
gestures whenever a nurse approached him. He was incapable of avoiding a
stick placed in his path. On the other hand, a piece of fruit held out to him
inspired him with alarm and he tried to draw away from it in terror. He
could not grasp the bars of his cage and made grotesque attempts to do so,
closing his fingers on empty air.




  "This other one here," said the director with a wink, "was once a
remarkable subject. We had succeeded in training him to an astonishing
degree. He answered to his name and, to a certain extent, obeyed simple
orders. He had solved fairly complicated problems and learned how to use
rudimentary tools. Today he has forgotten all his education. He does not
know his name. He cannot perform the slightest trick. He has become the
stupidest of all our men—as a result of a particularly difficult operation:
extraction of the temporal lobules."






 With my stomach heaving at this succession of horrors accompanied by
comments from a grinning chimpanzee, I saw men partially or totally
paralyzed, others artificially deprived of sight. I saw a young mother whose
maternal instinct—once highly developed, so Helius assured me—had
completely disappeared after interference with the cervical cortex. She kept
pushing away her young child whenever it attempted to approach her. This
was too much for me. I thought of Nova, of her impending motherhood,
and clenched my fists with rage. Luckily Helius showed me into another
room, which gave me time to recover my composure.






  "Here," he said with a mysterious ah", "we indulge in more. delicate
research. It's no longer the scalpel that is brought to bear, it's a far more
subtle medium—electrical stimulation of certain spots of the brain. We
have brought off some remarkable experiments. Do you practice this sort of
thing on Earth?"




"Yes, on apes!" I retorted in fury.






  The chimpanzee kept his temper and smiled.






  "Of course. However, I don't think you could ever have obtained such
perfect results as ours, comparable to those that Dr. Cornelius wishes to
show you himself. Meanwhile let's continue with our rounds of the
commonplace cases."




He again led me up to some cages where nurses were in the process of
operating. The subjects here were stretched out on a sort of table. An
incision in the skull laid bare a certain area of the brain. One ape was
applying the electrodes wfiile another was attending to the anesthetic.






 "You will note that here, too, we put the subjects to sleep: a mild
anesthetic, otherwise the results would be falsified, but the patient feels no
pain."
Depending on the point at which the electrodes were applied, the subject
made various movements, usually affecting only one side of his body. One
man jerked his leg up at each electric shock, then stretched it out again as
soon as the current was switched off. Another performed the same
movement with one arm. In the next case it was the whole shoulder that
began twitching spasmodically under the effect of the current. Farther on,
with a very young patient, it was the area commanding the jaw muscles that
was brought into play. The poor wretch started champing, endlessly
champing, with a ghastly grin on his face, while the rest of his adolescent
body remained motionless.






  "Now look what happens when the duration of the contact is increased,"
said Helius. "Here is an experiment carried to its utmost limit."






The creature on which this treatment was imposed was a lovely young girl
who in certain respects reminded me of Nova. Several nurses, male and
female apes in white smocks, were buzzing about her naked body. The
electrodes were fixed by a she-ape to the young girl's face. The girl at once
started moving the fingers of her left hand. The she-ape kept the current on
instead of switching it off after a few seconds, as in the other cases. Then
the movements of the fingers became frenzied and gradually the wrist started
twitching. A moment later and it was the forearm, then the upper arm and
shoulder. The twitching presently spread, on the one hand to the hip, the
thigh, and the leg all the way down to the toes, on the other to the muscles
of the face. After ten minutes the whole of the wretched girl's left side was
shaken by convulsive spasms, a dreadful sight, growing more and more
rapid and more and more violent.






"That's the phenomenon of extension," Helius calmly observed. "It's well
known and culminates in a state of convulsions presenting all the symptoms
of epilepsy—an extremely strange epilepsy, moreover, affecting only one
side of the body."






 "Stop it!"






  I had not been able to stifle the cry that rose to my lips. All the apes gave
a start and turned toward me with reproving glances. Cornelius, who had
just come in, gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder.


  "I admit these experiments are rather bloodcurdling when you're not used
to them. But you must bear in mind that thanks to them our medicine and
surgery have made enormous progress in the last quarter of a century."


  This argument did not convince me, any more than the memory I had of
the same treatment applied to chimpanzees in a laboratory on Earth.
Cornelius shrugged his shoulders and dragged me off toward a narrow
passage leading to a smaller room.




  "Here," he told me in a solemn tone, "you're going to see a marvelous
achievement, which is absolutely new. Only three of us ever go into this
room—Helius, who is personally in charge of this research and who has
made such a success of it; myself; and a carefully selected assistant.






He's a gorilla. He's dumb. He's devoted to me body and soul and, what is
more, he's an utter brute. So you see the importance I attach to this work.
I'm willing to show it to you because I know you'll be discreet. It's hi your
own interests."




C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - F O U R
I entered the room and at first could see nothing to justify this air of
mystery. The equipment was the same as in the previous room: generators,
transformers, electrodes. There were only two subjects, a man and a woman,
lying strapped down on two parallel divans. As soon as we arrived they started
observing us with a strange intensity.
  The gorilla assistant welcomed us with an inarticulate grunt. Helius and
he exchanged a few words in deaf-mute language. It was a far from
commonplace experience to see a gorilla and a chimpanzee moving then"
fingers like this. I do not know why, but it seemed to me the height of
absurdity and I almost burst out laughing.


  "All is well. They are quite calm. We can begin a test right away."




"What sort of test?" I implored.






  "I'd rather keep it as a surprise for you," Cornelius grinned.


  The gorilla anesthetized the two patients, who presently fell asleep, and
started up various machines. Helius went up to the man, carefully unrolled
the bandage that covered his skull, and, aiming at a certain spot, applied the
electrodes. The man remained absolutely still. I was questioning Cornelius
with my eyes when the miracle happened.


  The man began to talk. His voice echoed around the room with an
abruptness that made me start, rising above the buzz of the generator. It
was not an hallucination on my part. He was expressing himself in simian
language, with the voice of a man from Earth or that of an ape on this
planet.


 The faces of the two scientists were a study in triumph. They looked at me
with a mischievous glint in their eyes and reveled in my stupefaction. I was
about to utter an exclamation, but they motioned me to keep quiet and listen.
The man's words were incoherent and devoid of originality. He must have
been captive in the institute for a long time and kept repeating snatches of
sentences he had heard spoken by the nurses or the scientists. Cornelius
presently put a stop to the experiment.


 "We'll get nothing more out of this chap. But the main point is, he talks."




 "It's amazing," I stammered.






 "You haven't seen anything yet," said Helius. "He talks like a parrot or a
gramophone. But I've done much better with her."






He indicated the woman, who was sleeping peacefully.






 "Much better?"






  "A thousand times better," said Cornelius, who showed the same
excitement as his colleague. "Just listen. This woman also talks, as you'll
soon hear. But she doesn't merely repeat the words she has heard hi
captivity. Her talk has an exceptional significance. By a combination of
physico-chemical processes, of which I shall spare you the details, this
genius Helius has succeeded hi awakening hi her not only her own
individual memory but the memory of the species. Under electrical impulse
her recollections go back to an extremely distant line of ancestors: atavistic
memories reviving a past several thousands of years old. Do you realize
what that means, Ulysse?"


  I was so amazed by this extravagant claim that for a moment I really
believed the learned Cornelius had gone mad; for madness exists among
the apes, particularly among the intellectuals. But the other chimpanzee
was already handling his electrodes and applying them to the woman's
brain. The latter remained inert for some time, just like the man, then she
heaved a deep sigh and started talking. She likewise expressed herself in
simian language in a rather low but extremely distinct voice that changed
from time to time, as though it belonged to a number of different persons.
Every sentence she uttered has remained engraved on my memory.




  "For some time," said the voice in a slightly anxious tone, "these apes, all
these apes, have been ceaselessly multiplying, although it looked as though
then" species was bound to die out at a certain period. If this goes on, they
will almost outnumber us . . : and that's not all. They are becoming
arrogant. They look us straight in the eye. We have been wrong to tame
them and to grant those whom we use as servants a certain amount of
liberty. They are the most insolent of all. One day I was jostled hi the street
by a chimpanzee. As I raised my hand, he looked at me hi such a menacing
manner that I did not dare strike him.






 "Anna, who works at the laboratory, tells me there have been a great
many changes there as well. She dares not enter the cages alone any more.
She says that at night a sort of whispering and chuckling can be heard. One
of the gorillas makes fun of the boss behind his back and imitates his
nervous tics."






The woman paused, heaved several anguished sighs, then went on:




 "It's happened! One of them has succeeded in talking. It's certain; I read
about it in Woman's Journal. There's a photograph of him, too. He's a
chimpanzee."


  "A chimpanzee, the first! Just as I thought," Cornelius exclaimed.


 "There are several others. The papers report fresh cases every day.
Certain biologists regard this as a great scientific success. Don't they
realize where it may lead? It appears that one of these chimpanzees has
uttered some ugly threats. The first use they make of speech is to protest
when they are given an order."


 The woman fell silent again and resumed in a different voice, a somewhat
pedantic man's voice:


  "What is happening could have been foreseen. A cerebral laziness has
taken hold of us. No more books; even detective novels have now become
too great an intellectual effort. No more games; at the most a hand or two
of cards. Even the childish motion picture does not tempt us any more.
Meanwhile the apes are meditating in silence. Their brain is developing in
solitary reflection . . . and they are talking. Oh! not very much, and to us
hardly at all, apart from a few words of scornful refusal to the more
intrepid men who still dare to give them orders. But at night, when we are
not there, they exchange impressions and mutually instruct one another."


 After a long silence a woman's voice continued, in anguish:


 "I was too frightened. I could not go on living like this. I preferred to
hand the place over to my gorilla. I left my own house.




  "He1 had been with me for years and was a loyal servant. He started
going out in the evening to attend meetings. He learned to talk. He refused
to do any work. A month ago he ordered me to do the cooking and washing
up. He began to use my plates and knives and forks. Last week he chased
me out of my bedroom. I had to sleep in an armchair in the sitting room.
Not daring to scold him or punish him, I tried to win him over by kindness.
He laughed in my face and his demands increased. I was too miserable. I
abdicated.






"I have taken refuge in a camp with other women where they are in the
same plight. There are some men here as well; most of them have no more
courage than we have. It's a wretched life we lead outside the town. We feel
ashamed and scarcely speak to one another. During the first few days I
played a few games of patience. I haven't the energy any more."






The woman broke off again and a male voice took over:


"I had found, I believe, a cure for cancer. I wanted to put it to the test, like
all my previous discoveries. I was careful, but not careful enough. For some
time the apes have been reluctant to lend themselves to these experiments.
Before going into Georges', the chimpanzee's, cage I had him held down by
my two assistants. I got ready to give him the injection—the cancer-
producing one. I had to give it to him in order to be able to cure him.
Georges' eyes looked resigned. He did not move, but I saw his crafty eyes
glance over my shoulder. I realized too late. The gorillas, the six gorillas I
was holding in reserve for the infection, had escaped. A plot. They seized
us. Georges directed the operation. He copied my movements exactly. He
ordered us to be tied down on the table, and the gorillas promptly obeyed
him. Then he picked up the hypodermic and injected all three of us with the
deadly liquid. So now I have cancer. It's certain, for though there may be
doubt as to the efficacy of the cure, the fatal serum has long since been
tested and proved effective.






  "After emptying the hypodermic, Georges gave me a friendly pat on the
cheek, as I often did to my apes. I had always treated them well. From me
they received more caresses man blows. A few days later, in the cage in
which they had locked me up, I recognized the first symptoms of the
disease. So had Georges, and I heard him tell the others that he was going
to begin the cure. This gave me a new fright. What if it killed me off more
quickly! I know I am condemned, but now I lack confidence in this new
cure. During the night I succeeded hi forcing the bars of my cage and
escaping. I have taken refuge in the camp outside the town. I have two
months to live. I am spending them playing patience and dozing."
Another feminine voice succeeded his:






 "I was a lady animal tamer. I used to do an act with a dozen orangutans,
magnificent beasts. Today I'm inside the cage instead of them, together
with some other circus performers.




  'To give them their due, the apes treat us well and give us plenty to eat.
  They change the straw of our bedding when it becomes too dirty. They are
  not unkind; they punish only those of us who show reluctance and refuse
  to perform the tricks they have taken it into their heads to teach us. These
  are extremely advanced! I walk on all fours; I turn somersaults. So they are
  very good to me. I'm not unhappy. I have no more worries or
  responsibilities. Most of us are adapting ourselves to this regime."






  This time the woman fell silent for a long time, during which Cornelius
gazed at me with embarrassing insistence. I could read his thoughts only too
well. Had it not been high time for such a feeble race of men, who gave in
so easily, to make way for a nobler breed? I grew flushed and looked away.
The woman continued in a more and more anguished tone:






  "They now hold the whole town. There are only a few hundred of us left in
this redoubt and our situation is precarious. We form the last human nucleus in
the vicinity of the city, but the apes will not tolerate us at liberty so close to
them. In the other camps some of the men have fled far off, into the jungle;
the others have surrendered in order to get something to relieve their
hunger. Here we have stayed put, mainly from laziness. We sleep; we are
incapable of organizing ourselves for resistance. . . .
  "This is what I feared. I can hear a barbaric din, something like a parody of a
military band. . . . Help! It's them, it's the apes! They are surrounding us.
They are led by enormous gorillas. They have taken our bugles, our drums
and uniforms, our weapons, too, of course. . . . No, they haven't any weapons.
Oh, what bitter humiliation, the final insult! Their army is upon us and all they
are carrying are whips!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - F I V E


Some of the results obtained by Helius have leaked out to the public.
Probably it was the chimpanzee himself who could not keep his mouth shut in
the enthusiasm of success. In the town they are saying that a scientist has
succeeded in making men talk. Furthermore, the discoveries of the buried
city are being discussed in the press, and although their significance is usually
distorted, one or two journalists are close to suspecting the truth. As a result
there is an uneasy atmosphere abroad, which is manifested by the increased
wariness of the authorities about me, an attitude that is increasingly more
disturbing.






Cornelius has many enemies. He dares not proclaim his discovery frankly.
Even if he thought of doing so, his superiors would no doubt be against it.
The orangutan clan led by Zaius is in league against him. They talk about a
conspiracy against the simian race and point me out more or less openly as
one of the factioniste. The gorillas have not yet adopted an official stand,
but they are always against anything that tends to disturb law and order.


  Today I experienced a deep emotion. The long-awaited event has taken
place. First I was overwhelmed with joy but, on second thoughts, trembled
at the new danger it represents. Nova has given birth to a boy.


I have a child, I have a son on the planet Soror. I have seen him, but only
with the greatest difficulty. The security measures have become
increasingly strict and I was unable to visit Nova until the week after the
birth. It was Zira who brought me the news. She at least will remain a true
friend, whatever else may happen. She found me so perturbed that she took
the responsibility of arranging a meeting for me with my new family. It was
a few days after the event that she took me to see them, late at night, for the
newborn child is under close observation during the day.


I have seen him. He's a splendid baby. He was lying on the straw like a new
Christ, mizzling against his mother's breast. He looks like me, but he also
has Nova's beauty. The latter gave a menacing growl when I pushed open
the door. She, too, feels uneasy. She rose up, her nails extended like claws,
but calmed down when she recognized me. I am sure this birth has raised
her a few degrees higher on the human scale. The fleeting gleam in her eye
is now a permanent glow. I kiss my son with passion, without allowing
myself to think of the clouds gathering over our heads.






  He will be a man, a proper man, I'm sure. Intelligence sparkles in his
features and in his eyes. I have. revived the sacred flame. Thanks to me, a
new human race is rising and will bloom on this planet. When he grows up
he will be the first of the branch and then….




  When he grows up! I shudder at the thought of the conditions of his
childhood and of all the obstacles that will stand in his path. No matter!
Between the three of us, we shall triumph, of that I am sure. I say the three
of us, for Nova is now one of us. One need only see the way in which she
looks at her child. Though she still licks him, in the manner of the mothers
of this strange planet, her eyes radiate love.






 I put him. down again on the straw. I am reassured as to his nature. He
does not talk yet, but—I am out of my mind, he is only three days old!—he
will one day. Now he has started crying, crying like a human child and not
whining. Nova hears the difference and observes him with awe and ecstasy.
  It does not escape Zira's attention, either. She draws closer, her furry ears
prick up, and she watches the baby for a long time, in silence, with a
solemn expression. Then she signals me that it is time to go. It would be
dangerous for all of us if I were to be found here. She promises to look after
my son and I know she will keep her word. But I am also aware that she is
suspected of being attached to me, and the possibility of her dismissal
makes me tremble. I must not allow her to run this risk.


  I embrace my family warmly and leave. Looking around, I see the she-ape
likewise bend over this human body and gently put her muzzle to his brow
before closing the cage. And Nova does not protest! She permits this caress,
which must have become a daily occurrence. Remembering the antipathy
she used to show toward Zira, I cannot help regarding this as a miracle.




We go out. I am trembling from head to foot and I see that Zira is as deeply
moved as I am.


"Ulysse," she exclaims, wiping away a tear, "I sometimes feel this child is
also mine!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - S I X


The periodic visits that I force myself to pay Professor Antelle are a more and
more painful duty. He is still in the institute, but he has had to be moved from
the fairly comfortable cell where I had arranged for him to be kept. He was
pining away there and from time to time gave vent to outbursts of temper
that made him dangerous. He attempted to bite his warders. So Cornelius
then tried out another system. He had him put in an ordinary straw-lined cage
and gave him a mate: the girl with whom he used to sleep in the zoo. The
professor welcomed her noisily with an animal demonstration of joy, and
immediately his manner changed. He has now taken a new lease on life.
It is in her company that I now find him. He appears to be quite happy. He
has put on weight and looks younger. I have done all I can to enter into
communication with him. I try again today, but without success. He is
interested only in the cakes I offer him. When the bag is empty he goes back
and lies down beside his mate, who starts licking his face..






 "Now you can see how intelligence can melt away just as it can be
acquired," someone behind me mutters.


 It is Cornelius. He is looking for me, but not to talk about the professor.
There is something serious he wants to discuss. I follow him into his office,
where Zira is waiting. Her eyes are red, as though she has been weeping.
They seem to have bad news for me, but neither of them dares to speak.






"My son?"


 "He's very well," Zira says abruptly.


 "Too well," Cornelius mutters with a frown.






  I know he is a splendid baby, but it is a month since I have seen him. The
security measures have been tightened still more. Zira, who is suspect by
the authorities, is under close surveillance.




"Much too well," Cornelius repeats. "He smiles. He cries like a baby ape . . .
and he has begun to talk."






 "At three months of age!"
  "Baby words, but there's everything to indicate that he will talk properly
later. In fact, he is miraculously precocious."


 I am delighted. Zira is annoyed by my doting-father manner.


  "But don't you realize this is a disaster? The others will never leave him in
liberty."


  "I know from a reliable source that some extremely important decisions
are going to be taken about him by the Grand Council, which is to meet in
two weeks' time," Cornelius remarks quietly.




 "Important decisions?"






  "Very important. There's no question of doing away with him . . . not for
the moment, at least; but he'll be taken away from his mother."




"And I, wouldn't I be allowed to see him?"






  "You least of all . . . no, don't interrupt me," the chimpanzee continues
emphatically. "We didn't come here to feel sorry for ourselves but to work
out a plan of action. Well, now I have some definite information. Your son is
going to be placed in a sort of fortress under the surveillance of the
orangutans. Yes, Zaius has been plotting for some time and he is going to get
the better of us."






At this point Cornelius clenches his fists in rage and mutters some ugly
oaths. Then he continues:
  "Needless to say, the Council knows perfectly well how little that old fool's
scientific views can be trusted, but they are pretending to believe he is more
qualified than I am to study this exceptional subject, because the latter is
regarded as a danger to our race. They are counting on Zaius to make it
impossible for him to do any harm."






 I am dumbfounded. It is not possible to leave my son in the hands of that
dangerous imbecile. But Cornelius has not yet finished.




 "It's not only the child that is menaced."






 I remain speechless and look at Zira, who hangs her head.




  "The orangutans hate you because you are the living proof of their
scientific aberrations, and the gorillas consider you too dangerous to be
allowed at liberty much longer. They are frightened you might found a new
race on this planet. But apart from this eventuality, they are frightened that
your mere example might sow unrest among the men. Unusual nervousness
has been reported among the ones with whom you are dealing."






  This is true. In the course of my last visit to the room with the cages, I
noticed a marked change among the men. It was as though some mysterious
instinct had notified them of the miraculous birth. They had greeted my
appearance with a concert of howls.






   "To tell the truth," Cornelius abruptly concludes, "I'm very much afraid
that within the next two weeks the Council might decide to eliminate you
. . . or at least remove part of your brain on the pretext of some experiment.
As for Nova, I believe it will be decided to put her out of the way as well,
because she has been in such close contact with you."






It's not possible! I who believed' myself entrusted with a semi-divine
mission! I feel I am once again the most wretched creature living and give
way to the most dreadful despair. Zira puts her hand on my shoulder.






  "Cornelius is quite right not to have concealed anything from you. But
what he has not told you is that we will not abandon you. We have decided
to save all three of you, and we'll be helped by a small group of brave
chimpanzees."




 "What can I do, the only member of my species?"






  "You must get away. You must leave this planet, to which you should
never have come. You must go back where you belong, to Earth. Your son's
safety and your own demand it."






Her voice breaks as though she is on the verge of tears. She is even more
attached to me than I thought. I am also deeply upset, no less at her sorrow
than at the prospect of leaving her forever. But how to escape from this
planet? Cornelius has a plan.






   "It's true," he says. "I've promised Zira to help you escape, and so I shall,
 even if it means losing my job. I shall thus feel I have not evaded my duty
 as an ape. For if a danger threatens us, it will be averted by your return to
 Earth. . . . You once said, I believe, that your spacecraft was still intact and
 could take you home?"
"Without the slightest doubt. It contains enough fuel, oxygen, and supplies
to take us to the edge of the universe. But how am I to reach it?"






  "It's still orbiting around our planet. An astronomer friend of mine has
tracked it down and knows every detail of its trajectory. As to the means of
reaching it? Now listen. In exactly ten days' time we are going to launch an
artificial satellite, manned by humans, of course, on whom we want to test
the effect of certain rays. . . . No, don't interrupt! The number of passengers
will be limited to three: one man, one woman, and one child."






I grasp his scheme in a flash and appreciate his ingenuity —but what
obstacles!






"Some of the scientists responsible for this launching are friends of mine, and
I have won them over to your cause. The satellite will be placed on the
trajectory of your craft and will be navigable within certain limits. The
human couple have been trained to carry out certain motions through
conditioned reflexes. I think you'll be even more skillful than they are. . . .
For this is our plan: you three will take the place of the passengers. That
shouldn't be too difficult. As I said, I've already got the necessary
accomplices: chimpanzees regard assassination with repugnance. The others
won't even notice the trick that's played on them."






   This indeed is more than likely. To most of the apes, a man is a man and
 nothing more. The differences between one individual and another do not
 strike them.
  "I'll put you through an intensive course of training during these ten
 days. Do you think you'll be able to board your craft?"






   It ought to be possible. But it's not the difficulties and dangers I am
 thinking about at the moment. I cannot shake off the melancholy that
 assailed me just now at the thought of leaving the planet Soror, Zira, and
 my fellows, yes, my fellow humans. Toward them I feel I am something !
 of a deserter. Yet above all I must save my son and Nova. i But I shall
 come back. Yes, later, I swear it on the heads ' of the captives in the cages,
 I shall come back with trump cards in my hand.






I am so bewildered that I voice my thoughts out loud.






 Cornelius smiles.






  "In four or five years of your time, your traveling time, but in more
than a thousand years as far as we stay-at-homes are concerned. Don't
forget that we, too, have discovered relativity. In the meantime I've
discussed the risk with my chimpanzee friends and we have decided to take
it."


  We leave one another after making arrangements to meet on the
following day. Zira goes out first. Remaining behind with Cornelius for a
moment, I take the opportunity of thanking him with all my heart.
Inwardly I'm wondering why he is doing all this for me. He reads my
thoughts.


 "Zira's the one you ought to thank," he says. "It's to her you will owe
your life. On my own, I don't know if I should have gone to so much
trouble or taken so many risks. But she would never forgive me for being
a party to murder . . . and anyway . . ."


  He pauses. Zira is waiting for me in the corridor outside. He makes sure
she cannot hear and quickly whispers:
  "Anyway, for her as well as me, it is better that you should vanish from
this planet."


 He closes the door after me as I leave the room. I am alone with Zira
and we take a few steps along the corridor.


 "Zira!"






  I stop and take her in my arms. She is as upset as I am. I see a tear
coursing down her muzzle while we stand locked in a tight embrace. Ah,
what matter this horrid material exterior! It is her soul that communes
with mine. I shut my eyes so as not to see her grotesque face, made
uglier still by emotion. I feel her shapeless body tremble against mine. I
force myself to rub my cheek against hers. We are about to kiss like
lovers when she gives an instinctive start and thrusts me away violently.


  While I stand there speechless, not knowing what attitude to adopt, she
hides her head in her long hairy paws and this hideous she-ape bursts
into tears and announces in despair:


  "Oh, darling,, it's impossible. It's a shame, but I can't, I can't. You are
really too unattractive!"






C H A P T E R T H I RT Y - S E V E N
We have brought it off. I am once again traveling through space aboard the
cosmic craft, rushing like a comet in the direction of the solar system at an ever-
increasing speed.
  I am not alone. With me are Nova and SMus, the fruit of our interplanetary
passion, who can say "papa," "mama" and many other words. Also on board
are a couple of chickens and rabbits, and various seeds that the scientists put
in the satellite to study the effects of radiation on organisms of very diverse
kinds. All this will not be wasted.






  Cornelius' plan was carried out to the letter. Our substitution for the selected trio
was made without difficulty. The woman took Nova's place in the institute;
the child will be handed over to Zaius. The latter will demonstrate that he
cannot talk and is nothing but an animal. Then perhaps I will no longer be
considered dangerous, and the man who has taken my place, who will also
not talk, will be spared his life. It is unlikely that they will ever suspect the
substitution. The orangutans, as I've said before, make no distinction between
one man and another. Zaius will triumph. Cornelius will have a few worries
perhaps, but all this will soon be forgotten. . . . What do I mean! It is
forgotten already, for aeons have elapsed out there during the few months I
have been shooting through space. As for me, my memories are rapidly receding,
like the material body of the super-giant Betelgeuse, as the space-time increases
between us: the monster has changed in size to a small balloon, then an
orange. It is now no more than a minute bright spot in the galaxy. So is it with
my Sororian thoughts.






  It would be unreasonable of me to fret. I have succeeded in saving the
beings who are dear to me. Whom do I miss over there? Zira? Yes, Zira.
But the emotions that came to life between us had no name on Earth or in
any other region of the cosmos. The separation was essential. She must have
recovered her peace of mind, bringing up her baby chimpanzees after
marrying Cornelius. Professor Antelle? To hell with the professor! I could no
longer do anything for him, and he has apparently found a satisfactory solution
to the problem of existence. Only I shudder occasionally when I think that had I
been placed in the same environment as he was, and without Zira's presence, I,
too, might have fallen equally low.
  The boarding of our craft took place without a hitch. I was able to draw
closer and closer to it by guiding the satellite, and to enter the compartment, which had been left wide
open for the eventual return of our launch. Then the robots went into action and closed all the exits. We were on board. The
equipment was intact and the electronic brain started carrying out all the operations for our departure. On the planet Soror our
accomplices pretended that the satellite had been destroyed in flight after failing to be placed in orbit.








  We have been traveling for more than a year and a half of our own time. We have reached almost the speed of light, crossed an
immense space in a very short time, and have already embarked on the deceleration period that is to last another year. In our little
universe I never get tired of admiring my new family.








Nova is bearing the voyage extremely well. She is becoming more and more rational. Her motherhood has transformed her. She
spends hours doting on her son, who is proving to be a better teacher for her than I was. She articulates almost correctly the words
he utters. She does not yet talk to me, but we have drawn up a code of gestures enabling us to understand each other. I feel as
though I had lived with her always. As for Sirius, he is truly the pearl of the cosmos. He is a year and a half old. He walks, despite
the heavy gravity, and babbles without stopping. I cannot wait to show him to the men on Earth.




   What intense emotion I felt this morning when I noticed the sun beginning to assume perceptible dimension! It appears to us
now like a billiard ball and is tinged with yellow. I point it out to Nova and Sirius. I explain the nature of this heavenly body,
which is new to them, and they understand. Today Sirius talks fluently and Nova almost as well. She has been learning at the same
time as he. Miracle of motherhood, miracle that I Ovulated! I was unable to raise all the men on Soror from their animal state, but
my success in Nova's case is complete.








   The sun is growing bigger every moment. I try to distinguish the planets through the telescope. I can find my bearings easily. I
can see Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and . . . the Earth, yes, here is the Earth!








   Tears come into my eyes. Only someone who has lived more than a year on the planet of the apes could appreciate my emotion.
. . . I know that after seven hundred years I shall find neither parents nor friends, but I can hardly wait to see proper men again.








   Glued to the portholes, we watch Earth approaching.
I no longer need the telescope to distinguish the continents. We are in orbit. We are revolving around my old planet. I can see
Australia, America, and then . . . yes, here is France. We all three embrace, sobbing.








   We embark in the vessel's second launch. All the calculations have been made with a view to landing in my native country: not far from
Paris, I hope.








We have entered the atmosphere. The retrorockets come into action. Nova looks at me and smiles. She has learned how to smile
and also how to weep. My son stretches his arms out and opens his eyes in wonder. Below us is Paris. The Eiffel Tower is still there.








   I have taken over the controls and am navigating very accurately. A miracle of technique! After seven hundred years' absence I
manage to land at Orly—it has not changed very much—at the end of the airfield fairly far from the airport buildings. They must have
noticed me, so all I need do is wait There seems to be no air traffic; could the airport be out of use? No, there goes a machine. It
resembles in every respect the aircraft of my day and age!








A vehicle moves off from the buildings, heading in our direction. I switch off my rockets, a prey to an increasingly feverish
excitement What a story I shall have to tell my fellow humans! Perhaps they won't believe me at first, but I have proof. I have Nova, I have my
son.








The vehicle approaches. It is a truck and a fairly old-fashioned model: four wheels and a combustion engine. I automatically register
these details. I should have thought such vehicles had been relegated to museums long ago.








I also expected a somewhat more official reception. There are very few people here to greet me. Only two men, as far as I can see.
But how stupid I am—of course they cannot know. But when they do know . . .!








   Yes, there are two of them. I cannot see them distinctly because of the setting sun reflected on the windshield, an extremely dirty
windshield. Just the driver and one passenger. The latter wears a uniform. He is an officer; I can see the glitter of his badges of rank.
The commander of the airport, probably. The others will follow.








The truck stops fifty yards from us. I pick my son up in my arms and leave the launch. Nova follows us after a moment's hesitation.
She looks frightened but she will soon get over it.








   The driver gets out of the vehicle. He has his back turned to me. He is half concealed by the long grass growing in the space
between us. He opens the door for the passenger
to alight I was not mistaken, he is an officer; a senior officer, as I now see from his badges of rank. He jumps down. He takes a few steps to
emerges from the grass, and at last appears in full view. Nova utters a scream, snatches my son from me, and rushes back with him to the launch
remain rooted to the spot, unable to move a muscle or utter a sound. He is a gorilla.








CHAPTER                  THIRTY-EIGHT




Phyllis and Jinn raised their heads from the manuscript over which they had been bending together and looked at each other for some time without saying






   "A likely story," said Jinn at last, forcing a smile to his lips.




   Phyllis remained wrapped in thought. Certain parts of the story had moved her and seemed to contain a germ of truth. She said so to her comp




   "It just shows there are poets everywhere, in every corner of the cosmos, and practical jokers, too."




   She pondered over this, but was not so easily convinced as he was. However, she reluctantly agreed.




   "You're right, Jinn. That's what I think. . . . Rational men? Men endowed with a mind? Men inspired by intelligence? No, that's not possib
the author has gone too far. But it's a pity!"




   "I quite agree," said Jinn. "Now it's time we started back."




   He let out the sail, exposing it to the combined rays of the three suns. Then he began to manipulate the driving levers, using his four agi
while Phyllis, after dismissing a last shred of doubt with an energetic shake of her velvety ears, took out her compact and, in view of their
port, touched up her dear little chimpanzee muzzle.








   THE END