CHAPTER FOUR

TEEN


The second day went by like the first. The apes did not bother about us
except to bring us food. I was more and more puzzled about this strange
establishment when, on the following day, we were given a series of tests, the
memory of which humiliates me even today but which provided some
distraction at the time.






  The first one struck me at first as rather unusual. One of the warders came
up to me while his colleague was working in another cage. My gorilla kept
one hand hidden behind his back; in the other he held a whistle. He looked
at me to attract my attention, put the whistle to his mouth, and produced a
series of shrill blasts: this for a whole minute. Then he held out his other
hand, ostentatiously showing me one of those bananas that I had enjoyed
and to which all the men appeared to be partial. He held the fruit out in front
of me, without taking his eyes off me.
  I stretched out my hand, but the banana was out of reach and the gorilla
did not come any closer. He looked disappointed and seemed to be
expecting another gesture. After a moment he gave up, hid the fruit away
again, and resumed his whistling. I was nervous, intrigued by this play-
acting, and I almost lost patience when he once more waved the fruit out of
reach. I managed to stay calm, however, trying to guess what was being
expected of me, for he looked more and more surprised, as though confronted
with behavior that was abnormal. He went through the same motions five or
six times, then moved along to another captive. i had a distinct feeling of
frustration when I saw that this captive was given the banana at the very
first trial, and so was the next one. I closely watched the other gorilla, who
was going through the same ceremony with the row opposite. Since he was
now dealing with Nova, I did not miss one of her reactions. He whistled,
then brandished the fruit as his colleague had done. Immediately the young
girl became excited, moving her jaws and…






   All of a sudden I understood. Nova, the gorgeous Nova, had started
 watering at the mouth at the sight of this titbit, like a dog when it is
 offered a lump of sugar. That was what the gorilla was waiting for, as far
 as this day was concerned. He let her have the desired object and went on
 to another cage.


   I had understood, I tell you, and I was not very proud of it! I had studied
 biology at one time, and Pavlov's work held no secrets for me. Here they
 were, applying to men the very experiments he had carried out on dogs.
 And I, who had been so stupid a few minutes before, now, with my
 rational brain and education, not only grasped the nature of this test but
 also foresaw those that were to follow. For several days, perhaps, the
 monkeys would operate in this manner: blasts on a whistle, then the offer
 of a favorite food, the latter causing the subject's mouth to water. After a
 certain period it would be the sound of the whistle alone that would
 produce the effect. The meri* would have acquired what are known in
 scientific jargon as conditioned reflexes.
  I could not stop congratulating myself on my perspicacity and could
hardly wait to put it to good use. As my gorilla walked past me again,
having finished his rounds, I tried by every means to attract his attention.
I tapped on the bars; I made sweeping gestures, pointing at my mouth,
with the result that he condescended to resume the experiment. Then, at
the first blast of the whistle, and well before he had waved the fruit, I
started watering at the mouth, watering at the mouth in fury, in frenzy—I,
Ulysse Merou, started watering at the mouth as though my very life
depended on it, such pleasure did I derive from showing him my
intelligence.


 As a matter of fact he appeared extremely dismayed, called his
colleague over, and had a long talk with him, as on the previous day. I
could follow the elementary reasoning of these clodhoppers: here was a
man who only a moment before had no reflexes at all and who suddenly
has acquired conditioned reflexes, which required a long time and consider
able patience in the case of the others! I felt pity for the weakness of their
intellect, which prevented them from discerning the only possible cause for
this sudden progress: the capacity for thought. I am sure Zira would have
been brighter.


Yet my skill and excess of zeal had a very different result from what I had
expected. They went away without giving me the fruit, which one of them
started munching himself. There was no longer any point in rewarding me,
since the desired end had been achieved without it.






They came back the following day with other equipment. One of them was
carrying a bell; the other trundled before him a machine that bore a close
resemblance to an electric generator. This time, prepared for the kind of
experiment to which we were to be subjected, I understood what they
planned to do with these instruments even before they were put into action.






They began with Nova's neighbor, a big strapping fellow with a particularly
dull expression who had come up to the edge of his cage and was clutching
the bars as we all did nowadays at our jailers' approach. One of the gorillas
started swinging the bell, which gave out a solemn ring, while the other
connected the generator to the bars of the cage. When the bell had sounded
for some time, the second operator started turning the handle of the
machine. The man leaped backward, uttering a plaintive cry.
They went through this business several times on the same subject, who
was coaxed by the offer of some fruit to come back and cling to the bars.
The object, I knew, was to make him leap backward at the sound of the bell
and before the electric shock (yet another conditioned reflex), but it was not
achieved that day, the man's faculties not being sufficiently developed to
enable him to relate cause and effect.






  I waited for them, on the other hand, chuckling to myself, eager to show
them the difference between instinct and intelligence. At the first sound of
the bell I let go of the bars and retreated to the middle of the cage. At the
same time I looked at them and gave a mocking smile. The gorillas
wrinkled their brows. They no longer laughed at my behavior and for the
first time appeared to suspect that I was teasing them.






 They had decided nevertheless to do the experiment over a second tune,
when their attention was diverted by the arrival of some new visitors.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Three figures were coming down the passage: Zira, the female chimpanzee,
and two other apes, one of whom was plainly in a high position.




He was an orangutan, the first I had seen on the planet Soror. He was
shorter than the gorillas and slightly round-shouldered. His arms were
relatively longer so that he often touched the ground with his hands as he
walked, which the other apes did only rarely. He thus gave me the odd
impression of using a couple of walking sticks. His head adorned with long
coarse hair and sunk between his shoulders, his face frozen in an expression
of pedantic meditation, he looked like a venerable and solemn old pontiff. He
was also dressed quite differently from the others, in a long black frock coat
with a red star in the buttonhole and black-and-white-striped trousers, both
somewhat dusty.
He was followed by a little female chimpanzee carrying a heavy brief case.
Her attitude suggested that she was his secretary. By this time no one is
surprised, I imagine, by my repeated reference to significant attitudes and
expressions among these apes. I am convinced that any rational being
confronted with this couple would have concluded, as I did, that the one was
a learned elder and the other his humble secretary. Their arrival gave me an
opportunity of noting again the sense of hierarchy that seemed to exist among
the apes. Zira showed every sign of respect for this superior of hers. The
two gorillas went forward to meet him as soon as they caught sight of him
and bowed low before him. The orangutan gave a condescending little wave
of his hand.




  They made straight for my cage. Was I not the most interesting subject of
the lot? I welcomed the great authority with my most affable smile and
addressed him in ringing tones:






"My dear orangutan, how happy I am to find myself at last in the presence
of a creature who exhales wisdom and intelligence! I am sure we are going
to understand each other, you and I."






The old dear had given a start at the sound of my voice. He scratched his ear
for some time and peered suspiciously into my cage as though scenting
some trickery. Zira then addressed him, notebook in hand, reading out the
particulars she had jotted down about me. She did her best, but it was plain
to see that the orangutan refused to be convinced.


He uttered two or three sentences in a pompous manner, shrugged his
shoulders several times, shook his head, then put his hands behind his back
and started pacing up and down the corridor, passing and repassing my cage
and darting glances in my direction that were far from kindly. The other
apes waited for his decision in respectful silence.
In seemingly respectful silence, at least—for their respect appeared far from
genuine when I intercepted a furtive sign from one gorilla to the other, the
sense of which allowed no room for doubt: they were making fun of the
boss behind his back. This, combined with the annoyance I felt at his attitude
toward me, inspired me with the idea of putting on a little act designed to
convince him of my mental ability. I started pacing to and fro hi the cage,
imitating his gait, my shoulders hunched, my hands behind my back, my
brow wrinkled in an air of profound meditation.






The gorillas choked with laughter and Zira herself was unable to keep a
straight face. As for the secretary, she was obliged to plunge her muzzle
into her brief case to hide her amusement. I was congratulating myself on
my demonstration when I suddenly realized it was dangerous. Noticing my
mimicry, the orangutan looked very annoyed and in a dry voice uttered a
few sharp words that restored order immediately. Then he stopped in front
of me and started dictating his notes to his secretary.






He went on dictating for a long time, punctuating his phrases with
pompous gestures. I was beginning to have enough of his blindness and
resolved to give him fresh proof of my capacities. Stretching my arms out
toward him, I spoke up to the best of my ability: "My Zaius."




I had noticed that all the underlings who addressed him began with these two
words. Zaius, I subsequently learned, was the pontiff's name, "mi" an
honorific title.




  The monkeys were flabbergasted. They no longer wanted to laugh, least
of all Zira, who seemed extremely perturbed, especially when I pointed a
finger at her and added "Zira," a name I had also remembered and that
could only be hers. As for Zaius, he was completely flustered and started
pacing up and down the corridor again, shaking his head with an air of
incredulity.




Having finally recovered his composure, he gave orders for me to be
subjected in his presence to the tests I had been given the previous day. I
acquitted myself well. I watered at the mouth at the first blast of the whistle.
I leaped back at the sound of the bell. He made me repeat this last operation
a dozen times, dictating countless comments to his secretary.




  In the end I had an inspiration. At the moment the gorilla began to ring
the bell, I unfastened the clip that connected the electric wire to my cage
and threw the cable outside. Then I held on to the bars and stayed where I
was, while the other warder, who had not noticed my trick, struggled to turn
the handle of the now harmless generator.


  I was very proud of this move, which was bound to be irrefutable proof of
wisdom to any rational creature. In fact, Zira's attitude showed me that she,
at least, was extremely impressed. She looked at me with singular intensity
and her white muzzle turned pink—which, as I learned later, is a sign of
emotion in chimpanzees. But there was nothing I could do to convince the
orangutan. This fiendish ape again started shrugging his shoulders nastily
and shaking his head energetically when Zira spoke to him. He was a
methodical scientist; he refused to listen to such nonsense. He gave further
instructions to the gorillas and I was given another test, a combination of the
first two.


  I knew this one, too. I had seen it practiced on dogs in certain
laboratories. The idea was to bewilder the subject, to provoke a mental
confusion by combining two reactions. One of the gorillas emitted a series
of blasts on his whistle as the promise of a reward, while the other rang the
bell that announced a punishment. I recalled the conclusions of a noted
biologist concerning a similar experiment: it was possible, he said, by so
abusing an animal, to produce in him emotional disorders strangely
reminiscent of neurosis in men, and sometimes even to send him out of his
mind by repeating these maneuvers fairly often.
  I took care not to fall into the trap: but, clearly pricking up my ears at the
sound of the whistle, then at that of the bell, I sat down halfway between
the two, my chin resting in my hand, in the traditional attitude of the
thinker. Zira could not help clapping her hands. Zaius took a handkerchief
out of his pocket and mopped his brow.


  He was sweating, but nothing could shake his stupid skepticism. This I
could see from his expression after a vehement discussion he had with the
she-ape. He dictated some more notes to his secretary, gave some detailed
instructions to Zira, who listened to them with a far from satisfied air, and
finally went off after darting another churlish glance at me.






 Zira spoke to the gorillas and I quickly realized she was giving them
orders to leave me in peace, at least for
The rest of the day, for they went off with their equipment. Then she came
back to my cage by herself and observed me again, in silence, for a long
time. After which, of her own accord, she stretched out her hand in a friendly
gesture. I seized it with emotion, meanwhile gently whispering her name.
The blush that mantled her muzzle showed me she was deeply touched.