From then on, thanks to Zira, my knowledge of the simian world and
language increased rapidly. She contrived to see me alone almost every day
on the pretext of some test and undertook my education, instructing me in
the language and at the same time learning mine with a rapidity that amazed
me. In less than two months we were capable of holding a conversation on
a variety of subjects. Little by little I came to understand the planet Soror,
and it is the characteristics of this strange civilization that I am now going to try
to describe.






  As soon as we could converse together, Zira and I, I directed the
conversation toward the principal object of my curiosity: Were the apes the
only rational beings, the kings of creation on the planet?






  "What do you think?" she said. "Ape is of course the only rational
creature, the only one possessing a mind as well as a body. The most
materialistic of our scientists recognize the supernatural essence of the
simian mind."


Phrases like this always gave me a start in spite of myself.






 "Well then, Zira, what are men?"






  We were then speaking French, for, as I have said, she was quicker to
learn my language than I hers. At the outset there were some difficulties of
interpretation, the words "man" and "ape" not evoking the same creatures
for us; but this snag was quickly smoothed out. Each time she said "ape," I
mentally translated "superior being, the height of evolution." When she
spoke about men, I knew she meant bestial creatures endowed with a
certain sense of imitation and presenting a few anatomical similarities to
apes but of an embryonic psyche and devoid of the power of thought.






"It was only a century ago," she said dogmatically, "that we made some
remarkable progress in the science of origins. It used to be thought that
species were immutable, created with their present characteristics by an all-powerful God. But a line of great thinkers, all of them chimpanzees, have
modified our ideas on this subject completely. Today we know that all
species are mutable and probably have a common source."






 "So that apes probably descend from men?"






  "Some of us thought so; but it is not exactly that. Apes and men are two
separate branches that have evolved from a point in common but in
different directions, the former gradually developing to the stage of
rational thought, the others stagnating in their animal state. Many
orangutans, however, still insist on denying this obvious fact."


"You were saying, Zira . . . a line of great thinkers, all of them chimpanzees?"






I am reporting these conversations as they occurred, in nonconsecutive
snatches, my eagerness to learn leading Zira into countless lengthy
digressions.
"Almost all the great discoveries," she stated vehemently, . "have been
made by chimpanzees."






 "Are there different classes among the apes?"






  "There are three distinct families, as you have noticed, each of which has
its own characteristics: chimpanzees,


gorillas, and orangutans. The racial barriers that used to exist have been
abolished and the disputes arising from them have been settled, thanks
mainly to the campaigns launched by the chimpanzees. Today, in principle,
there is no difference at all between us."






 "But most of the great discoveries," I persisted, "were made by the
chimpanzees."




"That is true."






"What about the gorillas?"






  "They are meat eaters," she said scornfully. "They were overlords and
many of them have preserved a lust for power. They enjoy organizing and
directing. They love hunting and life in the open air. The poorest of them are
engaged on work that requires physical strength."




"And the orangutans?"
Zira looked at me for a moment, then burst out laughing.






  "They are Official Science," she said. "You must have noticed this already
and you'll have plenty of opportunities to confirm it. They learn an
enormous amount from books. They are all decorated. Some of them are
looked upon as leading lights in a narrow specialized field that requires a
good memory. Apart from that . . ."


  She made a gesture of contempt. I did not pursue this subject, but made a
mental note to come back to it later. I led the conversation to more general
ideas. At my request she drew the genealogical tree of the ape, insofar as
the best specialists had determined it. This bore a close resemblance to the
diagrams that with us represent the evolutionary process. From a single
trunk, whose roots faded away at the base into the unknown, various limbs
branched out in succession: vegetables, unicellular organisms, then coelen-terata and echinoderms; higher up one arrived at fish, reptiles, and finally
mammals. The tree was extended to include a class analogous to our
anthropoids, and at this point a new limb branched out: that of men. This
branch stopped short, whereas the central stem went on rising, giving birth to
different species of prehistoric apes with barbaric names, to culminate
eventually in Simius sapiens, forming the three extreme points of evolution:
the chimpanzee, the gorilla, and the orangutan. It was absolutely clear.






 "Ape's brain," Zira concluded, "has developed, is complex and organized,
whereas man's has hardly undergone any transformation."






 "And why, Zira, has the simian brain developed in this way?"
Language had undoubtedly been an essential factor. But why did apes talk
 and not men? Scientific opinion differed on this point. There were some
 who saw in it a mysterious divine intervention. Others maintained that
 ape's mind was primarily the result of the fact that he had four agile hands.






  "With only two hands, each with short, clumsy fingers," said Zira, "man is
probably handicapped at birth, incapable of progressing and acquiring a
precise knowledge of the universe. Because of this he has never been able
to use a tool with any success. Oh, it's possible that he once tried, clumsily.
. . . Some curious vestiges have been found. There are a number of research
projects going on at this moment into that particular subject. If you're
interested in these questions, I will introduce you someday to Cornelius. He
is much more qualified than I am to discuss them."




 "Cornelius?"






 "My fiance' said Zira, blushing. "A very great, a real scientist."




 "A chimpanzee?"






 "Of course. . . . Anyway," she concluded, "that's what I think, too: our
being equipped with four hands is one of the most important factors in our
spiritual evolution. It helped us in the first place to climb trees, and thereby
conceive the three dimensions of space, whereas man, pegged to the ground
by a physical malformation, slumbered On the flat. A taste for tools came to
us next because we had the potentiality of using them with dexterity.
Achievement followed, and it is thus we have raised ourselves to the level
of wisdom."
  On Earth I had frequently heard precisely the opposite argument used to
explain the superiority of man. After thinking it over, however, Zira's
reasoning struck me as being neither more nor less convincing than ours.


I should have liked to pursue this conversation, and I still had a thousand
questions to ask, when we were interrupted by Zoram and Zanam bringing
the evening meal. Zira bade me a hasty good night and went off.






  I remained in my cage with Nova as my only companion. We had finished
eating. The gorillas had left, after putting out the lights, except the one over
the entrance which gave a feeble gleam. I looked at Nova and thought
about what I had learned during the day. It was obvious that she did not
care for Zira and was vexed by these conversations. At first she had even
protested in her usual manner and tried to come between Zira and me,
leaping about the cage, tearing up handfuls of straw, and flinging them in
the in-truder's face. I had had to resort to force to keep her quie After receiving a
few thundering slaps across her beautiful face, she had eventually calmed
down. I had allowed myself to indulge in this brutal behavior almost
without thinking; afterward I felt sorry, but she appeared not to hold it
against me.




  The intellectual effort I had made to assimilate the simian theories of
evolution left me worn out. I was happy when I saw Nova creep over to me
in the dark and in her usual fashion beg for the half-human, half-animal
caresses for which we had gradually worked out the code: a singular code,
the details of which are of little importance, composed of compromise and
reciprocal concessions to the manners of the civilized world and to the
customs of this outlandish human race that populated the planet Soror.