CHAPTER 33

Admirable she-ape! Thanks to her, I was able to see Nova fairly often during
this period, without the authorities knowing. I spent hours on the lookout for
the intermittent gleam in her eye, and the weeks went by in impatient
expectancy of the birth.


  One day Cornelius decided to take me to the encephalic section, the
wonders of which he had described to me. He introduced me to the head of
the department, the young chimpanzee called Helius, whose genius he had
praised to the skies, and apologized for not being able to show me around
himself because of some urgent work.


 "I'll come back in an hour's time to show you the pearl of these experiments
myself," he said, "the one that affords the evidence I told you about.
Meanwhile I'm sure you'll be interested in the classic cases."




Helius showed me into a room similar to those in the institute, equipped
with two rows of cages. On entering, I was struck by a pharmaceutical smell
reminiscent of chloroform. It was indeed an anesthetic. All the surgical
operations, my guide informed me, were now performed on subjects who
had been put to sleep. He stressed this point, as though to show the high
degree attained by simian civilization, which was at pains to suppress all useless
suffering, even in men. I could thus be reassured.






  I was only half reassured. I was still less so when he ended by mentioning
an exception to this rule: the very experiments, in fact, whose aim is to
make a study of pain and localize the nerve centers from which it derives. But
I was not to see any of these today.




  This was not calculated to appease my human sensibility. I remembered that
Zira had tried to dissuade me from visiting this section, where she herself
came only when she had to. I felt like turning around and retracing my steps;
but Helius did not give me time to do so.






"If you would like to attend an operation, you will see for yourself-that the
patient suffers no pain at all. No? Well, let's go and see the results then.


  Passing by the closed cell from which the smell emanated, he led me
toward the cages. In the first I saw a young man of fairly handsome
appearance but extreme emaciation. He was propped up on a litter. In front
of him, almost under his nose, stood a bowl containing a mash of sweetened
cereals to which all the men were partial. He was gazing at it in
bewilderment without making the slightest gesture
  "You see," said the director. "This boy is famished, he has not eaten for
twenty-four hours. Yet he does not react when confronted with his favorite
food. This is the result of partial ablation of the frontal brain, which was
performed on him some months ago. Since then he has been continuously in
this state and has to be fed by force. You can see how thin he is.


 He signaled to a nurse, who went into the cage and plunged the young
man's face into the basin. The latter then began lapping up the mash.
"A fairly commonplace case. Here are some more interesting ones. On each
of these subjects we've performed an operation affecting various areas of the
cerebral tissue."


 We walked past a series of cages occupied by men and women of all ages.
At the door of each of these was a panel specifying the operation
performed, with a wealth of technical details.


 "Some of these areas are related to the natural reflexes; others to the
acquired reflexes. This one, for instance—"


  This one, according to the case history, had had a whole zone of the
occipital area removed. He could no longer distinguish the distance or
shape of objects, a disability he manifested by a series of disorganized
gestures whenever a nurse approached him. He was incapable of avoiding a
stick placed in his path. On the other hand, a piece of fruit held out to him
inspired him with alarm and he tried to draw away from it in terror. He
could not grasp the bars of his cage and made grotesque attempts to do so,
closing his fingers on empty air.




  "This other one here," said the director with a wink, "was once a
remarkable subject. We had succeeded in training him to an astonishing
degree. He answered to his name and, to a certain extent, obeyed simple
orders. He had solved fairly complicated problems and learned how to use
rudimentary tools. Today he has forgotten all his education. He does not
know his name. He cannot perform the slightest trick. He has become the
stupidest of all our men—as a result of a particularly difficult operation:
extraction of the temporal lobules."






 With my stomach heaving at this succession of horrors accompanied by
comments from a grinning chimpanzee, I saw men partially or totally
paralyzed, others artificially deprived of sight. I saw a young mother whose
maternal instinct—once highly developed, so Helius assured me—had
completely disappeared after interference with the cervical cortex. She kept
pushing away her young child whenever it attempted to approach her. This
was too much for me. I thought of Nova, of her impending motherhood,
and clenched my fists with rage. Luckily Helius showed me into another
room, which gave me time to recover my composure.






  "Here," he said with a mysterious ah", "we indulge in more. delicate
research. It's no longer the scalpel that is brought to bear, it's a far more
subtle medium—electrical stimulation of certain spots of the brain. We
have brought off some remarkable experiments. Do you practice this sort of
thing on Earth?"




"Yes, on apes!" I retorted in fury.






  The chimpanzee kept his temper and smiled.






  "Of course. However, I don't think you could ever have obtained such
perfect results as ours, comparable to those that Dr. Cornelius wishes to
show you himself. Meanwhile let's continue with our rounds of the
commonplace cases."




He again led me up to some cages where nurses were in the process of
operating. The subjects here were stretched out on a sort of table. An
incision in the skull laid bare a certain area of the brain. One ape was
applying the electrodes wfiile another was attending to the anesthetic.






 "You will note that here, too, we put the subjects to sleep: a mild
anesthetic, otherwise the results would be falsified, but the patient feels no
pain."
Depending on the point at which the electrodes were applied, the subject
made various movements, usually affecting only one side of his body. One
man jerked his leg up at each electric shock, then stretched it out again as
soon as the current was switched off. Another performed the same
movement with one arm. In the next case it was the whole shoulder that
began twitching spasmodically under the effect of the current. Farther on,
with a very young patient, it was the area commanding the jaw muscles that
was brought into play. The poor wretch started champing, endlessly
champing, with a ghastly grin on his face, while the rest of his adolescent
body remained motionless.






  "Now look what happens when the duration of the contact is increased,"
said Helius. "Here is an experiment carried to its utmost limit."






The creature on which this treatment was imposed was a lovely young girl
who in certain respects reminded me of Nova. Several nurses, male and
female apes in white smocks, were buzzing about her naked body. The
electrodes were fixed by a she-ape to the young girl's face. The girl at once
started moving the fingers of her left hand. The she-ape kept the current on
instead of switching it off after a few seconds, as in the other cases. Then
the movements of the fingers became frenzied and gradually the wrist started
twitching. A moment later and it was the forearm, then the upper arm and
shoulder. The twitching presently spread, on the one hand to the hip, the
thigh, and the leg all the way down to the toes, on the other to the muscles
of the face. After ten minutes the whole of the wretched girl's left side was
shaken by convulsive spasms, a dreadful sight, growing more and more
rapid and more and more violent.






"That's the phenomenon of extension," Helius calmly observed. "It's well
known and culminates in a state of convulsions presenting all the symptoms
of epilepsy—an extremely strange epilepsy, moreover, affecting only one
side of the body."






 "Stop it!"






  I had not been able to stifle the cry that rose to my lips. All the apes gave
a start and turned toward me with reproving glances. Cornelius, who had
just come in, gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder.


  "I admit these experiments are rather bloodcurdling when you're not used
to them. But you must bear in mind that thanks to them our medicine and
surgery have made enormous progress in the last quarter of a century."


  This argument did not convince me, any more than the memory I had of
the same treatment applied to chimpanzees in a laboratory on Earth.
Cornelius shrugged his shoulders and dragged me off toward a narrow
passage leading to a smaller room.




  "Here," he told me in a solemn tone, "you're going to see a marvelous
achievement, which is absolutely new. Only three of us ever go into this
room—Helius, who is personally in charge of this research and who has
made such a success of it; myself; and a carefully selected assistant.






He's a gorilla. He's dumb. He's devoted to me body and soul and, what is
more, he's an utter brute. So you see the importance I attach to this work.
I'm willing to show it to you because I know you'll be discreet. It's hi your
own interests."

