CHAPTER ELEVEN

I was utterly exhausted. The events of the last two days had broken me
physically and plunged my mind into such confusion that I had been
incapable until now of bewailing the loss of my comrades or even of
picturing concretely all that was involved for me in the pillaging of our
launch.






It was with relief that I welcomed the half-light, then isolation in the almost
total darkness that followed, for the dusk was very swift and we drove all
through the night. I racked my brains to discover some sense in the events I
had witnessed. I needed this intellectual exercise to escape from the despair
that haunted me, to prove to myself that I was a man, I mean a man from
Earth, a reasoning creature who made it a habit to discover a logical
explanation for the apparently miraculous whims of nature, and not a beast
hunted down by highly developed apes.
I reviewed all that I had observed, often without being aware of it. A
general overall impression prevailed: these apes, male and female, gorillas
and chimpanzees, were not in any way ridiculous. I have already mentioned
that they had never struck me as being animals in disguise, like the tame
monkeys exhibited in our circuses. On Earth a hat on the head of a she-
monkey was a hilarious sight to some people, to me a painful one. Not so
here. Both head and hat were in keeping, and there was nothing at all
unnatural about any of their gestures. The she-ape sipping a drink through a
straw looked like a lady. I also remember having seen one of the hunters
take a pipe out of his pocket, fill it methodically, and light it. Well, nothing
about this act had shocked my sensibilities, so natural were his movements.
I had had to think about it before recognizing it as a paradox. I pondered
over this at great length and, for the first time since my capture, I deplored
the disappearance of Professor Antelle. In his wisdom and knowledge he
would doubtless have been able to find an explanation for these paradoxes.
What had become of him? I was certain he was not among the victims that
had been shot. Was he among the captives? It was not impossible; I had not
seen them all. I dared not hope that he had succeeded in preserving his
liberty.






With my feeble resources I tried to piece together an hypothesis, but it was
not very satisfactory. Could the inhabitants of this planet, the civilized
beings whose towns we had seen, could they have succeeded hi training
apes so as to instill more or less rational behavior in them—this, after
patient selection and efforts lasting several generations? After all, on Earth
there are chimpanzees who manage to perform astonishing tricks. The very
fact that they had a language was perhaps not so outlandish as I had
thought. I now remembered a discussion I had had on this subject with a
specialist. He had told me there were learned scientists who spent a large
part of their time trying to teach primates to talk.
They claimed that there was nothing in the conformation of these animals
to prevent it. Until then all their efforts had been in vain, but they were
persevering, maintaining that the only obstacle was the fact that monkeys
were unwilling to talk. Perhaps one day they had proved willing on the
planet Soror? This enabled these hypothetical inhabitants to use them for
certain rough work, like the hunt during which I had been captured*
  I clung desperately to this explanation, recoiling in horror at the thought
of another, simpler one, so essential for my safety did it seem that there
should exist on this planet properly rational creatures, that is, men, men like
myself, to whom I could reveal myself.




Men! Of what race, then, were the beings whom the apes had killed and
captured? Some sort of backward tribe? If that were the case, how cruel the
masters of this planet were to tolerate and perhaps decree such massacres!






  I was distracted from these thoughts by a figure creeping toward me. It
was Nova. Around me, all the prisoners were lying in groups on the floor
boards. After a moment's hesitation she snuggled up against me, as on the
previous night. Once again I vainly tried to discern in her eyes the gleam by
which this gesture of hers might have been construed as an act of
friendliness. She turned her head away and presently closed her eyes. In
spite of this I felt reassured by her mere presence and eventually fell asleep
beside her, trying not to think of the morrow.