CHAPTER 31

I spent the month following my return in bed, suffering from an infection I
had probably picked up on the site and which assumed the form of violent
bouts of fever similar to malaria. I was not in pain, but my brain was on fire
and I could not stop mulling over the elements of the fearful truth I had
glimpsed. There was no longer any doubt in my mind that a human era had
preceded the simian age on the planet Soror, and this conviction gave me a
sort of intoxication.




On second thought, however, I am not sure if I ought to feel proud of this
discovery or profoundly humiliated by it. My self-respect notes with
satisfaction that apes have invented nothing, that they are mere imitators.
My humiliation derives from the fact that a human civilization could have
been so easily assimilated by apes.
How could this have happened? In my delirium I could not keep my mind
off the problem. True, we have long known that our civilizations are mortal,
but such a complete disappearance makes the senses reel. A sudden
disaster? A cataclysm? Or else the slow decline of the one and the
progressive ascent of the other? I am inclined to the latter hypothesis, and I
find extremely significant indications of this evolution in the apes' present-day condition and preoccupations.




  The importance they attach to biological research, for instance—well, I
am fully aware of its origin. In the old days many apes must have served as
experimental subjects for men, as is the case in our own laboratories. These
were the ones who first hoisted the flag, who were the pioneers of the
revolution. They would naturally have begun by imitating the gestures and
attitudes observed in their masters, and these masters were researchers,
learned biologists, doctors, nurses, and warders. Hence this unusual imprint
on most of their enterprises, which still persists today.


  And what about the men all this time? Enough speculation about apes!


  It is now two months since I visited my former companions in captivity,
my fellow humans. Today I feel better. I have no more fever. Yesterday I
told Zira--»-Zira has looked after me like a sister during my illness—I told
her that I was planning to resume my work in her department. She did not
seem very pleased but she raised no objection. It is time for me to pay my
visit.


  Here I am again in the room with the cages. A strange emotion makes me
pause on the threshold. I now see these creatures in a new fight. It is with
anguish that I wonder, before making up my mind to enter, if they will
recognize me after my long absence. Well, they do recognize me. All their
eyes are fixed on me, as they always used to be, and even with a sort of
deference. Am I dreaming or do I really discern a new look in them, a look
reserved for me and different from the glances they bestow on their ape
warders? A gleam impossible to describe, but in which I fancy I see an
awakened curiosity, an unusual emotion, shades of ancestral memories
trying to emerge from bestiality, and perhaps . . . an uncertain glimmer of
hope.


  This hope, I believe, I have myself unconsciously nourished for some
time. Is it not the reason why I am overwhelmed by this feverish
excitement? Is it not I, I, Ulysse Merou, the man whom destiny has brought
to this planet to be the instrument of human regeneration?


  Here, distinctly stated at last, is the hazy notion that has been haunting me
for a month. The good Lord does not shoot dice, as a certain physicist once
said. Nothing happens by mere chance in the cosmos. My voyage to the
world of Betelgeuse was decreed by a superior consciousness. It is up to me
to show myself worthy of the choice and to be the new savior of this human
race in decline.


 As before, I go slowly around the cages. I force myself not to rush over to
Nova's cage at once. Is the envoy of destiny entitled to favorites? I speak to
each of my subjects. The moment has not yet come for them to talk. I do
not mind. I have my entire lifetime in which to accomplish my mission.


  I now approach my former cage with studied negligence. I look out of the
corner of my eye, but I do not see Nova's arms stretched through the bars, I
do not hear the cries of joy with which she always used to greet me. A
strange misgiving assails me. I cannot restrain myself. I dash forward. The
cage is empty.




I summon one of the warders in an authoritative voice that makes the
captives shiver. Zanam is the one who appears. He does not like receiving
orders from me, but Zira has instructed him to put himself at my disposal.






"Where is Nova?"
  He replies in a surly manner that he does not know. She was taken away
one day without any reason being given. I repeat my question but in vain.
At this moment, luckily, Zira turns up to carry out her tour of inspection.
She sees me in front of the empty cage and realizes why I am so upset. She
looks flustered and at once starts talking about something else.


  "Cornelius has just come back. He wants to see you."


  At the moment I don't give a damn about Cornelius or the chimpanzees or
the gorillas or any other creature hi heaven or in hell. I point at the cell with
my ringer.




  "Where's Nova?"






  "She's ill," says'Zira. "She's been transferred to a special wing."


  She beckons to me and leads me aside, out of earshot of the warder.






"The administrator made me promise to keep it secret. But I feel you ought to
know."






"She's ill?" ,






"Nothing serious; but it's important enough to put the authorities on their toes.
Nova is expecting."






"She's ..."
"I mean she's pregnant," the she-ape announces, observing me with a curious
expression.


