CHAPTER ONE

Jinn and Phyllis were spending a wonderful holiday, in space, as far away as
possible from the inhabited stars.




  In those days interplanetary voyages were an everyday occurrence, and
interstellar travel not uncommon. Rockets took tourists to the wondrous
sites of Sirius, or financiers to the famous stock exchanges of Arcturus and
Aldebaran. But Jinn and Phyllis, a wealthy leisured couple, were
distinguished in their cosmos for their originality and a few grains of
poetry. They wandered over the universe for their pleasure —by sail.
  Their ship was a sort of sphere with an envelope—the sail—which was
miraculously fine and light and moved through space propelled by the
pressure of light-radiation. Such a machine, left to its own devices in the
vicinity of a star (though far enough away for the field of gravity not to be
too powerful), will always move in a straight line in the opposite direction
to the star; but since Jinn and Phyllis' stellar system contained three suns
that were relatively close to one another, their vessel received rays of light
along three different axes. Jinn had therefore conceived an extremely
ingenious method of steering. His sail was lined inside with a series of
black blinds that he could roll up or unroll at will, thus changing the effect
of the light-pressure by modifying the reflecting power of certain sections.






  Furthermore, this elastic envelope could be stretched or contracted as the
navigator pleased. Thus, when Jinn wanted to increase his speed, he gave it
the biggest diameter possible. It would then take the blasts of radiation on
an enormous surface and the vessel would hurtle through space at a furious
velocity, which made his mate Phyllis quite dizzy. He would also be
overcome by vertigo, and they would then cling passionately to each other,
their gaze fixed on the mysterious and distant depths to which their flight
propelled them. When, on the other hand, they wanted to slow down, Jinn
pressed a button. The sail would shrink until it became a sphere just big
enough to contain them both, packed tightly together. The effect of the light
became negligible, and this minute bubble, reduced to nothing more than its
own inertia, seemed motionless, as though suspended in the void by an
invisible thread. The young couple would spend rapturous idle hours in this
reduced universe, erected on their own scale and for them alone, which Jinn
compared to a becalmed sailing ship and Phyllis to the air bubble of the sea
spider.






  Jinn knew a number of other tricks, considered as the height of art by
sailing cosmonauts: for example, making use of the shadows of the planets
and certain satellites in order to change course. He imparted this skill to
Phyllis, who was now almost as accomplished as he himself and often more
daring. When she held the tiller, she would sometimes fire a broadside that
swept them right to the borders of the stellar system, heedless of the resulting
magnetic storm, which would start to upset the light-rays and to shake their
skiff like a cockleshell. On two or three occasions, waked up with a start by
the tempest, Jinn had had quite a struggle snatching the tiller from her and,
in order to run for shelter as quickly as possible, starting the auxiliary
rocket, which they made it a point of honor never to use except in case of
danger.


  One day Jinn and Phyllis were lying side by side in the middle of their
spacecraft without a care in the world, making the most of their holiday by
exposing themselves to the rays of their three suns. Eyes closed, Jinn was
thinking only of his love for Phyllis. Phyllis lay stretched out on her side,
gazing at the immensity of the universe and letting herself be hypnotized,
as she often did, by the cosmic sensation of the void.




All of a sudden she came out of her trance, wrinkled her brow, and sat up.
An unusual flash of light had streaked across this void. She waited a few
seconds and saw a second flash, like a ray being reflected off a shiny object.
The cosmic sense she had acquired in the course of these cruises could not
deceive her. Moreover, Jinn, when it was pointed out to him, agreed with
her, and it was inconceivable that he should make a mistake in this matter: a
body sparkling in the light was floating through space, at a distance they
could not yet assess. Jinn picked up a pair of binoculars and focused them
on the mysterious object, while Phyllis leaned on his shoulder.






   "It's not a very big object," he said. "It seems to be made of glass. . . . No,
let me look. It's drawing closer. It's going faster than we are. It looks like . .
."






 A puzzled expression came into his eyes. He lowered the binoculars,
 which she at once snatched up.


 "It's a bottle, darling." "A bottle!" She looked at it, in turn.
  "Yes, it's a bottle. I can see it quite clearly. It's made of light-colored glass.
It's corked; I can see the seal. There's something white inside that looks like
paper"—a message, obviously. Jinn, we've got to get hold of it!"






  Jinn was of the same opinion and had already embarked on some skillful
maneuvers to place the sphere on the trajectory of the unusual body. He
soon succeeded and then reduced his own speed to enable it to catch up
with him. Meanwhile Phyllis donned her diving suit and made her way out
of the sail by the double trapdoor. There, holding onto a rope with one hand
and brandishing a long-handled scoop in the other, she stood in readiness to
retrieve the bottle.






It was not the first time they" had come across strange bodies, and the
scoop had already been in use. Sailing at low speed, sometimes completely
motionless, they had enjoyed surprises and made discoveries that were
precluded to travelers by rocket. In her net Phyllis had already gathered up
remnants of pulverized planets, fragments of meteorites that had come from
the depths of the universe, and pieces of satellites launched at the outset of
the conquest of space. She was very proud of her collection; but this was the
first time they had come across a bottle, and a bottle containing a message
—of that she was certain. She trembled from head to foot with impatience,
gesticulating like a spider on the end of its thread as-she shouted down the
telephone to her companion:






"Slower, Jinn. . . . No, a bit faster than that, it's going to pass us. . . .
Starboard. . . . Now hard to port. . . . Hold it. . . . I've got it!"






She gave a triumphant cry and came back inside with her trophy
It was a largish bottle and its neck had been carefully sealed. A roll of
paper could be seen inside.






"Jinn, break it open, hurry up!" Phyllis begged, stamping her foot.






  Less impatient, Jinn methodically chipped off the sealing wax. But when
the bottle was thus opened, he saw that the paper was stuck fast and could
not be shaken out. He therefore yielded to his mate's entreaties and smashed
the glass with a hammer. The paper unrolled of its own accord. It consisted
of a large number of very thin sheets, covered with tiny handwriting. The
message was written in the language of the Earth, which Jinn knew
perfectly, having been partly educated on that planet.






 An uncomfortable feeling, however, restrained him from starting to read a
document that had fallen into their bands in such an incongruous manner;
but Phyllis' state of excitement decided him. She was not so well
acquainted with the language of the Earth and needed his help.




 "Jinn, please!"






 He reduced the volume of the sphere so that it floated idly in space, made
sure that there was no obstacle in front of them, then lay down beside his
companion and began to read the manuscript.