CHAPTER 35

Some of the results obtained by Helius have leaked out to the public.
Probably it was the chimpanzee himself who could not keep his mouth shut in
the enthusiasm of success. In the town they are saying that a scientist has
succeeded in making men talk. Furthermore, the discoveries of the buried
city are being discussed in the press, and although their significance is usually
distorted, one or two journalists are close to suspecting the truth. As a result
there is an uneasy atmosphere abroad, which is manifested by the increased
wariness of the authorities about me, an attitude that is increasingly more
disturbing.






Cornelius has many enemies. He dares not proclaim his discovery frankly.
Even if he thought of doing so, his superiors would no doubt be against it.
The orangutan clan led by Zaius is in league against him. They talk about a
conspiracy against the simian race and point me out more or less openly as
one of the factioniste. The gorillas have not yet adopted an official stand,
but they are always against anything that tends to disturb law and order.


  Today I experienced a deep emotion. The long-awaited event has taken
place. First I was overwhelmed with joy but, on second thoughts, trembled
at the new danger it represents. Nova has given birth to a boy.


I have a child, I have a son on the planet Soror. I have seen him, but only
with the greatest difficulty. The security measures have become
increasingly strict and I was unable to visit Nova until the week after the
birth. It was Zira who brought me the news. She at least will remain a true
friend, whatever else may happen. She found me so perturbed that she took
the responsibility of arranging a meeting for me with my new family. It was
a few days after the event that she took me to see them, late at night, for the
newborn child is under close observation during the day.


I have seen him. He's a splendid baby. He was lying on the straw like a new
Christ, mizzling against his mother's breast. He looks like me, but he also
has Nova's beauty. The latter gave a menacing growl when I pushed open
the door. She, too, feels uneasy. She rose up, her nails extended like claws,
but calmed down when she recognized me. I am sure this birth has raised
her a few degrees higher on the human scale. The fleeting gleam in her eye
is now a permanent glow. I kiss my son with passion, without allowing
myself to think of the clouds gathering over our heads.






  He will be a man, a proper man, I'm sure. Intelligence sparkles in his
features and in his eyes. I have. revived the sacred flame. Thanks to me, a
new human race is rising and will bloom on this planet. When he grows up
he will be the first of the branch and then….




  When he grows up! I shudder at the thought of the conditions of his
childhood and of all the obstacles that will stand in his path. No matter!
Between the three of us, we shall triumph, of that I am sure. I say the three
of us, for Nova is now one of us. One need only see the way in which she
looks at her child. Though she still licks him, in the manner of the mothers
of this strange planet, her eyes radiate love.






 I put him. down again on the straw. I am reassured as to his nature. He
does not talk yet, but—I am out of my mind, he is only three days old!—he
will one day. Now he has started crying, crying like a human child and not
whining. Nova hears the difference and observes him with awe and ecstasy.
  It does not escape Zira's attention, either. She draws closer, her furry ears
prick up, and she watches the baby for a long time, in silence, with a
solemn expression. Then she signals me that it is time to go. It would be
dangerous for all of us if I were to be found here. She promises to look after
my son and I know she will keep her word. But I am also aware that she is
suspected of being attached to me, and the possibility of her dismissal
makes me tremble. I must not allow her to run this risk.


  I embrace my family warmly and leave. Looking around, I see the she-ape
likewise bend over this human body and gently put her muzzle to his brow
before closing the cage. And Nova does not protest! She permits this caress,
which must have become a daily occurrence. Remembering the antipathy
she used to show toward Zira, I cannot help regarding this as a miracle.




We go out. I am trembling from head to foot and I see that Zira is as deeply
moved as I am.


"Ulysse," she exclaims, wiping away a tear, "I sometimes feel this child is
also mine!"

