CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT




We set off a week later. Zira came with us, but she was to return after a few days to look after the institute in Cornelius' absence.
The latter intended staying much longer on the site of the excavations, if these proved to be as interesting as he expected.








  A special plane had been put at our disposal, a jet machine rather like our first models of this type of aircraft, but very comfortable and
equipped with a small soundproof compartment in which we could talk easily. It was here we were sitting, Zira and I, shortly after
our departure. I was looking forward to the journey. By now I was completely accustomed to the simian world. I had been neither
surprised nor frightened at seeing this big aircraft being piloted by an ape. My only thought was to enjoy the view and the spectacular
                     to a height of about thirty thousand feet. The air was
sight of Betelgeuse rising. We had climbed
remarkably pure, and the giant star could be seen on the horizon like our
own sun observed through a telescope. Zira was enchanted by it.


 "Are there such beautiful dawns as this on Earth?" she asked. "Is your sun
as lovely as ours?"
  I told her it was neither as big nor as red, but it sufficed us. On the other
hand, our nocturnal heavenly body was bigger and shed a more intense pale
light than Soror's. We felt as happy as school children on a holiday, and I
laughed and joked with her as with a very close friend. When Cornelius
came and joined us after a moment I almost resented his intrusion on our
tete-a-tete. He was pensive. For some time, moreover, he had seemed rather
nervous. He worked prodigiously on his own research, which absorbed him
to the point of occasionally causing him to be totally absent-minded. He
still kept the subject of this research a secret, and I believe Zira knew as
little about it as I diS. I only knew it concerned the origin of ape and that
the learned chimpanzee tended more and more to reject the classical
theories. This morning, for the first time, he revealed certain aspects of it to
me, and it did not take me long to understand why my existence as a
civilized man was so important to him. He began by reverting to a subject
we had discussed together a thousand times.


 "You did say, didn't you, Ulysse, that on your Earth the apes are utter
animals? That man has risen to a degree of civilization equal to our own and
which, in certain respects, even . . . ? Don't be frightened of making me
angry; the scientific spirit ignores all self-esteem."


  "Which, in many respects, even surpasses it—yes, that's undeniable. One
of the best proofs is that I am here. It seems to me you have only reached
the stage . . ."




  "I know, I know," he broke in wearily. "We've discussed all that. We are
now penetrating the secrets you discovered centuries ago. . . . And it's not
only your statements that disturb me," he went on, nervously pacing up and
down the little cabin. "For some time I've been harassed by a feeling—a
feeling supported by certain concrete indications— that the key to these
secrets, even here on our planet, has been held by other brains in the distant
past."


 I might have replied that this impression of rediscovery had also affected
certain minds on Earth. Perhaps it even prevailed universally and possibly
served as the basis for our belief in God. But I was careful not to interrupt
him.






He was following a train of thought that was still confused, which he
expressed in an extremely reticent manner.
 "Other brains," he repeated pensively, "that maybe were not ..."


 He broke off abruptly. He looked miserable, as though tortured by the
perception of a truth his mind was unwilling to admit.


 "You did say, didn't you, that your apes possess a highly developed sense
of mimicry?"




"They mimic us in everything we do, I mean in every act that does not
demand a rational process of thought. So much so that with us the verb ape
is synonymous with imitate."






 "Zira," Cornelius murmured, as though depressed, "is it not this sense of
aping that characterizes us as well?"
 Without giving Zira time to protest, he went on excitedly, "It begins in
childhood. All our education is based on imitation."




 "It's the orangutans . . ."






  "That's it. They are of tremendous importance, since it is they who mold
our youth through their" books. They force every young monkey to repeat
all the errors of his ancestors. That explains the slowness of our progress. For
the last two thousand years we have remained similar to ourselves."
  This slow development among the apes deserves a few comments. I had
been struck by it while reading their history, noticing in it some important
differences from the soaring flight of the human mind. True, we also have
known a period of semi-stagnation. We, too, have had our orangutans, our
falsified education and ridiculous curricula, and this period lasted a long
time.






  Not so long, however, as in the apes' case, and above all not at the same
stage of evolution. The dark ages that the chimpanzee deplored had lasted
about ten thousand years. During this period no notable progress had been
achieved except, perhaps, during the last half century. But what I found
extremely curious was that their earliest legends, their earliest chronicles,
then-earliest memories bore witness to a civilization that was already well
advanced and in fact was more or less similar to that of the present day.
These documents, ten thousand years old, afforded proof of general skills
and achievements comparable to the skills and achievements of today; and,
before them, there was a total blank: no tradition either oral or written, not a
single clue. In essence, it seemed as though the simian civili
zation had made a miraculous appearance out of the bhu, ten thousand years
before and had since been preserved more or less without modification. The
ordinary ape had grown accustomed to finding this quite natural, never
imagining a different state of mental development, but a perceptive brain like
Cornelius' sensed an enigma there and was tormented by it.


"There are apes capable of original creation," Zira protested.






"Certainly," Cornelius agreed. "That's true, especially in recent years. In the long
run, mind is able to embody itself hi gesture. It has to, in fact; that's the
natural course of evolution. . . . But what I'm passionately seeking, Zira, what
I'm trying to find out, is how it all began. . . . At present it strikes me as not
impossible that it was through simple imitation at the beginning of our era."






  "Imitation of what, of whom?"






  He had reverted to his reticent manner and lowered his eyes as though
regretting he had said too much.
  "I can't answer that question yet," he finally said. "I need certain evidence.
Perhaps we shall find it in the ruins of the buried city. According to the
reports, it existed much earlier than ten thousand years ago, in a period about
which we know nothing."