CHAPTER SIX

TEEN
Zaius came back a few days later, and bis visit was the signal for a complete
reorganization of the room. But I must first describe how I had meanwhile
distinguished myself still further in the eyes of the apes.




The day after the orangutan's first inspection an avalanche of new tests
descended upon us, the first at mealtimes. Instead of putting our food in the
cages as they usually did, Zoram and Zanam, the two gorillas whose names I
had finally learned, hoisted them to the ceiling in baskets by means of a
system of pulleys with which the cages were equipped. At the same time they
placed four fairly big wooden cubes in each cell. Then, stepping back, they
observed us.




  It was heartrending to see my companions' discomfort. They tried to jump,
but none of them could reach the basket. Some climbed up the bars but,
having reached the top, they stretched out their arms in vain since they
could not get hold of the food, which was some distance away from the
sides of the cages. I was ashamed at the stupidity of these men. I, needless
to say, had found the solution to the problem immediately. One merely had
to pile the four cubes one on top of another, then climb onto this scaffolding
and unhook the basket. This is what I did, with an air of detachment that
concealed my pride. It was not a stroke of genius, but I was the only one to
show myself so skillful. Zoram and Zanam's obvious admiration went
straight to my heart.




  I started to eat, without concealing my contempt for the other captives,
who were incapable of following my example even after having watched
the maneuver. Nova herself could not imitate me that day, although I
repeated the action several times for her benefit. She di<l try, however —she
was certainly one of the most intelligent of the lot—she tried to pile one cube
on another, but she placed it crookedly so that it overbalanced; then, terrified
by the crash it made !n falling, she took refuge in a corner. This girl,
endowed with remarkable suppleness and agility, whose every gesturewas
graceful, proved to be as hopelessly clumsy as the others when it came to
handling an object. She succeeded, however, in mastering the trick within
two days.






That morning I took pity on her and threw her two of the best bits of fruit
through the bars. This gesture earned me a caress from Zira, who had just
come in. I allowed myself to be stroked by her hairy hand, much to the
displeasure of Nova, whom these demonstrations enraged and who forthwith
started jumping up and down and whimpering.






I distinguished myself in many other tests; but above all, by listening
carefully, I managed to retain a few simple words of the simian language and
to understand their meaning. I practiced pronouncing them whenever Zira
went past my cage, and she looked more and more astounded. I had reached
this stage when Zaius' new inspection took place.
Once again he was escorted by his secretary, but accompanied also by
another orangutan as solemn as he and wearing the same decoration, and
who chatted with him on an equal footing. I assumed he was a colleague
who had been called into consultation over the disturbing case that I
represented. They started a long discussion in front of my cage with Zira,
who had meanwhile joined them. The she-ape spoke at great length and
with fervor. I knew she was trying to plead my cause, pointing out the
exceptional keenness of my intelligence, which no longer could be
contested. But the only result of her intervention was to provoke an
incredulous smile from the two scientists.






I was once again required to undergo the tests at which I had proved so
adroit. The last one consisted in opening a box that was closed by nine
different systems (bolt, pin, key, hook, etc.). Someone on Earth, Kinnaman,
I think it was, had invented a similar device to assess the discernment of
monkeys, and this problem was the most complicated any of them had
succeeded in solving. The same no doubt applied here in the case of men. I
had acquitted myself with honor after the first few attempts.






Zira herself handed me the box, and I saw from her air of entreaty that she
was fervently hoping to see me perform brilliantly, as though her own
reputation was involved in the test. I did my best to satisfy her and operated
the nine mechanisms in a flash, without a moment's hesitation. Nor did I
confine myself to that. I took out the fruit that the box contained and
gallantly offered it to her. She accepted with a blush. Then I revealed my
major achievement and pronounced the few words I had mastered, pointing
out the objects to which they corresponded.






 This time I felt it was impossible that they could entertain further doubt as
to my true condition. Alas, I did not yet know the blindness of orangutans!
They again gave that skeptical smile that enraged me so much, paid no
attention to Zira, and went on with their discussion. They had listened to
me as though I were a parrot. I felt they were only prepared to attribute my
talents to a sort of instinct and a keen sense of mimicry. They had probably
adopted the scientific rule that one of our learned men at home summarized
as follows: "In no case may we interpret an action as the outcome of the
exercise of a higher psychical faculty if it can be interpreted as the outcome
of one that stands lower in the psychological scale."






Such was the obvious meaning of their jargon, and I began fuming with
rage. No doubt I should have yielded to some angry outburst had I not
intercepted a glance from Zira. It was plain to see that she did not agree
with them and felt ashamed to hear them talking like this in front of me.






His colleague having eventually gone off, doubtless after pronouncing a
categorical opinion on my case, Zaius embarked on some other exercises. He
did the rounds of the hall, examining each of the captives in turn and giving
fresh instructions to Zira, who noted them down. His movements seemed to
indicate numerous changes in the occupancy of the cages. It did not take me
long to discover his plan and to understand the purpose of the evident
comparisons he was making between certain characteristics of such-and-
such man and those of such-and-such woman.






I was not mistaken. The gorillas were now carrying out the boss's orders,
which Zira had passed on to them. We were redistributed in couples. What
fiendish tests were indicated by this pairing off? What peculiarities of the
human race did these apes, with their mania for experiments, wish to study?
My acquaintance with biological laboratories had suggested the answer to
me: to a scientist who has chosen instinct and reflexes as his field of study,
the sexual instinct has an exceptional interest.
  That was it! These demons wanted to use us—to use me, who found
myself attached to this herd by an extravagant whim of fate—to study in
captivity the amorous practices of men, the methods of approach of the
male and the female, the manner in which they copulate, in order to
compare them perhaps with earlier observations of the same men in the wild
state. Doubtless they also intended to experiment with sexual selectivity?






As soon as I understood then- plan, I felt more humiliated than I had ever
been in my life and swore to die rather than lend myself to these degrading
schemes. Yet my shame was substantially reduced, I must admit, although
my resolution was still firm, when I saw the woman whom science had
assigned as my mate. It was Nova. I felt almost inclined to forgive the old
pedant his stupidity and blindness, and I made no protest when Zoram and
Zanam seized me around the waist and flung me at the feet of the nymph of
the torrent.