CHAPTER 32

I am stupefied without yet fully realizing what this news implies. At first I
am assailed by a mass of trivial details and above all tormented by the
disquieting question: why was I not notified of this? Zira does not give me
time to protest.


  "I noticed two months ago, on my return from the trip. The gorillas had
not seen a thing. I phoned Cornelius, who had a long conversation with the
administrator. They agreed that it would be better to keep it secret. No one
knows about it except them and me. She's in an isolated cage and I'm looking
after her personally."




I regard this concealment as an act of treachery on Cornelius' part and I can
see that Zira is embarrassed. It looks to me as though some plot is being
hatched in the background.


, "Don't worry. She is being well treated and there's nothing she needs. I'm
doing everything I can for her. No pregnancy of a female human has ever been
so carefully watched over."




  Under her mocking gaze I lower my eyes like a schoolboy guilty of some
misdemeanor. She makes an effort to assume an ironical tone, but I can see
she is perturbed. True, I realize my physical intimacy with Nova has vexed
her ever since she recognized my true nature, but there is more than
vexation in her expression. It is her affection for me that makes her anxious.
These mysteries concerning Nova presage nothing good. I imagine she has
not told me the whole truth: that the Grand Council is well aware of the
situation and there have been discussions at a very high level. –
"When is her confinement due?"






  "In three or four months."






  The tragi-comic side of the situation overwhelms me suddenly. I am about
to become a father in the system of Betelgeuse. I am going to have a child on
the planet Soror by a woman for whom I feel a great physical attraction and
sometimes even compassion but who has the mind of an animal. No other
being in the cosmos has found himself involved in such an adventure. I feel
like weeping and laughing at the same time.




 "Zira, I want to see her!"






 She gives a little pout of annoyance.






 "I knew you would ask me that. I've already discussed it with Cornelius
and I think he will agree to it. He's waiting for you in his office."






 "Cornelius is a traitor!"






 "You've no right to say that. He is divided between his passion for science
and his duty as an ape. It is only natural that he should feel extremely
apprehensive at this impending birth."
My anguish increases as I follow her down the corridors of the institute. I
can imagine the attitude of the learned apes and their fear of seeing a new
race arise that— Good heavens! I now see exactly how the mission with
which I have been entrusted can be accomplished.






 Cornelius greets me in a friendly manner, but a permanent awkwardness
has been created between us. At times he looks at me as though in terror. I
make an effort not to broach the subject on my mind at once. I ask him
about the voyage and the end of his stay among the ruins.




"Fascinating. I have a mass of irrefutable proof."






  His clever little eyes are sparkling. He cannot prevent himself from
exulting over his success. Zira is right; he is torn between his love of
science and his duty as an ape. At the moment it is the scientist speaking,
the enthusiastic scientist for whom only the triumph of his theories counts.


 "Skeletons," he says. "Not one, but a whole collection, discovered in such
order and circumstances as to make it incontestably clear that we had come
upon a graveyard. Enough evidence to convince the most obtuse mind. Our
orangutans, of course, insist on regarding it as a mere coincidence."


 "What about these skeletons?"




"They are not simian."






 "I see."
We look each other straight in the eye. With his enthusiasm somewhat
diminished, he slowly continues, "I can't hide it from you; you've already
guessed. They are the skeletons of men."


 Zira is certainly in the know, for she shows no surprise. Both of them
again observe me closely. Cornelius finally makes up his mind to discuss the
matter frankly.


   "I am now certain," he admits, "that there once existed on our planet a
 race of human beings endowed with a mind comparable to yours and to
 that of the men who populate your Earth, a race that has degenerated and
 reverted to an animal state. . . . Furthermore, since my return here I have
 been given additional evidence to support this hypothesis."




  "Additional evidence?"






  "Yes. It was discovered by the director of the encephalic section, a young
chimpanzee with a great future. He may even be a genius. . . . You would
be wrong to think," he continued with heavy sarcasm, "that apes have
always been imitators. We have made some remarkable innovations in
certain branches of science, especially hi connection with these
experiments on the brain. I'll show you the results some day, if I can. I'm
sure you'll be amazed by them."


  He seems anxious to convince himself and expresses himself with
unusual aggressiveness. I have never attacked him on this point. He was
the one who first mentioned the lack of creative faculty in apes, two
months ago. In a boastful tone he continues:


  "Believe me, the day will come when we shall surpass men in every
field. It is not just by accident, as you might imagine, that we have
managed to succeed them. This result was foreordained in the normal
course of evolution. Rational man having had his day, a superior being was
bound to succeed him, preserve the essential results of his conquests, and
assimilate them during a period of apparent stagnation before soaring up to
even greater heights."


  This is a new way of visualizing the outcome. I might well retort that
many men on Earth have had the presentiment of a superior being who
may one day succeed them but that no scientist, philosopher, or poet has
ever imagined this superhuman in the guise of an ape. But I do not feel
inclined to pursue the point. The essential, after all, is that the mind should
embody itself in some organism. The form of the latter is of little
importance. I have many other more pressing subjects. I bring the
conversation around to Nova and her condition. He makes no comment
and tries to console me.


"Don't worry. It will be all right, I hope. It will probably be a child like any
other human child on Soror." "I certainly hope not. I'm convinced it will
talk!" I cannot help protesting indignantly. Zira gives a frown to make me
keep quiet






"Don't be too hopeful," Cornelius solemnly says, "for her sake and for your
own."






  He adds in a friendlier tone, "If he talked, I don't know if I should be able
to go on protecting you as I do. Don't you realize that the Grand Council is
on tenterhooks and that I've been given the strictest orders to keep this birth
a secret? If the authorities discovered you knew all about it, I should be
dismissed, so would Zira, and you'd find yourself alone among . . ."






"Among enemies?"
  He turns his head away. That is exactly what I thought: I am regarded as a
danger to the simian race. Nevertheless, I am happy to feel I have an ally in
Cornelius, if not a friend. Zira must have pleaded my cause more fervently
than she gave me to understand, and he will do nothing that might
displease her. He gives me permission to go and see Nova—in secret, of
course.




Zira leads me to an isolated little building to which she alone holds the key.
The room into which she shows me is not very big. It "contains only three
cages, two of which are empty. Nova occupies the third. She has heard us
coming and her instinct has warned her of my presence, for she has risen to
her feet and stretched out her arms even before seeing me. I clasp her hands
and rub my face against hers. Zira gives a contemptuous shrug, but she hands
me the key of the cage and goes to keep watch outside in the corridor. What
a good soul this she-ape is! What woman would have been capable of such
tact? She knows we must have a lot of things to say to each other and
therefore leaves us to ourselves.






A lot of things to say? Alas! I have again forgotten Nova's miserable
condition. I rush into the cage and fling my arms around her. I speak to her
as though she is able to understand—as I might speak to Zira, for instance.


Does she not understand? Does she not have at least a vague intuition of the
mission for which both of us are responsible from now on, she as well as I?






  I lie down on the straw by her side. I stroke the incipient fruit of our
outlandish passion. It seems to me nonetheless that her present condition
has given her a personality and dignity she did not have before. She
trembles as I pass my fingers over her stomach. Her eyes have certainly
acquired a new intensity. Suddenly, with a great effort, she stammers out
the syllables of my name, which I have taught her to articulate. She has-not
forgotten her lessons. I am overwhelmed with joy. But her eye dulls again
and she turns aside to devour the fruit I have brought her.
  Zira comes back; it is time to say good-by. I leave with her. Sensing my
feeling of loss, she accompanies me back to my apartment where I burst into
tears like a child.






"Oh Zira, Zira!"






 While she cradles me in her arms like a mother, I begin to speak to her, to
speak to her with affection, without stopping, relieving myself at last of the
surfeit of emotions and thoughts that Nova is unable to appreciate.

