CHAPTER TEN

I was seized by a deadly terror when I saw their troop advancing. After
witnessing their cruelty, I thought they were going to engage in wholesale
massacre.
The hunters, all of them gorillas, led the advance. I noticed that they had
abandoned their weapons, which gave me a little hope. Behind them came
the loaders and beaters, among whom there was a more or less equal
number of gorillas and chimpanzees. The hunters seemed to be the masters
and their manner was that of aristocrats. They did not appear to be ill-
disposed, and chatted among themselves as cheerfully as one could wish. . . .




 In fact, I am now so accustomed to the paradoxes of this planet that I
wrote the preceding sentence without thinking of lie absurdity it represents.
And yet it's the truth! The gorillas had the manner of aristocrats. They
chatted together happily in an articulate language, and each moment their
faces expressed human sentiments, not a trace of which I had found in
Nova. Alas! What had become of Nova? I shuddered as I recalled the
bloodstained alley. I now understood her emotion at the sight of our
chimpanzee. There existed a fierce hatred between the two races. To
realize this one only had to see the attitude of the captive men at the apes'
approach. They struggled frenziedly, thrashing out with hands and feet,
ground their teeth, foamed at the mouth, and gnawed furiously at the strings
of the net.




   Without paying attention to this hubbub, the hunter gorillas —I caught
 myself calling them the nobility—gave some orders to their servants. Some
 big carts, rather low-lying and completely caged in, were lined up on a
 track on the other side of the net. Into these we were bundled, ten or so to a
 vehicle: a fairly lengthy operation, for the prisoners struggled desperately.
 Two servant gorillas, their hands encased in leather gloves to protect them
 from bites, took hold of the prisoners one by one, freed them from the trap,
 and flung them into the cages, the doors of which were then shut fast,
 white the nobles directed the operation leaning negligently on their walking
 sticks.
When it came to my turn, I tried to draw attention to myself by talking. But
no sooner had I opened my mouth than one of the apes, no doubt mistaking
my action for a menace, brutally stuffed his enormous glove into my face. I
was forcibly silenced and thrown like a bundle into a cage together with a
dozen men and women who were still too agitated to pay any attention to me.






When we were all loaded inside, one of the servants checked the lock on each
cage and went to report to his master. The latter gave a signal, and a roar of
engines echoed through the forest. The carts started to move forward, each
one towed by a sort of tractor driven by an ape. I could distinctly see the
driver of the vehicle behind mine. He was a chimpanzee. From time to time
he made sarcastic remarks at us, and when the engines slowed down I could
hear him humming a rather melancholy little tune not altogether lacking hi
harmony.




  This first stage was so short that I scarcely had time to recover my senses.
After driving for a quarter of an hour along a rough track, the convoy came
to a halt on a stretch of open ground in front of a house built of stone. It
was the edge of the forest; beyond it I could see a plain covered with crops
that looked like cereals.


  The house, with its red tiled roof, green shutters, and an inscription on a
panel at the entrance, looked like an inn. I realized at once it was a meeting
place for the hunt. The she-apes had come here to wait for then- lords and
masters, who presently arrived in private cars along the same track we had
taken. The lady gorillas sat around in armchairs chatting together in the
shade of some big trees that looked like palms. One of them was sipping a
drink through a straw.


 As soon as the vehicles were parked, the females drew nearer, curious to
see the results of the hunt and especially the game that had been shot,
which some gorillas, protected by aprons, were extracting from two big
vans to display in the shade of the trees.
  It was a classical hunting scene. Here again the apes worked methodically.
They placed the bleeding bodies on their backs, side by side, in a long row
as though along a chalk line. Then, while the she-apes uttered little cries of
admiration, they applied themselves to making the game attractive. They
stretched the arms down along the sides of the bodies and opened the hands
with the palms facing upward. They straightened the legs, arranging the
joints so as to give each body a less corpselike appearance, corrected a
clumsily twisted limb, and reduced the contraction of a neck. Then they
carefully smoothed down the hair, particularly the women's, as some
hunters smooth down the coat or feathers of an animal they have just shot.


  I am afraid I am unable to convey the grotesque and diabolical quality this
scene had for me. Have I adequately stressed the absolutely and totally
simian appearance of these monkeys, apart from the expression in their
eyes? Have I described how these she-gorillas, also dressed in sports clothes
but with great elegance, jostled one another to view the best specimens and
point them out while congratulating their lords and masters? Have I said
that one of them, taking a little pair of scissors out of her bag, leaned over a
body, cut off a lock of brown hair, curled it around her finger, and then,
with the others soon following her example, pinned it onto her hat?




  The exhibition of the game was soon completed: three rows of bodies
carefully laid out, men and women alternately, the latter displaying a line of
golden breasts to the monstrous sphere blazing in the sky. Looking away in
horror, I noticed a new figure, carrying an oblong box fastened to a tripod.
It was a chimpanzee. I quickly recognized in him the photographer making
a pictorial record of these trophies for simian posterity. The session lasted
more than a quarter of an hour, me gorillas having themselves
photographed first individually, in good poses, some of them placing one
foot on one of their victims with a triumphant air; then as a compact group,
each of them putting an arm around his neighbor's shoulder. The she-
gorillas in turn were then photographed and assumed graceful postures in
front of the slaughter, with their decorated hats well to the fore.
  This scene was imbued with a horror incomprehensible to the normal
mind. My blood boiled, but I succeeded for some time in restraining
myself. However, when I noticed the body on which one of these females
had sat down to take a more sensational picture, when I recognized on the
face of the corpse stretched out among the others the boyish, almost
childish features of my luckless companion, Arthur Levain, it was no
longer possible to contain myself.






• My emotion exploded in an outlandish manner, in keeping with the
grotesque aspect of this macabre scene. I gave way to a fit of wild hilarity,
bursting out in hysterical laughter.






•     I had not thought of my companions in the cage. I was utterly
incapable of thinking! The tumult unleashed by my laughter reminded me
of their proximity, which was no doubt as dangerous for me as that of the
apes. Menacing hands were stretched in my direction. I realized the peril
and stifled my laughter by burying my head in my arms. I am not sure,
however, that I should have avoided being strangled and torn to bits if some
of the apes, alarmed by the din, had not re-established order with a few
thrusts of their pikes. Moreover, another incident soon diverted the general
attention. The gorillas made their way in small groups toward the house,
chatting merrily together, while the photographer gathered up his equipment
after taking a few shots of our cages.






 We men, however, had not been forgotten. I had no idea of the fate the
monkeys had hi store for us, but it was clearly their policy to look after us.
Before disappearing into the inn, one of the nobles gave some instructions
to a gorilla who appeared to be a team leader. The latter came over to us,
assembled his subordinates, and presently the servants brought us
something to eat in basins and some buckets of water to drink. The food
consisted of a sort of porridge. I was not hungry but was determined to eat
in order to keep up my strength. I approached one of the receptacles
around which several prisoners were squatting. I did as they did and
stretched out a timid hand. They gave me a surly look but, the food being
ample, did not try to stop me. It was a thick mash with a cereal base that did
not taste bad. I swallowed several handfuls without displeasure. Our menu
was, moreover, enriched by the good will of our guards. Now that the
hunt was over, these beaters, who had so frightened me, proved to be less
unpleasant so long as we behaved ourselves. They walked up and down in
front of the cages and threw us some fruit from time to time, deriving great
amusement from the stampede these offerings never failed to provoke.


  I even witnessed a scene that gave me food for thought. A little girl had
caught a piece of fruit in the air, when her neighbor rushed at her to snatch
it away. One of the gorillas then brandished his pike, poked jt through the
bars, and pushed the man back as hard as he could; then he put another bit
of fruit inthe same child's hand. I thus realized that these creatures were
capable of pity.




  When the meal was over, the team leader and his assistants set about
rearranging the convoy by transferring some of the captives from one cage
to another. They seemed to be making some sort of selection, but on what
basis I could not tell. Finding myself placed in a group of extremely
handsome men and women, I tried to persuade myself that this was because
we were the most remarkable subjects, deriving a bitter consolation from
the thought that the apes, at first glance, had judged me worthy of being
included in an elite.






I was surprised and overjoyed to see Nova among my new companions. She
had escaped the massacre and I gave thanks to the heaven of Betelgeuse. It
was with her, above all, in mind that I had scrutinized the victims at great
length, fearful of seeing at any moment her lovely body among the pile of
corpses. I felt as though I had recovered a being that was dear to me and,
losing my head once more, I rushed over to her, opening my arms wide. It
was utter madness; my gesture terrified her. Had she forgotten, then, our
intimacy of the night before? Was such a marvelous physique not animated
by any sort of mind? I felt downcast to see her shrink away at my approach,
her hands extended like claws as though to throttle me, which she probably
would have done had I persisted.




  Yet when I checked myself she calmed down fairly quickly. She lay down
in a corner of the cage and I followed her example with a sigh^ All the other
captives had done likewise. They now looked listless, prostrate, and
resigned to their fate.


  Outside, the apes were getting ready for the convoy to move off. A
tarpaulin was stretched over our cage and fastened halfway down the sides,
letting in some light. Orders were issued; the engines started. I found myself
traveling at high speed toward an unknown destination, terrified by the
thought of the fresh horrors that awaited me on the planet Soror.




CHAPTER ELEVEN
I was utterly exhausted. The events of the last two days had broken me
physically and plunged my mind into such confusion that I had been
incapable until now of bewailing the loss of my comrades or even of
picturing concretely all that was involved for me in the pillaging of our
launch.






It was with relief that I welcomed the half-light, then isolation in the almost
total darkness that followed, for the dusk was very swift and we drove all
through the night. I racked my brains to discover some sense in the events I
had witnessed. I needed this intellectual exercise to escape from the despair
that haunted me, to prove to myself that I was a man, I mean a man from
Earth, a reasoning creature who made it a habit to discover a logical
explanation for the apparently miraculous whims of nature, and not a beast
hunted down by highly developed apes.
I reviewed all that I had observed, often without being aware of it. A
general overall impression prevailed: these apes, male and female, gorillas
and chimpanzees, were not in any way ridiculous. I have already mentioned
that they had never struck me as being animals in disguise, like the tame
monkeys exhibited in our circuses. On Earth a hat on the head of a she-
monkey was a hilarious sight to some people, to me a painful one. Not so
here. Both head and hat were in keeping, and there was nothing at all
unnatural about any of their gestures. The she-ape sipping a drink through a
straw looked like a lady. I also remember having seen one of the hunters
take a pipe out of his pocket, fill it methodically, and light it. Well, nothing
about this act had shocked my sensibilities, so natural were his movements.
I had had to think about it before recognizing it as a paradox. I pondered
over this at great length and, for the first time since my capture, I deplored
the disappearance of Professor Antelle. In his wisdom and knowledge he
would doubtless have been able to find an explanation for these paradoxes.
What had become of him? I was certain he was not among the victims that
had been shot. Was he among the captives? It was not impossible; I had not
seen them all. I dared not hope that he had succeeded in preserving his
liberty.






With my feeble resources I tried to piece together an hypothesis, but it was
not very satisfactory. Could the inhabitants of this planet, the civilized
beings whose towns we had seen, could they have succeeded hi training
apes so as to instill more or less rational behavior in them—this, after
patient selection and efforts lasting several generations? After all, on Earth
there are chimpanzees who manage to perform astonishing tricks. The very
fact that they had a language was perhaps not so outlandish as I had
thought. I now remembered a discussion I had had on this subject with a
specialist. He had told me there were learned scientists who spent a large
part of their time trying to teach primates to talk.
They claimed that there was nothing in the conformation of these animals
to prevent it. Until then all their efforts had been in vain, but they were
persevering, maintaining that the only obstacle was the fact that monkeys
were unwilling to talk. Perhaps one day they had proved willing on the
planet Soror? This enabled these hypothetical inhabitants to use them for
certain rough work, like the hunt during which I had been captured*
  I clung desperately to this explanation, recoiling in horror at the thought
of another, simpler one, so essential for my safety did it seem that there
should exist on this planet properly rational creatures, that is, men, men like
myself, to whom I could reveal myself.




Men! Of what race, then, were the beings whom the apes had killed and
captured? Some sort of backward tribe? If that were the case, how cruel the
masters of this planet were to tolerate and perhaps decree such massacres!






  I was distracted from these thoughts by a figure creeping toward me. It
was Nova. Around me, all the prisoners were lying in groups on the floor
boards. After a moment's hesitation she snuggled up against me, as on the
previous night. Once again I vainly tried to discern in her eyes the gleam by
which this gesture of hers might have been construed as an act of
friendliness. She turned her head away and presently closed her eyes. In
spite of this I felt reassured by her mere presence and eventually fell asleep
beside her, trying not to think of the morrow.




CHAPTER TWELVE


I succeeded in sleeping till daybreak through a defense mechanism against
the intrusion of thoughts that were too unbearable. My sleep was
interrupted, however, by feverish nightmares, in which Nova's body
appeared in the guise of a monstrous serpent wound around my own body. I
opened my eyes to the light. She was already awake. She had drawn a little
away from me and was watching me with her eternally bewildered gaze.




  Our vehicle slowed down and I saw we were entering a town. The
captives had risen and were squatting beside the bars, glancing out beneath
the tarpaulin at a spectacle that seemed to revive their emotions of the
previous day. I followed their example; I pressed my face against the bars
and for the first time viewed a civilized city on the planet Soror.






  We were driving down a fairly broad street flanked with pavements. I
anxiously examined the passers-by: they were apes. I saw a tradesman, a
sort of grocer, who had just raised the shutters of his shop, turn around
curiously to watch us go by; he was an ape. I tried to see the passengers and
drivers of the motor cars flashing past us: they were dressed in the same
way as people at home and they were apes.






My hope of discovering a civilized human race became chimerical, and I
spent the last part of the drive in gloomy despair. Our vehicle slowed down
even more. I then noticed that the convoy had been split up during the
night, for it consisted of only two vehicles, the others evidently having
taken another direction. After passing through an entrance gate we came to
a halt in a courtyard. Some apes immediately surrounded us and tried to calm
down the captives' mounting agitation with a few blows of their pikes.






The courtyard was enclosed by buildings several stories high with identical
rows of windows. The general effect was that of a hospital, and this
impression was confirmed by the arrival of some new figures who came
forward to meet our guards. They were all dressed in white smocks and little
caps: they were apes.
  They were apes, every one of them, gorillas and chimpanzees. They
helped our guards unload the carts. We were taken out of the cages one by
one, stuffed into big sacks, and carried inside the building. I put up no
resistance and let myself be hauled off by two gorillas dressed in white.
For several minutes I had the feeling that we were going down some long
corridors and climbing some staircases. Eventually I was dumped down on
the ground; then, after the sack had been opened, I was thrown into another
cage, this time a stationary one, its floor covered with straw. I was alone.
One of the gorillas carefully locked the door from the outside.


  The room in which I found myself contained a large number of cages like
mine, lined up in two rows and facing a long passage. Most of them were
already occupied, some of them by my companions of the roundup who
had just been brought here, others by men and women who must have been
captured some time earlier. The latter could be recognized by their attitude
of resignation. They looked at the newcomers with a listless air, scarcely
pricking up their ears when one of them gave a plaintive moan. I also
noticed that the newcomers had been placed, as I had, in individual cells,
whereas the old hands were generally locked up in pairs. Putting my nose
through the bars, I saw a bigger cage at the end of the corridor containing a
large number of children. Unlike the adults, these appeared






to be extremely excited by the arrival of our batch. They gesticulated, jostled one another, and pretended" to shake the bars, uttering
little cries like young monkeys quarreling.








   The two gorillas came back carrying another sack. My friend Nova emerged from it, and again I had the consolation of seeing her
put into the cage directly across from mine. She protested this operation in her own way, trying to scratch and bite. When the door
was closed on her, she rushed to the bars, tried to break them down, grinding her teeth and whimpering enough to rend one's heart.
After a few minutes of this behavior she caught sight of me, stood stock-still, and extended her neck slightly, like a surprised
animal. I gave her a cautious half-smile and a little wave, which to my intense delight she clumsily tried to imitate.
   I was distracted by the return of the two gorillas in white jackets. The unloading had been completed, for they carried no further
bundle, but they pushed in front of them a handcart laden with food and buckets of water that they dished out to the captives, thus
restoring order among them.








It was soon my turn. While one of the gorillas mounted guard, the other entered my cage and placed in front of me a bowl
containing some mash, a little fruit, and a bucket. I had decided to do all I could to establish contact with these apes, who seemed to
be the only rational and civilized beings on the planet. The one who brought my food did not look unpleasant. Observing my
tranquillity, he even gave me a friendly tap on the shoulder. I looked him straight in the eye, then, putting my hand on my chest,
gave a ceremonious bow. I saw intense surprise on his face as I raised my head again. I then smiled at him, putting all my heart into
this gesture. He was just about to leave; dumbfounded, he stopped short and uttered an exclamation. At last I had succeeded in
attracting attention to myself. Wishing to reinforce this success by showing all my abilities, I uttered rather stupidly the first phrase
that came into my head:








   "How do you do? I am a man from Earth. I've had a long journey."






   The meaning was unimportant. I only needed to speak in order to reveal my true nature to him. I had certainly achieved my aim.
Never before had such stupefaction been seen on an ape's face. He stood breathless and gaping, and so did his companion. They both
started talking together in an undertone, but the result was not what I had hoped for. After peering at me suspiciously, the gorilla
briskly drew back and stepped out of the cage, which he closed behind him with even greater care than before. The two apes then
looked at each other for a moment and began roaring with laughter. I must have represented a truly unique phenomenon, for they
could not stop making merry at my expense. Tears were streaming down their faces, and one of them had to put down the bowl he
was holding to take out his handkerchief.








My disappointment was such that I immediately broke into a towering rage. I, too, began shaking the bars, baring my teeth and
cursing them in every language I knew. When I had exhausted my repertoire of invectives I went on giving incoherent yells, the only
result being that they shrugged their shoulders.








Nevertheless I had succeeded in drawing their attention to me. As they went off, they turned around several times to look back at
me. When I had finally calmed down, completely exhausted, I saw one of them take a notebook from his pocket and scribble
something in it after carefully recording a sign inscribed on a panel at the top of my cage, which I assumed to be a number.
They disappeared. The other captives, at first agitated by my demonstration, had resumed eating. There was nothing else I could do but eat
and rest while waiting for a more favorable opportunity to reveal my noble nature. I gulped down another mash of cereals and
some delicious fruit. Opposite me, Nova stopped munching every now and then to dart a furtive glance in my direction.








CHAPTER THIRTEEN




We were left to ourselves for the rest of the day. In the evening, after giving us another meal, the gorillas withdrew, putting out the
lights. I slept little that night, not because of the discomfort of the cage—the straw litter was thick and afforded an acceptable bed—
but I could not stop working out ways and means to enter into communication with the apes. I resolved never to lose my temper
again but to seek patiently and ceaselessly every opportunity to display my mental faculties. The two warders with whom I had dealt were
probably lowly underlings incapable of interpreting my movements, but there surely existed other apes who were more civilized.




  On the following morning I saw that this hope was not unfounded. I had been awake for an hour.
Most of my companions were restlessly pacing up and down their cages in the manner of captive animals. When I realized I was
doing likewise, arid had been doing so for some time without noticing it, I was ashamed of myself and forced myself to sit down
behind the bars, assuming as human and as pensive an attitude as possible. It was then that the door of the corridor was pushed open
and I saw a new figure enter the room accompanied by the two warders. It was a female chimpanzee, and I realized from the way
the gorillas kept in the background that she held an important post in the establishment.








The warders must have given her a report about me, for no sooner had she come in than she questioned one of them, who
promptly pointed his finger in my direction. Thereupon she came straight over to my cage.








  I watched her carefully as she approached. She, too, was dressed in a white smock, cut more elegantly than those worn by the
gorillas, gathered in at the waist by a belt and with short sleeves that revealed two agile dangling arms. What struck me most about
her was her expression, which was remarkably alert and intelligent. I felt this augured well for our future relationship. She seemed to
be quite young in spite of the simian wrinkles that framed her white muzzle. In her hand she carried a leather brief case.






   She came to a halt in front of my cage and began to scrutinize me, at the same time taking a notebook out of her brief case.






   "Good day to you, madame," I said with a bow.






   I had spoken in my gentlest voice. A look of intense surprise came over the she-ape's face, but she maintained her composure and with
a gesture of authority silenced the gorillas, who had started sniggering again.




   "Madame or mademoiselle," I went on, feeling encouraged, "I am sorry to present myself to you in these conditions and in this state
of undress. Believe me, I'm not in the habit "
   I was again spouting whatever nonsense came into my head, selecting only words in keeping with the polite tone I had made up
my mind to maintain. When I finished speaking, punctuating my speech with the gentlest of smiles, her surprise changed to stupefaction.
Her eyes blinked several times and the wrinkles on her forehead grew more pronounced. It was obvious that she was trying desperately to
find the solution to a difficult problem. She in turn smiled at me, and I had the impression that she was beginning to suspect a part
of the truth.






      During this scene the men in their cages watched us, this time without showing the hatred that the sound of my voice usually
   provoked in them. They showed signs of curiosity. One after another, they stopped their feverish pacing and came and glued their
   faces against the bars to see us better. Nova looked furious and could not keep still.






     The she-ape took a fountain pen from her pocket and inscribed several lines in her notebook. Then, raising her head and again
 meeting my anxious gaze, she smiled once more. This encouraged me to make another friendly advance. I stretched an arm out
 through the bars, keeping my hand open. The gorillas gave a start and made as though to come between us. But the she-ape, whose first
 reaction had been to draw back, recovered herself, stopped them with one word, and, without taking her eyes off me, likewise stretched
 out her hairy arm, which trembled a little, toward mine. I did not move. She drew nearer still and placed her hand with its
 excessively long fingers on my wrist. I felt her tremble at this contact. I did my best not to make any movement that might
 startle her. She felt my hand, stroked my arm, then turned around to her assistants with an air of triumph.






  I was breathless with hope, feeling more and more certain that she was beginning to recognize my noble quality. When she spoke
haughtily to one of the gorillas, I was insane enough to hope that my cage was about to be thrown open, . with a million apologies.
Alas, that was not what happened! The warder fumbled in his pocket and took out a small white object that he handed to his
superior. She herself put it in my hand with a charming smile. It was a lump of sugar.






    A lump of sugar! I fell from such a height, I suddenly felt so discouraged by the humiliation of this reward, that I almost
 flung it back in her face. Just in time I remembered my good resolutions and forced myself to remain calm. I took the sugar, bowed,
 and munched it with as intelligent an air as possible.






   Such was my first encounter with Zira. Zira was the she-ape's name, as I presently learned. She was the head of the department to
which I had been brought. In spite of my disappointment, her manner gave me some hope and I had a feeling that I would manage to
enter
into communication with her. She had a long conversation with the warders
and I fancied she was giving them instructions about me. Then she
continued on her rounds, inspecting the other occupants of the cages.




  She carefully scrutinized each of the newcomers and made a few notes,
more succinct than in my case. She never ventured to touch one of them.
Had she done so, I believe I should have been jealous. I was beginning to
feel proud of being the exceptional subject who alone deserved privileged
treatment. When I saw her stop in front of the children and throw some sugar
to them as well, I felt definitely vexed, certainly no less vexed than Nova,
who, after baring her teeth at the she-ape, had lain down in fury at the
bottom of her cage with her back turned on me.