A JOURNEY IN SEARCH OF HOME


On the Inclusion of “The Wandering Earth” in the 30th Anniversary of Science Fiction World


TRANSLATED BY HENRY ZHANG


Written August 2009, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World: The 30th Anniversary Supplement in September 2009










I wrote “The Wandering Earth” for the 1999 Science Fiction World writers’ conference. At the time, the editor asked all of us to bring our own work; in addition to this story, I took along “Whale Song,” “At the End of the Microcosmos,” and “Time Migration” (all unpublished then). It was the first time I’d engaged with the science fiction community.


I remember it was already very late when I got to the Sichuan Association for Science & Technology Guesthouse, located next to the magazine’s editorial office. In front of the reception desk, I saw a young man and woman, he more handsome and she more beautiful than anyone I’d seen before, like figures from a myth. I immediately decided that they must be science fiction writers, here to attend the conference—unconsciously, I believed that science fiction was as beautiful as they were. So, I hurried up to them and asked whether they were here to attend the convention, and they laughed and said they weren’t (they were probably students traveling during break). Only on the second morning, when the writers and editors began to appear in the lobby of the hostel, did I realize I wasn’t looking at gods, but mortals like me—that myths were written by people who didn’t belong in them, that the pair of beautiful young people I’d seen the previous night were no more capable of writing myths or science fiction than we are of pulling ourselves up by the hair.


At that particular conference, Alai invited Feng Min, senior editor at Journal of Short Stories, to give a lecture on the state of mainstream Chinese literature, and emphasized the need for science fiction novels to find a balance between a literary and a scientific imaginary. In fact, “The Wandering Earth” is a product of this balancing act.


From both a scientific and a sci-fi perspective, if humanity had to engage in mass exodus, as is the case in my short story, I would cast my vote with the faction that wanted to escape in spaceships. An overwhelming majority of the energy needed to propel Earth would be wasted on useless structural load: the matter of the planet’s crust. Such matter gives us gravity, but gravity can also be simulated by rotating the spaceships that carry us. Yet from a literary point of view, the story’s aesthetic core is the motif that science can push the entire planet through its itinerary among the stars. Using spaceships to flee makes much less of an aesthetic impact.


Later, though, something happened to me that almost resulted in the story’s stillbirth. During a work trip, I rode a plane for the first time. As I looked at Earth from several miles high, I still wasn’t able to perceive its curvature; the planet’s surface still appeared as an endless plane—it was a fool’s dream to move such a planet! But after returning home, I persisted in finishing. The first version was only half as long as the published one, but upon my editor’s suggestion, I doubled the length. When I read the story at the convention, Wang Jinkang commented that only a story of three hundred thousand characters could have fleshed out my idea. But I didn’t have the chance to turn it into a novel then.


In writing “The Wandering Earth,” I was forced to sacrifice scientific rigor in many parts. For example, helium flashes are phenomena that occur only in the latter part of a star’s life; only after they occur repeatedly and across a huge span of time can a star become a red giant. Apart from this, my inexperience prompted me to write out the exact specifications of the Earth’s propulsion engines, so that it would be easy to calculate the amount of acceleration they provided Earth. When calculated, these numbers would have resulted in engines that barely increased the Earth’s acceleration. They wouldn’t even be able to shift its orbit, let alone propel it through space.


Over the years, I’ve heard and read a lot of feedback on my work. Some people blabber on for ages and I don’t understand them, but some can use a single sentence to reveal truths that were hidden from me. During a conference in 2000, Yang Ping told me he thought he sensed a strong “longing for home” in my novels. At the time I didn’t agree; I believed such a longing was antithetical to my writing. But now I have to shake my head in admiration, and admit he got it right. Ten years later, a lot has changed, and very soon, I’m going to leave the place I’ve lived for more than two decades. It was here that I spent most of my youth, and where I wrote all of my science fiction, but now that it’s time to leave, I find I’m not reluctant at all. This isn’t my home, spiritually—I don’t know where that home is. Now, as I look at the mountain range outside my window, Ping’s words ring in my head again. In fact, my journey in science fiction really has taken me on the path toward home. Such a yearning lurked so deep inside of me that I didn’t know it, because I didn’t know where home was. That was why I had to go so far to look for it. “The Wandering Earth” stages exactly this kind of scene: a traveler, setting out on a long journey, accompanied by loneliness and terror.