CIVILIZATION’S EXPANSION IN REVERSE


TRANSLATED BY ADAM LANPHIER


Written September 14, 2001, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World, 2003, no. 2










When the alien civilization that generations have dreamed of, have called out for, have sought—when that civilization finally comes to Earth, humankind may find itself faced with an uncomfortable situation that has never occurred to it, even in its dreams: The aliens might ignore our welcoming, outstretched hands, choosing instead to embrace and converse with the ants.


This raises a question we’ve never seriously considered:


Who’s the Earth’s head of household?


If you take it for granted that we are, you’ll find you’re deluding yourself: It hasn’t been much more than a million years since we climbed down from the trees, and the oldest civilization whose legacy we can realistically claim as our own arose just five thousand–odd years ago. Hundreds of millions of years ago, ants were already forging their great empires on each of Earth’s ancient continents. Compared to them, we’re nothing but homeless orphans who’ve just wandered into the room and asked for a cup of water. We’re nowhere near head-of-household level.


You’ll no doubt protest: That’s ancient history! We have civilization, and human civilization is what raises Earth’s standing in the universe.


Yet so far, at least, the evidence hasn’t proven that. We think of the Late Cretaceous, with its asteroid impact and the subsequent extinction of most life on Earth, including the dinosaurs, as the most horrific period in the history of life on this planet. What you might not know, however, is that species are going extinct at a much faster rate now, in the Era of Civilization, than they did at the end of the Cretaceous. The most horrific period in the history of life on this planet is now! Civilization might be the path of light by which life perpetuates through the generations … or it might be a trap, a one-way road to the extinction of all life, ours included.


The defining feature of modern, technological civilization is its tendency toward expansion. Civilization constantly extends its borders, growing in scale as if it were a balloon being blown up, without a thought as to when it will pop.


Consider the Age of Exploration, full of desire and passion at sea. In that short era, European civilization, roused from sleep by the Renaissance, spread like a swarm of locusts to every corner of the globe.


As for what’s ahead: If civilization manages to persist, it will by necessity expand in scale indefinitely and become an enormous macrocivilization. Sci-fi writers have offered many vivid depictions of such superscale civilizations. Larry Niven’s Ringworld, for instance, depicts an enormous structure encircling a star that such a civilization has constructed; in Asimov’s Foundation series, humans have spread throughout the whole of the Milky Way; and in Clarke’s 2001: A Space Odyssey, the supercivilization makes use of a hyperspace structure—a thing beyond humanity’s capacity ever to understand—that in effect turns the entire universe into their backyard.


But what we’re writing is science fiction; if we’re to make slightly more serious predictions about humanity’s ultra-long-range future, we must do so within the parameters of mathematics and the laws of physics. Otherwise, we’re not making predictions, we’re writing myths.


When a civilization begins expanding throughout the universe, its natural first step is its own star system. As you probably know, the geometric expansion of a biome is a terrifying thing. Imagine that the surface of the Earth is a growth medium, covered in a nutritious colloid: If you put an invisibly small speck of a bacterial culture anywhere on its surface, then went off on your summer holiday, that speck would most likely have covered the whole planet before your break was half over. If human technology advances sufficiently, expansion into the star system will be similar: a storm of humanity, propelled by the unfeeling laws of economics, that sweeps across the entire solar system. You’ll realize then that our planetary system is a small place—that even with the metals of Mercury and the asteroid belt, the territories of Venus and Mars, the liquid and solid hydrogen of Jupiter, the materials of Europa and of the rings of Saturn and Uranus, and the methane of Pluto, we still wouldn’t have nearly enough resources for our consumption! Humanity would soon face an ecological and existential crisis in the solar system, just as it had on Earth. Civilization’s next step would be to expand into extrasolar space, at which point it would bump up against an impenetrable wall: the speed of light.


There is no theoretical or observational proof for the existence of wormholes through space-time, and spatial folding is a fool’s errand. Our current theoretical framework doesn’t allow anything to exceed the speed of light. As I said earlier, to distinguish our predictions from mere myths, we must abide by this limitation. Indeed, with any means of astronautical propulsion foreseeable at present—fusion power, solar sails, and so on—we’d be hard-pressed to get a substantial interstellar vessel moving at even one-tenth the speed of light. At that speed, a trip to the nearest star and back might take nearly a century; a return trip to a star with significant available resources might take thousands of years, or even longer. Such a time frame would never be tolerable to the fast-growing economy of a technologically advanced society. Therefore, a global civilization of the future would propagate to other stars much as a dandelion spreads its seeds on the wind, which scatters them far apart before they land and grow into new dandelions. They’d have no way to connect with each other, and they’d never be able to reunite as a single entity. If Asimov’s Galactic Empire were real, it would be an enormous and unfathomably slow beast—when its brain wanted to move a finger, it would take a million years for the order to get to the finger, and another million for the brain to learn whether the finger did, in fact, move.


From this, we can infer that there is no interstellar macrocivilization in the universe. In other words, unlimited spatial expansion is not a feasible way to advance civilization.


Let’s shift our thinking toward the opposite direction. We’ll return to our first topic: ants. How have they survived? Why didn’t they go extinct like the dinosaurs? One critical factor is their small size. An ecological community with small individual members needs little space and few resources to survive, and as a consequence, it’s better at surviving. The space occupied by a single dinosaur that had lain down to nap would, to a city-state of ants, be an immense domain, and what was half a mouthful of meat to a Tyrannosaurus rex would be a year’s rations for every denizen of an ant metropolis. In nature, taxa whose individual members are small are therefore at a self-evident advantage. Nature itself may have taken note of this: If you look at the most prevalent trends of natural selection, you’ll find that as organisms evolve, they tend to shrink.


Shrinking one’s scale is tantamount to expanding one’s room for living. We might call this the civilization’s “expansion in reverse.”


In the long run, expansion in reverse may be the only way forward for human civilization. It’s a bit more realistic, technology-wise, than breaking the speed-of-light barrier. Humans just need to technologically intervene in their evolution to shrink themselves steadily over time. It is easiest now to envision this being accomplished through genetic engineering. At the rate that technology is developing, it isn’t hard to picture human beings one day being able to manipulate genes as if they were compiling a computer program, at which point biology will be capable of miracles that defy the imagination. On Earth today, among mammals with some resemblance to humans, the ones with the smallest bodies are rodents. With genetic engineering, humanity might one day shrink its members down to the size of little white mice, and were we to do so, the world would appear radically different to us. Imagine it: An ordinary two-bedroom house of today would be nothing short of a monumental palace to them! The Earth is already an unimaginably vast place to human beings.


This is just how expansion in reverse might begin, the first step toward a true microcivilization. Such a shrinkage would come nowhere near providing for civilization’s ultimate development. To create a space vast enough for the supercivilization of the future, humans may have to shrink themselves to the size of bacteria! This sounds like an off-the-wall idea—to realize it would require far more sophisticated technologies than genetic engineering: nanomechanics and others we can’t yet imagine—but unlike faster-than-light travel and spatial folding, it at least doesn’t violate any of the basic laws of physics as they’re presently understood. At the microscopic level, the atoms and their quantum states in a bacterium-sized mass are sufficient in number to store and process all the information that is currently stored and processed in a human brain. Maybe you still think it’s an impossible idea, but consider what would happen if you took a Pentium 4 microchip a hundred years into the past and talked about what was stored in that little trifle—it would have seemed like incomprehensible gibberish.


What would a civilization made up of bacterium-sized members look like? How would the world appear to them? Take a second to explore the idea—you’ll soon find doing so to be an unusually exhilarating imaginative exercise. Here’s one of my humble attempts, taken from my short story “The Micro-Era,” which is included in the Wandering Earth story collection:


The Forerunner indulged in the warm bliss of imagination: he could picture the micro-humans’ wild joy when they would first see a colossal green blade of grass rising to the heavens. And what about a small meadow? What would a meadow mean to micro-humanity?


An entire grassland! What would a grassland mean? A green cosmos for micro-humanity! And a small brook in the grassland? What a majestic wonder the sight of the brook’s clear waters snaking through the grassland would be in the eyes of a micro-human. Earth’s leader had said there could be rain soon. If rain fell, there could be a grassland and that brook could spring to life! Then there could certainly be trees! My God, trees!


The Forerunner envisioned a group of micro-human explorers setting out from the roots of a tree, beginning their epic and wondrous journey upward. Every leaf would be a green plain, stretching to the horizon.


There could be butterflies then. Their wings would be like bright clouds, covering the heavens. And birds, their every call angelic trumpets blaring from the heavens.


Scientists, in their speculations about how alien civilizations might behave and the traces they might leave, have historically tended to assume macroscopicity, as in the well-known hypothesis that once a would-be interstellar civilization has reached a certain point in its development, it will by necessity make maximal use of the energy of its home-system star, and as a result, the worlds it lives on will take the form of rings around the star, or even encase the star in its entirety. It follows that by looking for signs of such a star, we may well find an alien civilization. But let’s try starting from the microscale as we consider the existence of alien civilizations: Once civilizations have reached a certain point in their development, they will by necessity miniaturize themselves. This is of no help in our search for alien civilizations, but it would explain why we haven’t seen any so far. A microscale civilization would inevitably not give off much energy to the outside world (whether it meant to or not), making it more difficult for us to detect it. Imagine an alien race whose members are the size of bacteria—they could be right under your nose, holding their Olympic Games, and you’d have no way to detect their presence.


But miniaturization as such is not the ultimate in civilization’s development. It’s possible that a supercivilization might, as Clarke describes in 2001: A Space Odyssey, have “frozen [itself] in a lattice of light.” Such civilizations would have entirely transcended the notion of scope; they could shrink to the size of an atom or grow to the size of a galaxy, if they so desired. Speculations about this sort of civilizational apex are showing up more and more in sci-fi. “The Gravity Mine,” by Stephen Baxter, is a work from the US that was nominated for the 2001 Hugo Award for Best Short Story, which depicts a human civilization of the distant future comprised of force fields and radiation. Such speculations can even be found in serious scientific thought: The Last Three Minutes, a work of popular science by Paul Davies, is a masterful example. To us, however, this sort of civilization seems like a philosophical or even metaphysical subject, and by comparison, the microscopic civilization you found so enigmatic just a moment ago seems much more concrete and tangible.


We can envision another sort of ultimate civilization that, even compared to that ethereal, godlike civilization of force fields, is possessed of grandeur and majesty without peer. This sort is the microscale civilization that goes macroscale in the end. The necessary result of a microcivilization’s expansion into the universe is once again to expand to a macrospatial scale, but in a way that’s qualitatively different from that of primeval macrocivilizations, those whose members are themselves large. This reexpansion will represent another transcendence: the most glorious symphony that life will compose in the universe! I’ll draw a single picture of this sort of civilization and leave the remainder for you to imagine:


A grand fleet of interstellar crafts sail into the solar system. Though each ship is as large as the moon, it’s piloted by a mere few thousand bacterium-sized astronauts, who, even if they were gathered together, we’d need a microscope to see.


When it comes to what the future holds for life and civilization in the universe, all our fantasies are feeble indeed.