DESTINY


TRANSLATED BY ANDY DUDAK


Written May 11, 2001, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World Amazing Files, 2002, no. 3 (Sundance)










We discovered the asteroid 1,800,000 kilometers from Earth.


It was an irregular ovoid with a diameter of about ten kilometers. It revolved slowly, the many little planes and facets of its surface reflecting sunlight like blinking eyes. Our shipboard computer showed its orbit would intersect with Earth in eighteen days. This massive chunk of space rock would strike near the Gulf of Mexico.


Earth’s lookout network should have noticed this a year before, but we hadn’t heard anything about it in the news. We contacted Earth, but after the expected five-second lag, our earpieces were still quiet. We tried several more times and received no answer. It was like humanity was in collective shock. We’d exchanged words with Earth only ten minutes before. The radio silence amazed us more than our asteroid discovery.


Twenty days before, Emma and I had chartered this small ship for a space-cruising honeymoon. It was an old ship under traditional propulsion. In this era of space-time jump flights, our snail-slow old-school cutter seemed romantic and sentimental. We had toured synchronously orbiting Space City, then Luna, and then flown more than a million kilometers up-system. The journey had gone smoothly, idyllic as an old pastoral song, but on the eve of our planned return, things took a turn for the abnormal.


There it was, fifty kilometers off our bow, clear against the dark backdrop of space, real as a museum exhibit on black satin, and I was sure this wasn’t a nightmare.


“We have to do something,” I said.


As always, once I’d issued a call to action, Emma set about planning the details: “We could fire an engine at it, blow it off course.”


A computer sim confirmed this was feasible, but it would have to be done within twenty-four minutes. If the planetoid moved beyond that window undisturbed, it would be too late.


We didn’t hesitate any longer. We moved to a safe distance of one hundred kilometers from the asteroid, then issued the order to the computer. The engine separated from the tail section of our hull. We watched through a porthole as the cylinder spouted blue flame and headed for the rock. The blaze soon became a radiant little star. We held our breaths watching it collide with that massive boulder floating in space. After the initial flash, an immense fireball erupted from the asteroid, expanding fast, as if a new sun had suddenly instantiated before us, and was coming for us. Just when it seemed the inferno would engulf our ship, the expansion slowed, and suddenly it was shrinking, and then it was gone. There was the asteroid again, its surface marked by the engine detonation, the diameter of the crater at least three thousand meters. Countless points of light were flying out from the asteroid, impact ejecta, among them a fragment that swept past our ship. The computer was determining the asteroid’s new trajectory, and we nervously waited.


“Course change successful. The body will not collide with Earth. It will be captured at an orbit of 58,037 kilometers and become an Earth satellite.”


Emma and I hugged, overjoyed.


“Think the leasing company will make us pay for that engine?” she asked, half joking.


“Would they dare ask that of humankind’s saviors? Besides, we’re entitled to proprietary rights on this planetoid. Mineral extraction alone will make us billions!”


With the joy and pride of saviors, we fired the remaining engine and headed for Earth. But once again we got no answers to our hails, leaving us again in suspense. We just couldn’t imagine what was going on at home.


Our going was slow on one engine, and the asteroid passed us, soon vanishing in Earth’s direction. Emma, who’d been watching its progress on-screen, cried out: “God! Earth! Look at Earth!”


I looked, but at this distance it was baseball-sized, a glittering blue sphere, and I saw nothing strange. Emma pointed at the magnified image on-screen. After a quick scan I began to grow afraid: It was the continents. They’d changed. They looked like nothing I’d ever seen.


We turned to the computer for help, and it responded: “You’re seeing the continent shapes and distribution of the Late Cretaceous, including the supercontinent Gondwana.”


“The Cretaceous? How … long ago was that?”


“Approximately sixty-five million years. But your question may be framed incorrectly. Many signs indicate that the Cretaceous is now.”


The computer was right. Now we understood why Earth had gone radio-quiet: Humanity didn’t exist yet.


In our home era, space-time jump flights made interstellar travel possible. Every time an interstellar ship jumped, it left behind one or more wormholes, which then drifted in near-Earth space. If an interplanetary ship accidentally entered one, it might be flung instantaneously tens of thousands of light-years, far forward or back in time. Later, improved interstellar ships led to a purge of the spatial dimensions in these left-behind wormholes; that is, they would no longer change your location in space, but might still produce a time jump. Such wormholes were vastly less dangerous. If you accidentally went through one, all you had to do was retrace your route and go back through the other way, returning to the exact moment you left.


We’d gone through such a time-oriented wormhole without sensing it at all.


Accidental time-hole jumps occurred from time to time, but the backward-jumping ships always returned, among them a planet-mining ship that found itself in the Cambrian period. The astronauts saw an Earth glowing dark red, without oceans, the dry land flowing with magma.


Meanwhile, the forward-jumping ships never returned, a cause for great optimism about the future.


But Earth governments were still most focused on the backward jumps. There were strict ordinances. If you happened into a wormhole, by law you had to return. If you couldn’t return because of wormhole drift (the probability of this was very low), you had to get a sufficient distance from Earth and then self-destruct, to avoid changing Earth history.


“God,” Emma cried, “what have we done?”


My spirits were also low. In a flash, we’d gone from saviors to devils.


“Don’t worry, dear,” I consoled, “not every little disturbance triggers a butterfly effect.”


“Little disturbance? That’s what you call what we did?” She remembered something and asked the computer, “This is the Cretaceous?”


The computer replied in the affirmative. We both understood. What we’d nudged off course was none other than that fateful asteroid, the dinosaur killer.


After a long silence, Emma said, “Let’s go back.”


We promptly turned the ship around and carefully sped back along our original course.


“But what are we returning to?” I sighed. “A trial?”


“Ideally. If humanity still exists, never mind judges, we can die easy.”


Smiling, I shook my head. “You worry too much, Emma. Think about it. Why did humans come out ahead of other species? Why not ants? Or dolphins, or other such animals? They have societies, intelligence … but their degree of civilization doesn’t measure up to our scraps. Opportunities for species evolution are fair and impartial.”


“Okay then, why?”


“Because humanity is the spirit, the soul, of all living things. The cosmos chose us. Look how far our civilization has come. This confidence is warranted! The world we go back to might be changed somewhat, but humanity will exist, and so will human civilization!”


Emma smiled a bit. “I forgot what a believer in human selection theory you are.” She made a sign of the cross over her chest. “I can only hope you’re right.”






* * *






When we passed back through the wormhole, it felt like the cosmos vanished and reappeared. The process was very short. It was like space blinked, and that was that. No wonder we hadn’t noticed the first time through. During the instant of passage, Earth’s silence was replaced by a clamor of EM signals, but our excitement turned immediately to disappointment. The signals seemed to be nothing but muffled bursts of chirps and hoots. Neither we nor the computer could interpret them. We shouted at Earth and still got no answer. Once again, we saw Earth on the screen, the continents now restored to their familiar arrangement, and this at least let me breathe and relax for a moment. If there really had been a butterfly effect, at least it hadn’t inverted heaven and earth.


Our little ship flew on its remaining engine toward Earth. We entered low Earth orbit two days later and had just enough fuel left for descent. We splashed down in the Pacific, near Australia, and the ship quickly began to sink. We had to repair to a small life raft, and then we were adrift. It was the wee hours of the morning. The sun hadn’t risen. I looked around and the ocean seemed like the same old ocean, the sky the familiar sky. The world seemed unchanged.


After drifting half an hour, we saw a large vessel in the distance. We shot a signal flare and the ship came speedily toward us.


“Humanity!” Emma yelled, her eyes shining with excited tears. “It really still exists!”


“I said so, didn’t I? Humans are the soul of all living things. We’re destined to have the peak civilization.”


“But this world isn’t the one we set out from.” She was afraid again. “Look at that ship. I don’t think humans have entered the technological era yet.”


The ship appeared quite ancient, nothing like the vessels of our modern world. But that didn’t mean this world was technologically backward. I noticed the ship had no sails and wondered about its motive power.


It sped toward us and then came to a halt. A rope ladder came down the side. Emma and I climbed up. The crew were tanned and weathered-looking and dressed in rough gray-green clothes. I addressed them but no one responded; then one of them motioned for us to follow him.


We went up a long flight of steps, ascending the ship’s central tower-like structure, which commanded a view of the whole vessel. Our guide presented us to a powerfully built, silver-bearded old man, and said something to us. We didn’t understand, but the computer I wore on my chest did. It said: “Their tongue is similar to ancient Latin, with some differences. The sentence may be understood as … This is our captain.”


The captain also spoke to us, and the computer translated: “You two were drifting alone on the sea. Such bravery! Aren’t you afraid of getting devoured?”


“Devoured?” I said, the computer translating and amplifying my words. “By what?”


The captain gestured at the ocean. By now the sun had risen, and a thin morning fog on the sea’s surface scattered golden sunlight. The water, tranquil until moments before, now surged with waves, which soon broke, and an immense monster breached the surface. Then came another, and amid the roaring water, a whole pod of the beasts soon emerged. Emma and I finally understood the consequences of what we’d done 65 million years before.


Dinosaurs had never gone extinct.


One came toward the ship, halting alongside, its immense body like a frightful mountain peak, and we were in its vast shadow. I saw black, crisscrossing blood vessels under the gray, satiny skin, like vines and tendrils entangling the great gray summit. The dinosaur’s massive neck extended forward, suspending the huge head above us, and seawater came down like torrential rain, flooding the deck. A pair of colossal eyes watched us fixedly. Our blood almost congealed under that grim, cold gaze. Emma pressed against me, shuddering from head to toe.


“Don’t be afraid,” the captain said. “It can’t hurt anyone. This is a zoo.”


Sure enough, the dinosaur watched us for a while, then turned and swam away, its wake surging against the side of the ship and rocking it. We spotted another big ship like ours, far off upon the sea, with two dinosaurs swimming before it.


“You’ve domesticated dinosaurs?” Emma said. “Amazing!”


I too was astonished. “We thought dinosaurs would pose a threat to human evolution. Now we see they’ve only made human civilization stronger!”


Emma nodded. “Exactly! As beasts of burden they’re clearly stronger than oxen or horses. I guess they could move a small mountain without much effort! Darling, you really were right. Humans are the soul of all living things. From now on, I’m a confirmed believer in human selection theory!”


The computer translated our words, and the captain watched us, seemingly baffled. “This is a zoo,” he said. “They don’t harm people.”


Just then I made another surprising discovery: a vision of towering, pillar-like structures on the horizon, their altitude truly shocking. A cloud bank floated about halfway up the immense columns. We were like ants looking at a titanic forest. I asked the captain what it was.


“A building complex,” the captain said, indifferent. “A coastal skyscraper complex.”


“God!” Emma cried. “How tall are they?”


“Some ten thousand of you.”


“A building over ten thousand meters high?” I said. “That would mean, what, several thousand floors?”


The captain shook his head. “A hundred or so.”


“Each level a hundred meters high?” Emma exclaimed. “What a grand palace!”


“A grand civilization,” I said. “A grand human civilization!”


“Those structures were built by the tourists,” the captain said.


“Tourists?” I said. “Ah yes, you said this is a zoo, but … tourists? You lot are obviously not tourists.”


“It’s early,” Emma said. “Maybe the zoo is still closed?”


The captain stared at us in amazement, then turned to look at the distant swimming dinosaurs. This confused us, gave us pause, as did the slow, unsophisticated manner of these humans before us.


A howling chorus erupted from the pod of dinosaurs. The clamor was familiar: we’d heard it in space, coming from Earth via radio. We again marveled at the ten-thousand-meter buildings on the horizon, before a revelation burst in my mind like a thunderclap. At my side, Emma cried out in dismay and fell to the deck, as if suddenly paralyzed.


She surely understood now, like I did.


The cosmos had not chosen humanity after all. In the old timeline, humans had created the apex civilization on Earth, but that had been a one-time and accidental chance. In our human conceit, we’d taken the accidental for the inevitable. Now nature had tossed the evolutionary coin again, and it had come up tails instead of heads.


We were indeed in a zoo, but the dinosaurs were the tourists.


My legs went weak. I fell down and sat with Emma on the deck. The world before our eyes was a dark abyss. We heard the computer translation of the captain’s words:


“You two are rather exquisite looking. I think it will be okay if you stay with us. Both of you will be approved as ornamental humans.”


“Ornamental humans?” I asked, stupefied. The world gradually came back into focus. There was the grand city on the horizon.


“No,” Emma muttered, “I want to go ashore…”


“Are you mad?” the captain said. “Ashore, you would become a food human!”


“A … food human?”


“Food for them. Several thousand food humans are supplied to that city every day! Only in the zoo can you be an ornamental, saved from being food. All humans aspire to this.”


The world seemed suddenly changed into a grim, sinister meat locker. We were thoroughly desperate, and despairing. I was ready to give up on survival, had already begun to plan how to end my life, when Emma pointed skyward and cried, “Look!”


And there it was, a shining celestial body. It had, until a moment before, been hiding in the morning sun’s brilliance. Now we could see it clearly. It was orbiting fast, fast enough for us to perceive it moving. Watching carefully, I could see it wasn’t just a point of light, but a mass with definite shape.


“The Demon Star,” the captain said. “A tourist scientist says they are researching it. They say it was on a collision course with Earth, long ago, and their Savior used a violent explosion to push it away. The tourists claim their ancestors thus avoided extinction. They say there is a crater from this fateful explosion still on the Demon Star’s surface. Look there…” The captain pointed toward the distant city, at its tallest tower. “That is the cathedral. The tourists worship their Savior inside.”


“Do you know where we come from?” I said. I couldn’t help it.


The captain shook his head. He wasn’t interested. Curiosity belonged to the apex species, it seemed. These humans didn’t have it. They might as well have been ants or bees.


“Evolutionary fate is callous,” I said to Emma, to myself, maybe even to those other humans who could never understand me. “Callous and unfeeling. Indifferent. Humanity once enjoyed good fortune. We were lucky and we didn’t even know it. But now … well, we’re not ants or bees, not yet. We still have opportunities, and we should seize them, and not yield to fate.”


“You’re right,” Emma said. “We’ve changed history once, if unintentionally. Why not change it again?”


I looked at the distant, towering cathedral, then pointed at the pod of dinosaurs and asked the captain, “Those … tourists. They must really worship their Savior, right?”


The captain nodded. “As far as they are concerned, the Savior is supreme.”


Emma and I connected to the computer through our retinal screens. We retrieved the ship’s flight files, finding every detail of the course alteration 65 million years ago, including data and images. Everything had been recorded.


“Can you speak their language?” Emma asked the captain, who nodded.


“Excellent,” I said. “Tell them we are the Saviors who pushed away the Demon Star. Tell them we have irrefutable proof.”


The captain and his crew stared at us, dumbfounded.


“Quickly, if you don’t mind! Later I’ll tell you the other story of humanity, but for now, please relay our message to the tourists, and be quick about it!”


The captain cupped his hands around his mouth and yelled in the dinosaurs’ direction. His voice was tenuous and weak compared with their howls. It was hard to believe he was speaking their language.


But the pod of dinosaurs immediately stopped playing. They turned their heads toward us as one, and as one they swam toward our big ship.