END OF THE MICROCOSMOS


TRANSLATED BY S. QIOUYI LU


Written October 1998, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World, 1999, no. 6










Tonight, humanity attempts to split the quark.


The magnificent feat will occur at Lop Nor’s eastern nuclear center. The center itself appears to be just an elegant white building in the desert. The enormous accelerator with a perimeter of 150 kilometers, however, is buried in a tunnel deep under the sand. Nearby, a custom-built, 1,000,000,000-watt nuclear power plant generates power for the accelerator. But today’s experiment requires even more power, which the grid to the northwest will temporarily supply.


Today, the accelerator will speed particles up to 1020 gigaelectron volts, the same amount of energy released during the big bang, when all matter began. With such incredible power, the smallest particle known to humanity will be split, providing answers to the deepest mysteries of the physical world.


There are only a few people in the nuclear center’s control room. Among them are two of the most illustrious theoretical physicists on Earth, representing two different approaches to research on the deep structure of matter. Herman Jones, an American, believes that the quark is the smallest particle and cannot be split any further. Meanwhile, Zhang Yi, from China, believes that matter can be infinitely split. Accompanying them are the chief engineer, who supervises operations, and a few journalists. The other workers are in dozens of control rooms deep underground; those in the main control room can see data only once it’s been aggregated. The most surprising person present is an old Kazakh shepherd named Dilshat, whose village is located over the accelerator. The physicists tried some of his whole roast lamb yesterday and insisted that he be present today. Their thinking was that this is a moment of truth for physics, a moment of truth for all of humanity—so there should be someone present who has no understanding of physics at all.


The accelerator starts up. On a large monitor, the power curve climbs lazily like a newly awakened earthworm toward a red line showing the critical amount of energy needed to split the quark.


“Why aren’t they broadcasting this?” Zhang Yi asks, pointing to a TV set in the corner showing a packed soccer match. Zhang Yi is still wearing the same blue work outfit he had on when he departed from Beijing. It’s easy to mistake him for an ordinary handyman.


“Dr. Zhang, we are not the center of the world. If we can get even thirty seconds of airtime on the news after this experiment has concluded, I’d consider that good,” the chief engineer replies.


“Ignorant. Unbelievably ignorant,” Zhang Yi says, shaking his head.


“But it’s a fact of life,” Jones says. His entire appearance is dispirited. His hair is long and shaggy, and, from time to time, he takes a flask from his pocket for a swig of alcohol. “Unfortunately, I have the misfortune of not being ignorant. It’s hard to live this way.” He flashes a sheet of paper to the others. “Sirs, this is my suicide note.”


His words startle everyone present.


“After this experiment is over, the physical world will no longer have any mysteries to explore. Within an hour, the entire field of physics will come to an end! I’m here to welcome that time. Ah, physics, what a cruel mistress you are! Once you’re exhausted, how can I keep on living?”


Zhang Yi objects.


“People said that back in Newton’s day and Einstein’s day as well, like Max Born and Stephen Hawking. But the field of physics didn’t come to an end then, and it won’t come to an end now. Soon you’ll see that, once the quark is split, we’ll reach another level on the ladder to nowhere. I’m here to welcome the birth of the world!”


“Dr. Zhang, you’re simply restating what Mao Zedong believed. He brought up the idea of infinitely divisible matter in the 1950s,” Jones shoots back sarcastically.


“You two are too far in your own heads,” the chief engineer says, interrupting them. “You can infer that the Earth is round from the differences in solar projections at wells in Egypt and Greece, and you can even calculate the Earth’s diameter. But it wasn’t until Magellan’s trip that people felt inspired. Before, you physicists were all stuck at the bottom of a well. But today, we take a true voyage around the Earth through the microcosmos!”


The energy potential line continues to creep toward the red line. The world outside seems to detect the enormous amount of energy surging deep in the desert: a startled flock of birds takes flight from a grove of tamarisks and pulses through the night sky as distant wolves howl. Finally, the energy potential line crosses the red line. The particles in the accelerator have acquired the energy needed to split the quark, making them the most powerful particles in all of history. The computer leads the energized particles through a ring around the 150 km perimeter of the accelerator, then sends them into a feeder path, where they fly toward their target at close to the speed of light. Under this maximum-energy bombardment, the target bursts with a storm of atomic radiation. Countless sensors stare wide-eyed at the rainstorm. In an instant, they can distinguish the few raindrops that are of a slightly different color. From the combination of colors, the supercomputer can determine whether a quark has been hit, or even whether a quark has been split.


The energized particles continue to be produced and bombard their target. The probability of an accelerated particle hitting a quark is minuscule—no one in the anxious crowd knows how long they’ll have to wait.


“Ah, friends from afar,” old Dilshat says, breaking the silence. “I was here a dozen years ago when they began building all this. Back then, there were over ten thousand people at the construction site. There were mountains of steel and concrete, and there were hundreds of coils several stories tall. They told me that those were electromagnets. But what I don’t understand is this: For the same amount of money, resources, and labor, you could irrigate the desert and fill it with grapes and hami melons. Yet you’re doing something no one understands.”


“Sheikh Dilshat, we are investigating one of the mysteries of the physical world. This is far more important than anything else!” Zhang Yi says.


“I’m not very knowledgeable, but I do know that all of you with the greatest education in the world seem to be looking for the world’s tiniest grain of sand.”


Everyone gathered is excited to hear the old Kazakh shepherd’s clear description of particle physics.


“Excellent!” Jones shouts once the interpreter is done speaking. “He believes,” he said, pointing to Zhang Yi, “that the grain of sand can keep getting smaller. But I believe that nothing can be smaller than that grain of sand. No matter how hard you clobber it, it won’t break. Who do you think is correct, sir?”


Old Dilshat shakes his head once the interpreter finishes translating. “I don’t know. You don’t even know. How can an ordinary person make heads or tails of the outcome of all this?”


“So you remain agnostic?” Zhang Yi asks.


The old shepherd’s timeworn eyes sink into deep contemplation.


“The world is truly incomprehensible. Ever since I was young, I’ve led flocks of sheep through the endless Gobi Desert to look for fresh pastures. There were many nights when I lay out in the wilderness with the sheep and gazed at a sky full of stars. The stars were so thickly dotted together, sparkling like gems, like the jewels in a woman’s black hair … When the night is young, the sands of the Gobi are still warm beneath you, and the wind sighs with the voice of the desert. In those moments, the world is alive, like a baby deep in slumber. You don’t need ears. You simply have to listen with your heart, and you can hear a single sound filling the space between the sky and the earth. That’s the sound of Allah. Only Allah can know what the outcome of all creation will be.”


At that moment, a buzzer pierces through the air: the signal that a quark has been hit. Everyone turns to the screen to face judgment day. A three-thousand-year-old question will soon be answered.


Data floods the screen. The two physicists immediately realize that something is wrong and shake their heads, perplexed.


The results don’t definitively show that the quark has been split, but neither do they show that the quark has remained whole. The data from the experiment is incomprehensible.


Dilshat gives a sudden shout. Of all the people in the room, only he isn’t paying attention to the data on the monitor. Instead, he is standing by the window.


“What in the world is going on outside?! Come look!”


“Sheikh Dilshat, please don’t disturb us!” the chief engineer snaps, but Dilshat’s next words make everyone turn around.


“What … what’s wrong with the sky?!”


Light streams in through the window. The entire night sky has gone pure white. The people in the main control room rush outside, where, over the limitless Gobi, the once-blue dome of heaven now shines like a sea of milk with a soft white glow, as if the world is now cradled in an eggshell. Once their eyes adapt, the crowd discovers that there are black specks in the white sky. A close inspection of the position of those dots brings them to the brink of madness.


“Subhanallah, those black dots … are stars!” old Dilshat shouts, expressing what everyone sees but is too afraid to say: the universe’s inverse.


Amid their shock, someone notices that the TV inside is still broadcasting a soccer match. The screen confirms that they’re not dreaming: a thousand miles away, the soccer stadium is also shrouded in white light. The tens of thousands of spectators in the stands crane their heads to look up with alarm at the sky.


The chief engineer is the first person to calm down.


“When did this happen?” he asks.


“Just now, when that buzzer sounded,” Dilshat replies.


The people gathered fall silent again as they all turn to look at Jones and Zhang Yi, hoping that the two most renowned physicists on Earth since Einstein can make some sense of the nightmare they’re in.


Meanwhile, the two physicists are no longer looking at the sky and both have their heads lowered in thought. Zhang Yi is the first to look back up at the blank white universe and let out a long sigh.


“We should have considered this way earlier.”


Jones also looks up, meeting Zhang Yi’s gaze.


“Yes, this must be the meaning of the supersymmetry equation’s variable!”


“What are you talking about?!” the chief engineer shouts.


“Chief Engineer, our voyage around the world is complete!” Zhang Yi declares, smiling.


“You’re saying that the experiment caused all this?!”


“Yes indeed!” Jones proclaims as he takes another swig from his flask. “Now Magellan knows that the Earth is round.”


“R … round?!” the others exclaim as they stare, bewildered, at the two physicists.


“The Earth is round. If you start at any point on its surface and keep going in a straight line, you will return to where you started,” Jones explains. “Now, we know the shape of the universe. It’s as if we’ve kept going straight into the microcosmos and reached the end—thus arriving at the macrocosmos. The accelerator pierced through the smallest building block of physics, and the energy impacted the largest building block, turning the entire universe inside out.”


“Dr. Jones, you still have something to live for. Physics hasn’t come to an end,” Zhang Yi says, “it’s just begun, like how the field of geography only emerged once we figured out the shape of the Earth. We were all wrong. If I were to pick the analysis that came closest to what actually happened, it would be what Sheikh Dilshat said. Although I don’t believe in Allah, the mysteries and secrets of the universe far surpass what we can comprehend.”


“I recall that an English science fiction author from the previous century, Arthur C. Clarke, once brought up the idea of the inverse of the universe in a story. Who would have thought that that really exists?”


“But now what do we do?” the chief engineer asks.


“This is good. I’m quite happy living in this inverse universe. It’s just as beautiful as the obverse universe, don’t you think?” Jones finishes off the rest of the alcohol in his flask. Tipsy, he throws open both arms to embrace the new universe.


“But, look…” The chief engineer points to the TV inside the control room. The crowd’s agitation and panic is reaching a tipping point into mass hysteria. Surely the rest of the world has fallen into similar chaos.


“Keep bombarding the target,” Zhang Yi says to the chief engineer as the computer continues to analyze the results, its bombarding routine suspended.


“Are you crazy?! Who knows what will happen the second time there’s a collision with a quark? Maybe it’ll cause the collapse of the universe, or even a massive explosion!”


“It won’t! What we’ve seen confirms the theory of supersymmetry. We know what will happen next,” Jones says.


The accelerator resumes bombarding the target with supercharged particles. The room waits for those few differently colored raindrops in an atomic storm to appear.


One minute … two minutes … ten minutes …


Curves and data roil through the screen.


Nothing happens.


On the TV, the sea of spectators loses control. Under the pure white sky, people stampede, trampling each other. The picture flickers as the TV’s signal goes out, until all that’s left is a field of fluttering snow. The universe’s sudden change goes beyond all of humanity’s understanding, beyond what humanity can bear. The world is on a path to madness.


The buzzer sounds for the second time, signaling a second collision with a quark.


Without warning, the universe returns to its usual state: a pitch-black sky glittering with stars.


“You’re doing Allah’s work!” old Dilshat says, standing along with everyone else under an intoxicating cosmos on the dunes of the Gobi.


“Yes, our relentless pursuit of the principles of physics has given us the power of God. This is beyond what any of us could have dreamed of,” Jones says.


“But we’re still only human. Who knows what will happen in the future?” Zhang Yi says.


Slowly, old Dilshat kneels before the heavens.


“Mashallah…”


As the stars twinkle in the night sky, an inaudible melody fills the universe.