HEARD IT IN THE MORNING


TRANSLATED BY JESSE FIELD


Written September 26, 2001, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World, 2002, no. 1


Winner of the Galaxy Award for Readers’ Choice Award










The Master said, “If I should hear the Way in the morning, I would feel all right to die in the evening.”


—Confucius, The Analects, 4.8, translated by Annping Chin










EINSTEIN EQUATOR


“There’s something I’ve been meaning to tell you,” Ding Yi said to his wife and daughter. “Most of my mind is occupied with physics. I’ve only ever cleared away a small corner of it for you two. It’s painful to admit, but there’s nothing I can do about it.”


“You’ve said that before,” replied Fang Lin, Ding Yi’s wife. “About two hundred times.”


“Yeah!” added his ten-year-old daughter, Wenwen. “And I’ve said so, too, a hundred times.”


“But you’ve never really understood, either of you,” said Ding Yi, shaking his head. “You don’t really get physics.”


“That’s fine,” laughed Fang Lin. “I know it’s not another woman. And that’s all I care about.”


The three of them were riding in a small vehicle traveling at five hundred kilometers per hour, along a steel tube five meters in diameter. The length of the tube was thirty thousand kilometers, encircling the entire planet at latitude 45° north.


The vehicle was entirely self-propelled, with a transparent carriage that had absolutely no apparatus for locomotion. When looking out from the vehicle, the steel tube projected forward, straight as a line. The vehicle within shot through like a bullet in a rifle barrel, albeit a rifle with no trigger or stock. The opening ahead seemed fixed at some infinitely distant point, unmoving, sharp as a needle. If not for the surrounding tube walls slipping by like gurgling water currents, there would hardly be any sense of movement at all. When the vehicle came to a stop, one could see that the tube walls were mounted with countless large instruments, as well as a great many hoops, all placed an equal distance apart. At full speed, the hoops became a blur, invisible to the naked eye. Ding Yi told his wife and daughter these hoops were used to produce a superconducting coil with a strong magnetic field, and the thin tube within the tube they could see suspended outside the window was a particle channel.


They were riding in the largest particle accelerator ever constructed by humanity, a device with a path around the planet, dubbed the “Einstein equator.” With it, physicists could fulfill the fondest dream of the previous century’s great scientists: a grand unified theory of the universe.


The vehicle was intended for use by engineers to service and repair the accelerator, but just now Ding Yi was using it to take his family on a trip around the world. He had long promised such a trip to his wife and daughter, though they never thought this was the route they’d take. The trip took sixty hours in total, and all they ever saw was the perfectly straight iron tube. But that was okay for Fang Lin and Wenwen, who were just happy to be together as a family for a couple of days.


And it’s not like the trip was boring. Ding Yi would point at the tube walls from time to time and say to Wenwen, “Well, we are now passing Mongolia—can you see the grassy plains? Look, there are herds of sheep, too … Now we are going past Japan, though actually we’re only just brushing against the northernmost tip of the country. Look, the sun is shining on snowy Kunashiri Island. You know, these are the first rays of light to fall on Asia each morning … And now we are way down at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean. It’s so dark, we can’t see anything. Or, wait, no, there are some rays of light here, dark reds. Ah, yes, we can clearly see, there is an ocean floor volcano. The magma exuding from it cools so fast, it’s just dark red flashes that ignite and then extinguish again, like a big bonfire at the bottom of the ocean. Wenwen, here is where new continents are born!” And so on.


Later, they went past the entire United States in the vehicle, slipping past the Atlantic Ocean to the European mainland via France, driving past Italy and the Balkan peninsula, then entering Russia once again, and onward across the Caspian Sea back to Asia, passing into China via Kazakhstan. And now, they were on the last stage of the journey, returning to the Einstein equator’s starting point in the Taklamakan Desert, at the World Nuclear Center, which was also the main control center for the particle accelerator.


It was dark outside when Ding Yi and his family emerged from the control center building. The wide desert lay spread out beneath the stars, and all was quiet. The world was simple, yet so profound.


“All right, then,” Ding Yi said to Fang Lin and Wenwen, excited now. “We three fundamental particles have now completed one accelerator experiment in the Einstein equator.”


“Father, how long does it take for real particles to go around in the big tube like that?” Wenwen pointed at the accelerator tube behind them, stretching out from the control center east and west, away into the distance.


“Tomorrow, the accelerator will operate for the first time, with the largest particles it can handle, and each particle in it will receive a push like a nuclear weapon,” Ding Yi answered his daughter. “They will accelerate to nearly the speed of light. At that speed each particle in the tube requires only a tenth of a second to travel the rotation course that just took us more than two days.”


“Don’t imagine that trip means you’ve kept your promise to us,” Fang Lin teased. “That didn’t count as a trip around the world!”


“That’s right!” nodded Wenwen, playing along. “When you are free again, Papa, you have to take us along the outside of the tube, so we can see where we were when we were inside. Now that would be a real trip around the world!”


“Oh, there’s no need for that,” Ding Yi said to his daughter. He continued, with great feeling, “If you just use your imagination, this trip was enough. Why, you’ve seen everything already! From inside the tube, I mean. In your imagination. Remember: True beauty is not visible to the eye, but only to the imagination. It’s not like the oceans or the flowers and forests; it has no color and form. You can grasp the universe as a whole, make the whole thing a toy for your own mind. But only with your imagination. And mathematics. Only then will you see this kind of beauty.”






* * *






Ding Yi saw his wife and daughter off, but did not return home himself, instead heading back into the control center. Only a few staff remained on the overnight shift, marking it as one of the quietest times the site had seen after two years of construction and testing.


Ding Yi went up to the top floor and stood on the rooftop, open to the sky. As he looked at the accelerator tube bisecting the earth below, it seemed to him that all the stars were eyes and all the eyes were trained on the line below.


Ding Yi returned to his office below, lay down on the sofa, and went to sleep. It was then that a dream came to him, the kind only a physicist could have.


He was riding in a small vehicle, right at the starting point of the Einstein equator. It began to move, and he felt the massive power of the accelerator. He whipped along the forty-fifth parallel, one revolution after the other, like a ball on a roulette wheel. As he approached the speed of light, the dramatic increase in mass caused his body to feel like a solid hunk of metal. He grew conscious of the fact that his body contained the power to create worlds, and at once knew the pleasure of a god. On the last revolution, he was drawn down a side road and charged off to a strange place, where all was only void. He saw the color of the void: neither black nor white, but the color of colorlessness, though not transparent, either. Here, space and time themselves awaited creation. His creation.


In front of him, he saw a small black dot. It expanded dramatically, and he could make out that it was another vehicle, and inside there was another Ding Yi. Himself. They careened and collided at the speed of light, and disappeared, leaving only a dimensionless singularity in the midst of the void. This seed of all things exploded into a rapidly expanding high-energy ball of fire. Red light gradually faded, infusing into the universe, energy falling cold in the sky like snow. At first, a thin cloud of nebulae, and then fixed stars, star clusters, galaxies.


In this new universe, Ding Yi possessed a quantized self. He could leap from one end of the universe to the other in an instant. And not leap, even, but rather exist at all points in the universe simultaneously. He was like a boundless fog that permeated the cosmos. The silver desert of the fixed stars was igniting inside his body. He was everywhere even as he was nowhere. He knew his whole existence was an illusion of probability. His multi-centered spirit, churning in and out of existence, scanning the universe, seeking a vision of itself collapsing into a dense body. Even as he searched, this vision appeared. It came from two eyes which were floating in the cosmos, behind a silver curtain of star clusters. The eyes had the beauty and the long lashes of Fang Lin, but the lively spirit of Wenwen. These eyes scanned the boundless distance. But in the end, they could not perceive Ding Yi’s quantized self. The wave function trembled, like a breeze over a placid lake, but it couldn’t collapse into being. Just as Ding Yi was about to give up hope, the endless sea of stars did begin to coalesce. Nebulae began to swirl and surge. Then everything went quiet. The stars of the universe formed into a single large eye, an eye one billion light-years wide, its image like diamond dust scattered on velvet. It stared at Ding Yi. Then, in an instant, the wave function collapsed, like a film of fireworks played backward. Ding Yi’s quantized existence cohered at last, at some tiny, insignificant point within the universe. He opened his eyes and returned to reality.


It was the control center’s chief engineer who’d woken him. Ding Yi opened his eyes and saw the physicists and technicians of the nuclear center standing around him as he lay on the sofa. They looked at him like they had just seen a monster.


“What is it? Have I overslept?” Ding Yi looked out the window, and saw that the sky had brightened, though the sun had not yet risen.


“No,” said the chief engineer. “But … something’s happened.” It was only then that Ding Yi realized that they weren’t concerned with him, but something else entirely. The chief engineer dragged Ding Yi to the window. Ding Yi had only gone two paces when suddenly someone stopped him, held him fast. He turned. It was Matsuda Seiichi, the Japanese physicist and one of the previous year’s Nobel Prize laureates.


“Dr. Ding,” said Matsuda. “You may find your mind unprepared for what you are about to see. I … I wouldn’t be too concerned about it. We might all be dreaming, at this very moment.” Matsuda’s face was pale; Ding Yi saw that the hand grasping him was trembling.


He could hardly suppress a shudder. “But I’ve just woken from a dream!” said Ding Yi. “What happened?” They all simply stared, agape. The chief engineer resumed dragging Ding Yi to the window. He looked out. What he saw made him immediately doubt the very words he’d spoken. The reality in front of his eyes was stranger than the dream he’d just had.


In the pale blue of the early morning light, the familiar accelerator tube bisecting the desert had been replaced with a band of green grass. Now a belt of green ran east and west, out to the horizon.


“Back to the control room!” called the chief engineer. Ding Yi followed them there and received yet another unbelievable shock: The control room was completely empty. Every piece of equipment had disappeared without a trace. Instead, all was grass, even growing directly out of the antistatic floor panels.


Ding Yi rushed madly out of the control room, around the building, and onto the band of grass, looking at how it disappeared off in the east, near the spot where the sun was about to rise. His breath came out in a fog in the cold desert air of the early morning.


“Where is the rest of the accelerator?” he asked the chief engineer, gasping.


“It has disappeared entirely—the parts aboveground, and underground, and in the ocean.”


“And turned to grass?!”


“Uhm, no. The grass is only on the desert surface near us. In other parts, it has simply disappeared. The surface and the seabed parts are left with only empty abutments and the underground parts left with only an empty tunnel.”


Ding Yi bent down and picked up a blade of the grass. Anywhere else, it would have been unremarkable, but here it was very unusual indeed: it looked nothing like the succulents or tamarisks of the desert, plants adapted to low-water conditions, but rather plum and crisp. Bursting with moisture, in fact. The kind of plant that could only grow in the south, with its higher rainfall. Ding Yi ground the blade of grass between his fingers, staining them green. A faint clean, grassy smell wafted toward his nose. Ding Yi stared for a long time into his hands. Then finally he said, “This does look like a dream.”


But a voice from the east replied, “No, this is real!”


VACUUM DECAY


At the end of the green grass road, the sun was already half risen in the sky, its light shining straight in their eyes. Out of the rays of the sun came a person, moving toward them along the grassy road. At first it was only a silhouette backed by the sun, the edges swallowed up in the bright emerging wheel of light, making the figure seem like a mirage. But as it came closer, people saw he was an adult man. He wore a white shirt and black pants, but no tie. Closer still, his face also became clear: mixed Asian and European features, which was not unusual in this region, though no one would confuse this man for a local. There was something too regular about his features—they weren’t quite realistic, more like an illustration of a human being on a public sign. When he came closer still, it became clear he was not of this world at all. Because he was not walking. No, his legs stood straight as pens, the bottoms of his shoes floating just above the grass. Then, just two or three meters from them, he stopped.


“Hello to you all. I have taken this external form so that we can communicate better. I do hope you can accept this, my best attempt at a human figure.” The person spoke in English, and his voice was just like his face, extremely standard and without any distinguishing features.


“Who are you?” someone asked.


“I am the dehazardification officer of this universe.”


This universe. Those two words left a deeper impression on the physicists than the rest.


“Did you have something to do with the disappearance of the accelerator?” asked the chief engineer.


“Yes. It was evaporated last night, as your planned experiment had to be stopped. By way of compensation I sent you this grass, which grows quickly in the desert.”


“But … why?”


“Your accelerator, if actually operated to its maximum potential, can accelerate particles to power levels exceeding ten to the twentieth power gigaelectron volts, which approaches those of the big bang itself. And this could bring disaster to the universe.”


“What disaster?”


“Vacuum decay.”


Hearing this response, the chief engineer turned to look at the physicists by his side. They remained silent, their brows furrowed, as they thought it over.


“Do you need a more in-depth explanation?” asked the dehaz officer.


“No, there is no need,” said Ding Yi, with a slight shake of his head. The physicists had thought the dehaz officer might bring up some concepts too difficult for humans to understand, but to their surprise, he referred to an idea proposed as early as the 1980s. At the time, most people thought it just a novel conjecture, with no relation to reality. Ideas like that had been all but forgotten by most.


The vacuum decay concept had made its earliest appearance in a 1980 article in the journal Theoretical Physics, by Sidney Coleman and Frank De Luccia, titled “Gravitational Effects of and on Vacuum Decay.” Even earlier, Paul Dirac had theorized that what seemed to be vacuum in our universe could be a false vacuum, where in seemingly empty space, phantomlike virtual particles emerged and disappeared on unimaginably short time scales. In these instants, the living drama of creation and destruction went on endlessly at every point, making what we called a vacuum actually a teeming sea of particles. So it followed that a vacuum actually had an energy level. Coleman and De Luccia’s contribution was to discover that certain high-energy processes might produce another vacuum state, one without the energy level of the present universal vacuum. The result might then be a “true vacuum” of energy level zero. Such a vacuum might only be the size of a single atom at first, but once produced, the higher-energy vacuum neighboring the lower-level vacuum would fall to the lower level, and so on, in a process whereby the low-energy vacuum volume would expand spherically and rapidly. The expansion rate of the sphere would quickly accelerate to the speed of light, and all protons and neutrons within the sphere’s volume would instantly decay. All the matter in the world would evaporate, leading to total destruction.


“Within 0.03 seconds, the zero-energy vacuum sphere expanding at the speed of light would destroy the Earth. Five hours later it would destroy the solar system. Four years after that, it would destroy the closest star systems, and a hundred thousand years after that, the entire Milky Way galaxy … Nothing would be able to stop the expansion of the sphere, so in time nothing in the universe would escape.” So said the dehaz officer, his words connecting precisely with what the physicists were thinking. Could he actually read their thoughts?! The dehaz officer spread his arms in a gesture of embrace.


“If we look at our universe as a wide sea, we are the fish in the sea. The boundless sea around us is so utterly transparent we forget it even exists. But I have to tell you: This is no seawater. It is liquid dynamite. A single spark could set off an inferno that destroys everything. As the universe’s dehazardification officer, my job is to extinguish all potential sparks.”


“I’m sure that’s not easy,” said Ding Yi. “Our universe already has a radius of twenty billion light-years, which must be a wide expanse even for a superior civilization like yours.”


The dehaz officer smiled then—it was the first time he had smiled, and yet this smile, too, was entirely without distinguishing characteristics. “It’s not as complex as you think. You already understand that our present universe is merely the embers of a big bang. Stars and galaxies are no more than scattered ashes that still retain some heat. You see, this is a low-base-energy universe, and the high-energy star systems you all see now only existed in the distant past. In the current natural universe, even the highest-energy processes, for example large masses cast into black holes, are all many orders of magnitude smaller than the big bang. In the present universe, the only chance for a big bang–level energy process comes from intelligent civilizations exploring with all their might the ultimate secrets of the universe. By concentrating great quantities of energy, they might create that level of power at microcosmic points. Hence, we only have to maintain surveillance over all the civilized worlds in the universe.”


“But, how long have you been paying attention to humans?” asked Matsuda. “Perhaps since the age of Max Planck?”


The dehaz officer shook his head.


“So, was it the age of Newton? Also no? Surely not as far back as Aristotle?”


“All incorrect,” replied the dehaz officer. “The universe’s dehazardification systems operation agencies work like this: Many sensors have already been placed around the universe wherever life has appeared. When a civilization with the ability to produce big bang–level energy processes is discovered, the sensors issue a warning. A dehaz officer like myself receives the warning and then goes in person to observe the civilization on this world. But unless these civilizations are actually going to carry out experiments with energy levels on the order of the big bang, we absolutely do not interfere in any way.”


Just then, a black square appeared above the dehaz officer’s head, about two meters on each side. The surface of the square was of such a deep, bottomless blackness it looked like a hole dug out of reality. A few seconds later, the shadowy outline of a blue globe emerged from the black space. Pointing at this image, the dehaz officer said, “This is the image taken by the sensor placed at your planet.”


“When was this sensor placed there?” someone asked.


“According to your geological division of time, during the Carboniferous period of the Paleozoic era.”


“Paleo … what?!”


“But that was … three hundred million years ago!”


“Surely not as early as that?” said the chief engineer, his tone now one of awe and veneration.


“Early, you say? No, in fact, that was too late! When we first arrived at Earth during the Carboniferous period, we saw the Gondwana supercontinent, with its moist amphibious animals crawling in the primeval forests and swamps. Why, it all sent us into cold sweats of alarm! Clearly, Earth already long had the potential for a technological civilization, so the sensor should really have been in place from the Cambrian or Ordovician periods.”


The image of the planet came forward, filling the square, the lens focused on the movements of the continents. Suddenly it felt like the scientists were carrying out the inspection themselves.


The dehaz officer said, “The image you are seeing was shot during the Pleistocene epoch, three hundred seventy thousand years ago, which to us is practically yesterday.”


The surface on the image of the planet stopped moving, with the lens fixed on the continent of Africa, which was just then on the nightside of the planet, appearing as a large ink-dark patch surrounded by lighter ocean. Something had caught the sensor’s attention: the image zoomed in, and Africa expanded into a more detailed view, quickly taking up all of the scene, as if the observer were on a nosedive toward the planet’s surface. Darkness gave way to greater color contrasts: white at the accumulated snows of the fourth ice age and the darker parts remaining vague and unclear—whether they were forests or scattered rocks upon the plains, the audience could only guess. The lens continued to close in, until a snowy plain filled the scene, turning the display square entirely a single color, that of snow on the ground at night: grayish white, with a hint of dark blue. Then black spots on the snowy plain, quickly resolving into human figures. Next, one could see they were all hunched over, with long skins draped over their shoulders blowing in the wind. The image shifted once again, and the face of a person looked up to fill the screen. In the weak rays of evening light, there was no way to make out facial details, but they could see that humans had very high brows and cheekbones, and long, thin lips. The lens continued to zoom in, until it seemed it could go no further. A pair of deeply sunken eyes filled the screen, the pupils of the dark eyes filled with silvery dots of light at the center. These were the stars, reflected in the eyes.


The image froze on this frame and a sharp sound of alarm arose. This was the system warning, the dehaz officer informed them.


“Why?” asked the chief engineer, not understanding.


“When this early person looked up at the starry sky, the threshold for a warning was reached. For they have now expressed curiosity about the universe. And by then there have been ten of these supercondition events at different points, matching the conditions for a system warning.”


“But if I’m not mistaken, you said just now that the sensor will only deliver its warning when a civilization capable of generating power levels equal to those at the creation of the universe emerges.”


“Is not what you are looking at just such a civilization?”


The people looked at each other, all at a loss.


The dehaz officer smiled his traitorous smile. “Is it so hard to understand? Once life becomes conscious of the existence of the mysteries of the universe, it is only one step away from unlocking these mysteries.” Seeing that the people still did not understand, he continued. “For example, life on this planet took four hundred million years to realize for the first time that the mysteries of the universe exist, but since then, only four hundred thousand years have passed, and you have constructed this Einstein equator. And the most accelerated phase of that development all happened in fewer than five hundred years. If you will, with their eyes on the universe in those moments, that human saw treasure. All of what you call human civilization since then has been little more than bending over to pick it up.”


Ding Yi nodded his head as if he had begun to understand. “When you put it that way, the moment that person gazed up at the stars was monumentally important!”


The dehaz officer went on, “It is for that reason that I have come to your world, and set up surveillance over the progress of your civilization. It’s as if I were looking over a child playing with fire, and the surrounding universe, illuminated by the fire, fascinates the child. But this child might lose control over the flames. And now, the universe stands in danger of being incinerated.”


Ding Yi thought deeply on this. When he finally looked up, he asked what would become the most important question in the history of human science. “So what you are saying is, we can never obtain the grand unified theory? We will never plumb the ultimate mysteries of the universe?”


At this, all the scientists gazed questioningly at the dehaz officer, like souls awaiting their final judgment.


“There are many tragedies to a life of wisdom and this is one of them,” the dehaz officer said blandly.


Matsuda, his voice quavering, asked, “As a higher civilization, how do you all accept such a terrible thing?”


“We are truly fortunate children in this universe, for we have obtained the unified theory.”


Immediately, the fires of hope were reignited in the hearts of the scientists.


But Ding Yi thought of another terrifying possibility. “You mean … vacuum decay has actually happened, somewhere?”


The dehaz officer shook his head. “We used another method to obtain the unified model, which we cannot speak of now, though at a later time I may explain it to you in detail.”


“And can we not repeat that method?”


The dehaz officer continued to shake his head. “Its time has passed, and no civilization in this universe may repeat it.”


“Well, but, please, then tell us humans of the unified theory of the universe!”


The dehaz officer shook his head again.


“We beg of you! This is very important to us—no, it’s everything to us!” Ding Yi rushed forward to grasp the dehaz officer by the arm, but his hands passed through the form of the man, feeling nothing at all.


“The Knowledge Protection Directive prohibits doing so.”


“Knowledge Protection Directive?!”


“It is the highest directive regarding civilized worlds in the universe: A higher-level civilization is not permitted to transmit knowledge to a lower-level civilization. We call this behavior ‘knowledge pipeline delivery.’ Lower-level civilizations can only obtain knowledge by their own investigation.”


“But that isn’t rational!” cried Ding Yi in a petulant voice. “Better you all explained the unified theory to all of the civilizations seeking the deepest secrets of the universe, so they would not try to arrive at them via high-energy experiments. Wouldn’t the universe be safer then?”


“Your thinking is too simplistic. The unified theory only covers this universe. As soon as you had it you would know that countless other universes exist, and then you would thirst for the trans-unified theory, to comprehend all of these universes. Plus, the grand unified theory would supply you with the knowledge to build technology that could generate even higher-energy processes, which you would use to try to tunnel through the barriers between different universes. But there are differences in the vacuum energies of different universes, so this would lead to vacuum decay, simultaneously destroying both universes, and maybe more. Knowledge pipeline delivery would also involve even more direct negative results and disasters in the lower civilization, for reasons that you all presently cannot understand. Therefore, the Knowledge Protection Directive must never be violated. What this directive refers to as ‘knowledge’ not only includes the deep secrets of the universe, but also refers to all of the knowledge you presently do not possess, including knowledge at each level. Imagine, for example, if human beings still did not know Newton’s three laws or calculus—I would similarly not be able to give these to you.”


The scientists fell silent. In their eyes, the sun which had just risen so high had sunk at once into darkness. To them, the whole universe in an instant became a grand tragedy, the depth of which they could not grasp immediately, but which would trickle over and through them for the rest of their lives. It would be torture. In fact, the rest of their lives would hold little meaning.


Matsuda sat down on the grass, dazed. What he said next would be famous later. “In a universe that cannot be known, my heart hardly cares to keep on beating.”


These words expressed precisely what all the physicists were feeling, with their glazed and sluggish eyes. It looked as if they wanted to cry, but the tears wouldn’t come. They were like that for some indeterminate time, until Ding Yi suddenly broke the silence.


“I’ve got it! I’ve thought of a way to get the grand unified theory without breaking the Knowledge Protection Directive.”


The dehaz officer nodded at him. “Let’s hear it.”


“You tell me the ultimate secret of the universe. Then, you destroy me.”


“I’ll give you three days’ time to consider this,” the dehaz officer said, answering Ding Yi with neither surprise nor hesitation.


Ding Yi was wild with joy. “You mean this will work?!”


The dehaz officer nodded his head.


THE ALTAR OF TRUTH


What should people call the huge half-spherical body, its flat surface facing up and its round surface lodged in the desert, looking from far away like an overturned hill? The dehaz officer had constructed the half sphere out of sand, somehow causing a huge tornado to spring up out of the desert. In the midst of the wind, a tall pillar of sand had finally condensed into this form. No one knew what he had used to form so much sand into such a precise hemisphere shape, and of such strength and durability it could sit, lodged round side down, without collapsing. But the hemisphere was unstable in this position, swaying visibly as gusts of wind passed over the desert.


The dehaz officer had told them that on his world this sort of hemisphere served as an altar. During the ancient age of that civilization, scholars had collected on such altars to discuss the secrets of the universe. Because of the instability of a hemisphere placed in this way, the scholars on the altar had to distribute themselves carefully over its surface, or else the hemisphere would tilt to one side, causing the people on it to slide off. The dehaz officer said little more about any deeper meaning the shape might have, but people guessed that it might symbolize the unbalanced and unstable state of the universe.


To one side of the hemisphere, there was a long sloping path, also made out of sand, that led from the ground up to the altar. In the dehaz officer’s world, this path was not necessary, for even before they had become omnipotent, his race had been a transparent life-form equipped with two pairs of wings, and so they could fly directly onto the altar. The slope, then, was constructed especially for humans. Some three hundred of them would travel up the path to the altar of truth, where they would give their lives in exchange for the deepest secrets of the universe.


Three days before, after the dehaz officer had agreed to Ding Yi’s request, new developments were driving the world to despair: in the space of a single short day, hundreds of people had made the same request. Besides the world’s core scientists, other scholars from all over the world wanted it. At first it was only physicists, but later physicists and cosmologists, and then scientists from mathematics, biology, and all the basic sciences, and then even economists, historians, and others from outside the natural sciences. These people who asked to trade their lives for truth were all at the cutting edge of their fields, the elite even among the elite, with half of them winners of Nobel Prizes. The altar of truth had attracted the cream of the crop, as far as the human sciences were concerned.


The altar of truth was no longer in a desert, as the grass the dehaz officer had planted three days before had quickly spread, the band doubling in width, its unruly margins now just beneath the altar. More than ten thousand people had assembled on the grass: besides the scientists aiming to give up their lives and reporters from media organizations around the world, there were also the family and friends of the scientists. Two days and two nights of ceaseless pleading had left them all exhausted and sick at heart. But even with spirits at the edge of collapse, they still decided to give it their all, until the last minute. Helping them at this task were representatives from all the world’s governments, including more than ten heads of state, all trying their hardest to hold on to the scientific elite of their countries.






* * *






“How could you bring our child here?!” Ding Yi demanded of Fang Lin, aghast. Behind them, Wenwen sat and played on the grassy ground, totally unaware of what was going on. She had the only happy face in a crowd of dark expressions.


“I want her to see you die,” Fang Lin said coldly, her face pale and wan, her two eyes focused on the distance.


“Do you think her presence will stop me?”


“I don’t hold out any hope for that, but I hope I can at least stop your daughter from being like you.”


“You can punish me, but the child…”


“No one can punish you, and don’t you pretend that what is about to happen is a punishment to you. You’re finally making your dreams come true!” Lin yelled as she turned to face him.


Ding Yi looked straight into the eyes of his wife and said, “I guess you finally know me, on a deeper level.”


“I don’t know anyone. There’s nothing in my heart now. Nothing except hatred.”


“You of course have the right to hate me.”


“I hate physics!”


“But if it weren’t for physics, humans now would still be just animals living in forests or caves.”


“Well, I’m hardly happier than them!”


“But I’m happy. I wish you could share in my happiness.”


“Let your child share it with you, when she sees with her own eyes her father leaving her forever. At least then, after she’s grown, she will stay away from physics. What poison it is!” Lin scoffed in disgust.


The heads of state were holding forth with the dehaz officer on the altar of truth, beseeching him to refuse the scientists’ requests.


The president of the United States said, “Sir—if I may call you that? Our world’s best scientists are all here. Surely you don’t really want to destroy science on this planet?”


“It’s not as severe as all that,” said the dehaz officer. “Another batch of scientific elite will quickly surge forth and take their place, for exploring the secrets of the universe is the basic instinct of all intelligent life.”


“Given we are all intelligent life-forms, how could you kill fellow scholars? Isn’t that too cruel?”


“This is their own choice. Their lives are their own. And of course, can be exchanged for what they think is highest and most valuable.”


“You needn’t remind us of that!” exclaimed the Russian president. “We humans are long used to exchanging our lives for something higher. During the wars of the last century, more than twenty million in our countries did just that. But the fact now is that those scientists’ lives get us nothing in return! Only they themselves will gain the knowledge they seek, and then you allow them only ten minutes more of life! They have become slaves to their desire for the final truth. Surely you too understand this to be the case?”


“What I understand to be the case is this: They are the only correct and reasonable living individuals in this star system.”


The heads of state exchanged looks, then looked back in confusion and puzzlement at the dehaz officer.


The dehaz officer spread his arms as if to embrace the heavens: “Life is a small price to pay for the chance to glimpse the beauty of universal harmony.”


“But after they see this beauty they only have ten minutes to live!”


“Even without the ten minutes, it would still be worth it to experience this ultimate beauty.”


The heads of state looked at each other, all shaking their heads with wry and bitter smiles.


“With the progress of civilization, people like these will gradually increase in number,” said the dehaz officer, pointing at the scientists gathered beneath the altar. “In the end, when the problems of existence are completely solved, when love disappears because individuation gives way to connection, and when art finally dies out upon reaching the final peaks of exquisiteness and obscurity, the pursuit of extreme beauty of the universe will become the only thing civilization can put its faith in. Then what these people want now will align with the basic values of the world.”


The heads of state were silent a moment, trying to understand what the dehaz officer had said, when the president of the United States suddenly began to laugh. “Haha! Sir, you are having us on—you are playing a game with all of humanity!”


The dehaz officer looked confused. “I do not understand…”


“Humanity is not as stupid as you imagine,” said the prime minister of Japan in reply. “Even a child could grasp fallacies in your logic!”


At this, the dehaz officer seemed even more confused. “I don’t see any logical fallacies in what I’ve said.”


The American president went on, after another wry laugh. “A trillion years from now, our universe will be filled with highly progressed civilizations. Well, if it is as you say, and the desire for the state of final truth will become the basic value of the entire universe, at that time all the civilizations of the universe will agree, use high-energy experiments to investigate the trans-unified theory that comprehends all of the universes—will they not worry that they will destroy everything, including themselves, in the course of these experiments? Do you wish to tell us that this will happen?!”


The dehaz officer stared at the heads of state for a long time without speaking, a strange gaze that made them shiver with its creepiness. One of them seemed to have a realization.


“Wait. You’re saying…”


The dehaz officer raised a hand to stop him from going on, then walked toward the edge of the altar of truth. There, in a loud, bright voice, he said to all:


“You all certainly wish to know how we obtained the grand unified theory. Now this can be told to you.


“Long, long ago, our universe was much smaller than it is today, and very hot, too. The fixed stars had not appeared, but there were materials that had condensed from the energy, forming nebulae that permeated the red glow of space. Life appeared at this time—a kind of life formed from thin clouds of matter bound in force fields, with bodies that looked like tornadoes. This kind of nebulae life progressed rapidly as a flash, quickly producing an advanced civilization that spread all over the universe. When the nebulae civilization’s own desire for the ultimate truths of the universe reached its peak, all the worlds of the whole universe agreed to risk the vacuum decay danger to advance experiments with big bang–level energies, in order to explore the grand unified theory of the universe.


“The nebulae life-forms’ methods for controlling matter were entirely different from those of life in the universe today. Owing to the severe lack of matter in general, they made their own bodies into the things they wanted. After they made their final decision, some of the bodies on some of the worlds rapidly transformed themselves into accelerator parts. Finally, more than a million of these nebulae linked themselves up, forming a particle accelerator that could reach the energy levels at the creation of the universe. When the accelerator went into operation, a dazzling blue ring of light flashed among the dark red nebulae.


“They knew well the dangers of this experiment. As they recorded the results of the experiment, they transmitted the data through a gravity wave propelled outward, this being the only form that could carry information through a vacuum decay event.


“After the accelerator operated for a time, the vacuum decay event did occur. The lower-energy vacuum sphere expanded from atomic size at the speed of light, expanding in the blink of an eye to astronomical size, evaporating and utterly destroying everything inside. Eventually, the speed of vacuum sphere expansion exceeded the expansion of the universe itself, and after enough time had passed, the entire universe was destroyed.


“A long time passed, and the universe had nothing in it at all. Then, the material which had been evaporated slowly began to re-condense. Nebulae appeared again, but the universe was entirely dead and alone. Until, that is, the fixed stars and planets appeared, when life finally once again sprouted in the universe. In those early days, the gravity wave sent forth by the extinct nebulae civilization continued to reverberate, though the appearance of solid matter caused it to swiftly diminish. But just before it was entirely lost, the earliest civilization to appear in the universe intercepted it, and the information it carried was decoded, so that from this ancient experimental data the new civilization obtained the grand unified theory. They discovered that the most crucial data for building the model was produced in the last one ten-thousandth of a second before the vacuum decay.


“Let us consider the situation of the nebulae universe. Even as the vacuum sphere expanded and destroyed the universe, the worlds outside the sphere, beyond the sphere’s event horizon as they were, could not have seen the catastrophe coming. So up until the moment the vacuum arrived, these worlds were entirely focused on receiving data from their accelerator. One ten-thousandth of a second after they had enough data to build the grand unified model, the vacuum sphere destroyed everything. However, the speed of thought among the nebulae was so high, one ten-thousandth of a second was a relatively long time for them. Therefore, they could have deduced the grand unified model in their last moment of life. Of course, this could be mere self-consolation. More likely, they did not deduce anything. Which means the nebulae civilization ripped open the fabric of the universe, but they themselves were destroyed before glimpsing the ultimate beauty of the universe. Perhaps they deserve our respect all the more, when we realize they knew the risks even before they began their experiments, and sacrificed themselves even as they supplied the data on the ultimate secrets of the universe to distant future civilizations.


“Now you all should understand that the pursuit of the most ultimate truth of the universe is the final aim of civilization.”


The dehaz officer’s story made everyone enter a long period of silent thought. Whether the humans of Earth agreed with his last sentence or not, one thing was sure: He had just left a permanent impression on human thought and culture.


The American president broke the silence. “You have painted a dark vision for civilization! Is it really true that in the long course of time, all humanity’s hope and hard work just comes down to the moth flying into the flame?”


“The moth certainly does not find it dark. To the moth, there is at least a brief period of light.”


“Humanity absolutely cannot accept such a view of life!”


“This is entirely understandable. In our universe reborn after vacuum decay, civilization is still in its early stages, and every world has its own ways, pursuing different aims. To the majority of worlds, the pursuit of ultimate truth does not possess the highest meaning. To risk the danger of destroying the universe for it would not be fair to the majority of lives in the universe. Even on my own world, certainly not all members agree to sacrifice all. Therefore, we ourselves have not continued trans-unified model high-energy experiments, and have set up the dehazardification system throughout the entire universe. But we believe that with the advance of civilization, there will finally come a day when all of the worlds of the universe will agree on the ultimate aim of civilization. Even right now in your infant civilization, there are already people who agree with this view.


“All right, the time has come. If any of you do not wish to exchange your life for truth, then please go back down and allow those who do so to come up.”


The heads of state went down from the altar of truth and, when face-to-face with those scientists, made their last effort.


The president of France said, “How about this: Let us put the matter off a bit! Come with me! There is more to life for us to experience. Let’s relax. Listen to the songs of the birds at dusk. We’ll stare at the silver moon, as old familiar music plays. We’ll drink our wine, and think of those we love … Yes, yes, you will discover that the ultimate truth is not so important as you first thought. There is more beauty in life than in the harmony of the universe!”


“All life follows reason,” replied a physicist, coldly. “You will never understand.”


The French president wanted to say more, but the president of the United States lost patience. “Fine! It’s no good playing fiddle for the cows! Can you not see what a group of irresponsible people this is? What a bunch of con artists and deceivers they are?! They all whooped it up about doing research for the benefit of all mankind, when actually they just take society’s wealth to satisfy their own perverted desires for some kind of mysterious beauty. Is there really any difference between that and using public money to visit a prostitute?”


Ding Yi rushed up and patted the president on the shoulder, saying with a laugh, “Well, Mr. President, science has come all this way and now, at least, someone can better define its fundamental character and substance.”


Matsuda, off to one side, said, “We have long admitted his point and told you so; it’s just that you never believed us.”


THE EXCHANGE


The exchange of life for truth began.


The first group of eight mathematicians came up the long sloping path to the altar of truth. There was no wind over the desert sands, as if nature itself held its breath. All was silent. The just-risen sun threw long shadows from the humans onto the desert, and these shadows were all that moved in a world now frozen.


The figures of the mathematicians disappeared onto the altar of truth, invisible now to the people below. All kept still, listening with bated breath. Then came the voice of the dehaz officer, crystal clear in the tomb-like silence:


“Please ask your question.”


Then the voice of a mathematician said, “We wish to know the final proofs of the conjectures of Fermat and Goldbach.”


“All right. But the proof is very long, and there is only time for you to see the key portions. The rest can be explained in writing.”


Just how the dehaz officer conveyed the knowledge to the scientists would forever remain a mystery to humanity. In images from a distant surveillance plane, the scientists all turn their heads up at the sky, though there didn’t seem to be anything in the direction they looked. It was commonly held that the aliens had used some kind of thought waves to directly input the information into their brains. But in fact, the actual situation was considerably simpler: The dehaz officer projected the information into space. To the people on the altar of truth, the entire sky had become a display screen, but the information was not visible from any other angle.


An hour passed before someone broke the silence on the altar of truth. “We are finished,” they said.


“You all have ten minutes,” came the placid, if solemn, answer of the dehaz officer.


The altar of truth filled with the surreptitious sounds of many people deep in conversation. The people below could only make out fragments of what was being said, though their excitement and joy was all too evident. They sounded like a group of people who had been traversing dark tunnels for a year or more, suddenly coming to the light at the mouth of a cave.


“… This is totally new…”


“… How could it be…”


“… before we intuited that…”


“Good god, it’s really…”


When the ten minutes were about to conclude, another clear voice sounded on the altar of truth: “Please accept the sincerest thanks from the eight of us.”


A strong light flashed on the altar of truth. When it was over, the people below saw eight orbs of ionic flame rise up from the altar, floating lightly upward, fluttering as they rose, gradually fading, bright yellow turning soft orange, and then red. Finally, they disappeared one by one into the blue sky. The whole process went on in complete silence. From the surveillance plane, one could see that only the dehaz officer remained on the altar of truth, standing in the center.


“The next group may ascend!” he called out in a loud voice.


As nearly ten thousand people fixed their eyes on the scene, another eleven people walked up to the altar of truth.


“Please ask your question.”


“We are paleontologists. We want to know the real reason the dinosaurs were destroyed.”


The paleontologists also looked up at the sky. They took much less time than the mathematicians who had been there before, and soon after someone said to the dehaz officer, “Now we know! Thank you.”


“You all have ten minutes.”


“Well, the puzzle pieces all fit…”


“I wouldn’t have thought of that in my wildest dreams…”


“… did you ever see anything so…”


And then the strong light appeared and disappeared. Eleven flaming orbs rose from the altar of truth, and were quickly lost in the skies over the desert.


Group after group of scientists walked onto the altar of truth, completed the exchange of life for truth, and then with a flash of a bright light were transformed into beautiful flaming orbs that floated away.


All was conducted in quiet austerity. Under the altar of truth, people avoided creating scenes of wailing for loved ones never again to be seen. Rather, the people of the world quietly watched the majestic scene, their own souls deeply cowed as some of their fellow humans experienced the greatest spiritual baptism in history.


A full day passed without anyone seeming to notice. The sun had fallen halfway toward the horizon in the west, the dusk scattering on the altar of truth with a layer of golden, shimmering light. The physicists began their ascent to the altar. These formed the biggest group, with eighty-six people. Just when they began, the voice of a child broke the silence that had held until that moment.


“Papa!” Wenwen, in tears, rushed out from among the crowd on the grass, ran straight to the sloping path, and charged into the group of physicists, clutching Ding Yi by his leg. “Papa, I won’t let you turn into one of those balls of fire that floats away!”


Ding Yi lightly embraced his daughter. “Wenwen,” he asked. “Tell Papa, can you remember the worst thing that ever happened to you?”


Wenwen, sniffing back her tears, thought for several seconds, then said, “I’ve been growing up out here in the desert, and I … I wanted so bad to go to the zoo. Last time, Papa went south for a meeting. You brought me to a big zoo, but as soon as we went in, your phone rang, and you said something urgent happened at work. The zoo only allowed children with adults, so I had to leave with you. You never took me there again. Papa, this was the worst thing that happened to me. I cried on the plane the whole way back.”


Ding Yi said, “But, my child! You will certainly have a chance to visit that zoo again. Mama can take you. With Papa now, it’s different. He’s also at the entrance to the big zoo, and inside are the mysterious things Papa always dreamed of seeing. But if Papa does not go now, later there will never be another chance.”


Wenwen stared at her father with her tear-filled eyes a moment, nodded her head and said, “Then … then go, Papa.”


Fang Lin came up, took her daughter from Ding Yi’s arms, eyes glaring at the altar of truth that loomed before her, and said, “Wenwen, your father may be the most selfish papa in the world … but he really does want to go to that zoo.”


Ding Yi’s eyes were fixed on the ground as he spoke again, his voice soft as a prayer. “Yes, Wenwen, Papa really wants to go.”


Fang Lin fixed her baleful stare at Ding Yi one last time. “You are a fundamental particle all right—utterly cold. Go on, then. Off to your final experiment.”


The group was about to turn and go when another female voice made them stop again.


“Matsuda-san, if you are going up there, I’ll die right here in front of you!”


The woman speaking was a petite young Japanese woman, standing on the grass by the edge of the platform slope, a small silver handgun held against her temple.


Matsuda walked out from the group of physicists and up to the young woman. “Motoko,” he said, looking her straight in the eye, “do you remember that cold morning in Sapporo? You said you wanted to test whether I truly loved you or not. You asked me, if your face were disfigured in a fire, what would I do? I said I would stay loyally by your side for the rest of your life. But you were disappointed when you heard this. You said that if I truly loved you, I would say I would blind myself, so that a beautiful Motoko would always exist in my heart.”


The gun Motoko held did not move, but her dark eyes filled up with tears.


Matsuda Seiichi went on, “So, my darling, you know deeply the importance of beauty to a human life. And now, the ultimate beauty of the universe is before me. I must see her.”


“If you take another step I’ll shoot!”


Matsuda Seiichi smiled at her, then said softly, “Goodbye, Motoko.” Then he turned and joined the other physicists as they started up again. Neither the sharp report of the gun, nor the splatter of brain material onto the grass, nor the soft thud of the body hitting the ground could make Matsuda turn around again.


The physicists reached the round surface of the altar of truth. In the center, the dehaz officer smiled warmly in greeting. The last light of the dusk went out as the sun set below the western horizon. Desert and grass alike went dim. The altar of truth seemed to suspend over the infinite black depths of space, reminding all of the physicists of the dark night before the creation of the universe, before a single star existed. The dehaz officer waved his hand. The physicists saw a golden star appear, in the distant black depths. At first it was too small to make out, but gradually it grew from a bright point to something with surface area and shape. They saw that it was a spiral galaxy floating toward them. The galaxy grew rapidly, displaying its roiling gases and nebulae. As the distance closed in still more, they discovered the stars in this galaxy were all numbers and symbols, the waves and structures forming one full, organized equation.


The grand unified theory of the universe had begun its slow and majestic passage before the physicists.


When the eighty-six orbs rose from the altar of truth, Fang Lin’s eyes fell to the grassy ground. But she heard her daughter ask in a faint voice, “Mama, which one is Papa?”


The final person to ascend was Stephen Hawking, his electric wheelchair moving slowly up the long slope like a bug crawling up the branch of a tree.


At last, the wheelchair reached the altar and the dehaz officer at its center. By then, the sun had already gone down, and the indigo sky was scattered with stars, the desert and grass below too dim to make out.


“Your question, Dr. Hawking?” asked the dehaz officer, expressing no more respect for him than for any other, but facing him with his featureless smile as he listened to the impersonal inflections of the voice on the scientist’s wheelchair loudspeaker.


“What is the purpose of the universe?”


No answer appeared from the sky. The smile disappeared from the dehaz officer’s face, and some slight expression—despair?—seemed to flash across his eyes.


“Sir?” asked Hawking.


Silence. The sky still was a dark expanse. Behind some thin wisps of cloud, the star systems of the universe continued to churn.


“Excuse me? Sir?” asked Hawking, again.


“Professor Hawking, the exit is to your rear,” said the dehaz officer.


“This is your answer?”


The dehaz officer shook his head. “I’m saying that you can go back where you came from.”


“You do not know?”


The dehaz officer nodded. “I do not.” Just then, he appeared not only human, but an individual with a full personality, as a dark flush of sorrow came into his face. Seeing him then, one could not doubt that he was indeed a person. And all too human, perhaps.


“How could I know,” murmured the dehaz officer.










EPILOGUE


One night, fifteen years later, on the grassy plain that had once been the Taklamakan Desert, a mother and daughter were having a conversation. The mother was in her forties, but white hair had long appeared at her temples, her weather-beaten eyes filled with worry, exhaustion, and little else. The daughter was a slim and delicate young woman, her large and limpid pupils glittering with the reflection of starlight.


The mother sat upon the soft lush grass, her eyes looking dispiritedly at the distant horizon. “Wenwen, first you were admitted to the physics department at your father’s alma mater, and now you are about to undertake doctoral studies in quantum gravity. And I’ve never tried to stop you. You can become a theoretician, and you can put all your spirit into this one field, if you like, but Wenwen, listen to your mother. Please, dear, no more than that. Don’t cross the line!”


Wenwen looked up at the glittering Milky Way, saying, “Mama, can you imagine, all this came from a small point, twenty billion years ago? The universe crossed its line long ago.”


Fang Lin stood, grabbed her daughter by the shoulders, said, “Child, please don’t be like that!”


Wenwen’s eyes were still fixed on the stars, unmoving.


“Wenwen, are you listening to Mama? What’s the matter with you?!” Fang Lin shook her daughter, but Wenwen’s eyes were still absorbed by the sea of stars.


Instead of answering, she asked her mother, “Mama, what is the purpose of the universe?”


“Ah … Noooo.” Fang Lin gave up. She fell back to the grassy ground, her hands over her teary face. “Child, no, no, not this.”


Wenwen finally turned her gaze back, squatted down, and held her mother by the shoulders, saying softly to her, “Then, Mama, what is the purpose of humanity?”


Like a block of ice, the question chilled Fang Lin’s burning heart. She turned to look her daughter in the eye. Then she looked out into the distance, in thought. Just as fifteen years earlier she had looked in that direction. Where the altar of truth had loomed, and beyond, where the Einstein equator had once crossed the desert.


A light breeze sprang up, rippling the soft grassy sea, as if it were the sea of humans roiling beneath the infinitude of the stars, singing quietly to the universe.


“I don’t know. How could I know,” murmured Fang Lin.