ON BALL LIGHTNING


An Interview with Liu Cixin


TRANSLATED BY ADAM LANPHIER


Interviewed on May 23, 2004


First published in Nebula II * Ball Lightning in July 2004 by Sichuan Science and Technology Press










Reporter: We’re delighted you’ve agreed to this interview. You’ve won the Galaxy Award five times now, and I’m sure after reading Ball Lightning, many readers will want to know more about the “hen that laid the eggs,” so to speak. Could you tell us a bit about your process in writing Ball Lightning?


Liu: I salvaged the concept for Ball Lightning from another novel I abandoned, which depicted a near-future war. My short story “Full-Spectrum Barrage Jamming” took material from that same novel, so that story is vaguely linked to Ball Lightning in terms of characters and plot. But in spirit and essence, they are different works: The pure idealism and hero worship of “Full-Spectrum Barrage Jamming” is mostly gone in Ball Lightning, and something more complicated and strange stands in its place. There wasn’t much war stuff that made it into the novel, either; what’s left is relegated to the distant background.


The novel took four years to get published, but the actual writing process didn’t take long—about a season, all told. The manuscript spent most of its time with the publisher. A friend of mine wrote a review of the manuscript online, which led some readers to the mistaken belief that the novel had already been published. That wasn’t the case; the current publication is the novel’s first time to print, and it’s entirely different from the early draft my friend reviewed.


Reporter: What’s your verdict on the novel? Do you, as the author, feel this novel is somehow different from your earlier works? What do you believe is critical in long-form works of sci-fi?


Liu: Ball Lightning is a relatively “pure” work of sci-fi. It’s one of the most technical stories I’ve ever written. Depictions of technology actually overwhelmed the first draft a bit, so a lot of that content was cut in the second draft.


Still, I feel that the biggest difference between Ball Lightning and my earlier works is that it’s packed with details. It’s not a large framework built of grand scenes. As I wrote in an essay not long ago, “Along with its macro-details, it has a wealth of micro-details.”


I think the most important thing in long-form sci-fi is creating a sci-fi figure. This means a nonhuman figure, or at least not a “human” figure as the mainstream literary tradition would have it. In a long-form work that’s set far from reality, this figure might be a whole world of the imagination; in works that are negligibly far from the real world, it might be an imagined, as-yet-unknown object. Ball Lightning belongs to the latter category. It’s a conscious attempt to manifest my concept of sci-fi, to create a nonhuman yet vivid sci-fi figure, which is something only science fiction literature is capable of creating.


Reporter: You mention at the beginning of the novel that the description of ball lightning in the work is based in rigorous scientific records of the phenomenon. Are you worried that experts on the subject or sci-fi fans will criticize the technical details?


Liu: Ball lightning is a complicated mystery of nature. As yet, there’s no theory to explain it and no understanding of its causes. Its internal temperature is superhot—tens of thousands of degrees—but its surface is cool. What’s most amazing about it is the selectivity of its energy release. There’s a historical abundance of eyewitness accounts of incredible events that also appear in the novel, such as ball lightning incinerating people but leaving their clothing entirely unscathed. Not long ago, Russian scientists claimed to have generated it in the lab, but soon learned that what they’d made was a droplet of liquid with an electrically charged surface, which is not the same thing as ball lightning as it appears in nature. As stated in the preface, the ball lightning in the novel is just a sci-fi literary figure, a rendition of a sci-fi aesthetic; it shouldn’t be taken as a scientific explanation of the phenomenon. In truth, my own (naïve and amateurish) scientific speculations about ball lightning are quite different. The novel’s explanation isn’t intended to be as logical as possible; it’s meant to be intriguing and romantic.


As to criticism of technical details, I’ll repeat what a master of sci-fi once said: If you’re looking for technical errors, you’ve come to the right place.


Reporter: In your afterword, you make repeated reference to a number of wonderful worlds created by sci-fi greats and expressed your fondness for self-consistent, imaginary worlds. Does Ball Lightning live up to this criterion of yours?


Liu: If you look at sci-fi stories (full-length novels, especially) in terms of their adherence to reality, you’ll find that most fall into one of two categories: They either build their own, complete worlds of the imagination, Creator-style, that are more or less unrelated to the real world, or they set off sparks of sci-fi in the real world—they toss diamonds into the grit of the real world, against whose grayness they sparkle all the more brilliantly. Works like the Foundation series and Dune belong to the former category, while works like the recently published Darwin’s Radio belong to the latter. Ball Lightning is likewise an amalgamation of sci-fi and reality. As the postscript says: The world of the novel is the gray world of reality, the gray sky and clouds we know, gray mountains and waters and seas, gray people with gray lives—yet a little, transcendental thing floats atop this gray reality, like a star in a dream whose light laps across the boundary of the real, hinting at the majesty and mystery of the universe …


Reporter: I’ve found the scientists in your work to be different from how people generally picture them. They have a special sort of “madness,” and the “madder” they are, the more brilliant. Take Ball Lightning—the protagonist almost loses his status as such a number of times and is nearly replaced mid-book by Ding Yi, a maverick physicist with a supporting role before he comes to the fore. Do you see this as an accurate portrayal of scientists, or is it more of a metaphysical or philosophical statement?


Liu: Professional researchers are a common thing nowadays, and naturally, most of them are normal people, but there are and always have been eccentric geniuses in their midst. Mainstream literature doesn’t place much value on such figures because they’re not tropes of the milieu that’s typical of such literature. But the typical milieu of sci-fi is quite different from that of mainstream work, and it permits such figures to exist. Uncommon people crop up more often in sci-fi than in mainstream literature, almost by definition. To speak about Ball Lightning’s Ding Yi in particular, he’s not at all the same as the character in “Heard It in the Morning”—he’s got a number of real-world blemishes. And in point of fact, the book’s protagonist is a normal person.


Reporter: You’ve frequently been criticized for the lack of “real people” in your work. Critics have said your characters are like ciphers—the women, especially. Lin Yun, the female lead in Ball Lightning, is a big departure from this.


Liu: Actually, the female lead of Ball Lightning is characterized simply, too. The reason you think she’s different from my previous characters is that she’s a different kind of person. She’s no hero, and she’s not an idealist; in fact, she’s arguably not even a good person. Her childhood and circumstances while growing up made her thinking as cold as a machine’s, and a bit warped, too … But as I said, the literary figure that Ball Lightning endeavors to create isn’t a heroine—it’s ball lightning.


I’d like to digress a bit here and say that some people may question the way the female lead behaves or the role she plays in the novel. As the author, I, too, sincerely wish that her characterization were implausible. Unfortunately, it isn’t—reality is much, much more complicated than the postulates and laws of theory.


Reporter: Many of your works feature a substantial sense of realism and an exuberant patriotic fervor—“Fire in the Earth” and “Full-Spectrum Barrage Jamming,” for instance—and Ball Lightning is no exception. How do you view this strain in your work? Isn’t it a bit odd to maintain a national standpoint in sci-fi literature, which promotes a panhuman perspective?


Liu: You may be thinking by inertia here. Ball Lightning might have the “substantial sense of realism” you mention, but there’s really no “exuberant patriotic fervor” in it, nor is there any nationalistic stuff at all—and there’s definitely no element of wish fulfillment. China doesn’t win the book’s war in any meaningful way; like the rest of the world, it’s left trembling at macro-fusion, which is a more fearsome threat than war. Yet the detailed descriptions in the novel are realistic, too, particularly implications about the current state of the military in the character of the female lead. Still, as I said above, this is meant only to add to the novel’s sense of immediacy.


As for my previous works, their sense of realism and patriotism varies based on their subject matter. There’s no sense of realism in “Cloud of Poems” or “The Micro-Era,” and there’s no patriotism in “Devourer” or “Heard It in the Morning.” As you said, science fiction is indeed the literature of panhumanism—but that doesn’t seem at odds with it having a national standpoint. Would you expect a wartime traitor from 1940 to sacrifice their life for the civilizations of Earth in 2140?


Reporter: You’ve made remarks in the past about “stripping sci-fi from literature” and “macro-details,” which indicate that there are big differences between your views on the genre and the views of its readers, even those of fans. If the market and readership were removed from the equation, what kind of sci-fi would you write?


Liu: What I want to write most is the kind of sci-fi that gives free rein to my imagination, that lets my thoughts wander without cease between the macro-est macro and the micro-est micro. I’m talking specifically about stories like “Sea of Dreams” and “Cloud of Poems.” Frankly, those are the two stories I’m fondest of. Writing that kind of sci-fi is a pleasure, a “billion-year spree.” (That’s the title of a book on sci-fi theory by Brian Aldiss.)


Unfortunately, readers don’t approve of works like these. I respect their wishes and won’t write any more works in that series. But ideas like those are constantly popping up in my head, and they bring me endless pleasure. It’s become a fascinating mental adventure for me. I still feel that’s what fantasy literature, including sci-fi, is for.


Reporter: Last question: What do you see in store for mid- and long-form sci-fi in China? Have you hatched any new creative plans in the last few years that will keep you as the bellwether of the science fiction market?


Liu: I’m just an engineer and sci-fi writer, and I’m out in the middle of nowhere. I’m really unqualified to talk about the market. In the US, the era of sci-fi in magazines gave way to an era of full-length novels. I wonder whether Chinese sci-fi will follow the same path. My sense is that we’ll need one or two novels that sell a million copies before the market for long-form works takes off, plus film adaptations of them that take in a hundred million yuan, or hit TV adaptations that CCTV airs during prime time. So far, at least, there have been no signs of either of these “holy grails.”


My creative plans … we amateur authors aren’t completely free to make decisions about that stuff. It depends on how much free time I have. If there’s a long stretch, I’d really like to write another novel; if not, I’ll keep on with short- and mid-form stuff. I don’t think I’m the “bellwether”—the community of sci-fi writers in China doesn’t qualify as a flock yet, and each of its few sheep has its own distinctive, irreplaceable characteristics. No real bellwether has come to emerge yet, in the market or in literary terms. All we can do is pray that they show up soon.