ON FINISHING DEATH’S END, THE LAST BOOK IN THE REMEMBRANCE OF EARTH’S PAST TRILOGY


TRANSLATED BY HENRY ZHANG


Written September 2, 2010, at Niangzi Pass


First published on the author’s Sina blog










The Remembrance of Earth’s Past trilogy is now finished. At 880,000 characters, it’s a real doorstop.


Recently, I’ve been getting constant emails, texts, and calls asking me to hurry up with the third book; after a while, I started feeling a bit like the poor tenant farmer, Yang Bailao, from The White-Haired Girl, whose ears ring constantly with his landlord’s cries: “Cixin, if you can’t pay me back by the end of the year, we’ll use your daughter as collateral.”


All things considered, I think I finished the book quite quickly. The second installment, The Dark Forest, was published in 2008; for external reasons, I wasn’t able to write for the entire following year. I finished Death’s End in around a year. Given the one-year hiatus, the book was done very quickly. To really do justice to all 360,000 words of it, I would have really needed three or four years.


We are always clamoring about quality goods—but how are quality goods produced? When it comes to novels, you need time. Of course, there are savants who can write a classic with their eyes closed, but they come around only once in a blue moon. Ordinary authors, like me, need a lot more time to finish our stories; we need to build our worlds, one brick at a time, and engage in a slow, extended dialogue with ourselves.


But even without reader pressure, I wouldn’t wait three or four years to finish a novel. The drive for quick gratification rules the day, and I am not immune from its strictures. Authors that can endure such loneliness are extremely rare.


Another reason for the speed is my own sense of crisis. I feel as if my creative output is a tour of my imaginary worlds. I’ve led this tour group around for ten years, but we haven’t even seen half of the scenery, to say nothing of new sites that are opening up. This makes me anxious, because I know the unexpected could happen at any moment; a flood could cut us off, or our bus could be taken hostage. As an avid reader of science fiction, I know my fears aren’t groundless.


Of all the unexpected things that might interrupt Chinese science fiction’s development, social unrest has to be the most worrying. I once told readers at a conference that science fiction is the product of leisurely and carefree minds. No one agreed, but I was telling the truth. Only when our lives are stable and quiet can we allow the universe’s catastrophes to fascinate and awe us. If we already live in an environment full of danger, then science fiction won’t interest us. In fact, two of the last three bursts of creative progress that Chinese science fiction underwent were cut short by social unrest, which is lethal to the genre. I hope these are just a science fiction writer’s empty worries. I hope that our time of peace and prosperity continues—it would be wonderful for science fiction.


But whatever happens, we ought to pick up our pace as we travel through the land of science fiction. In this new period of life, we ought to be hedonists. To quote Death’s End: “A moment here; eons there.”