ONE AND ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND EARTHS


TRANSLATED BY JESSE FIELD


Written October 29, 2011, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Modern Weekly, 2012, New Year Special










Compared to those of other animals, human infants are certainly weak. Infant horses can stand and walk on their own just ten minutes after birth, but human infants stay in their cradles a very long time, and during this period, if there is no outside party to take good care of them, they won’t survive. On their own strengths, humans would never make it out of the cradle. The factors producing this phenomenon are the requirements of evolution, with the bulk of the human brain so big, it would be difficult to grow it after sexual maturity, so it must be grown before. All of which is to say: All human infants are born premature.


If we see human civilization as an infant, then it, too, was born premature. The pace of civilization’s development is much faster than that of natural evolution, and humanity has in fact entered modern civilization with the brain and body of primitive humans. This leads us to a scary question: If no external world looks after it, will the human civilization be forever unable to step out of its cradle?


It now appears that this is a possibility.


In the remote future, when people remember the history of the mid-twentieth century to the present, all of the great events that seemed so momentous in this period will be milled away, leaving little trace, and only two things that we have overlooked will be seen as more and more important: first, humanity took its first step outside the cradle, and second, humanity then took a step backward. The importance of these two events cannot be overestimated. The year Gagarin went into space, 1961, could well replace the birth of Jesus as the annus primus for humanity; but the decline of space exploration after the Apollo moon landings brought humanity more trauma than our exile from the Garden of Eden.


The period from the late 1950s to the early 1970s will go down in the annals as a golden age. Within just three years of the launch of the first human-made satellite, the first cosmonaut went into space, and only seven more years passed before humanity walked on the moon. At the time, people were stirred by large and remote goals, and believed that in ten more years, give or take, humans would reach Mars, and even reaching Jupiter’s orbit to land on Europa did not seem like a remote possibility. Not long before, plans had been born for the bold “Project Orion” to surge off into space, using sequentially exploding atomic bombs to propel the spacecraft, which would be able to carry more than ten cosmonauts to the outer planets.


But soon after, the Apollo missions canceled remaining moon landing missions when funding was cut off. Thus, human space exploration was just like a stone thrown upward in Earth’s gravity, reaching a zenith, pausing briefly, and then falling dramatically down. The last Apollo mission—the Apollo 17 moon landing, in December 1972—was a significant turning point, for after that, although there would still be space stations and the space shuttle, and there would be more and more human-made satellites with the economic benefits they bring, and there would be probes sent to the outer planets, still, the quality of human ventures into space was quietly changed, with the gaze of space exploration turning away from the starry skies and down to the ground. Prior to Apollo 17, spaceflight was humanity’s effort to leave the cradle; after, it was merely to make the cradle more comfortable. Space ventures were brought in line with economics, with it necessary for product to exceed invention, the noble spirit of exploration replaced with the spirit of business. The wings of the human heart were clipped.


Actually, looking back, did humanity really wish to step outside its cradle? The behind-the-scenes impetus to the mid-twentieth-century wave of space exploration was the Cold War. It was the fear of the enemy and the desire to outdo him. It was a political show of force. Humanity never actually thought of space as its future home.


Now, the moon is once again a waste world with no trace of humans. Russian and American plans for planetary passenger flight have one after the other proven to be pipe dreams, and the “glorious plans” of Europe to explore the solar system have been put on hold. Glory seen no longer. If the space shuttles were taken out of service, the Americans who once walked on the moon would even lose the ability to send people into near-Earth orbit.


Why should this be so? The reasons we can think of are none other than technological and economic ones.


First examine the technological reasons. It is undeniable that humanity does not currently have the technology to undertake large-scale development in the solar system. In terms of propulsion technology, the most basic and most crucial thing for spaceflight, humanity is currently still in the stage of chemical propulsion, while large-scale planetary voyages will require nuclear propulsion, which present technology is still distant from. Nuclear-propelled rockets and ships are still only the stuff of science fiction.


And now look at the economic reasons. With present technology, sending a payload into near-Earth orbit incurs an expense equal to the weight of the load in gold; sending it to the moon or other planets would require ten to upward of a hundred times more capital. Before space development can be made productive, all of this investment would reap very little return. The Apollo moon landings, for example, cost 26 billion US dollars (which would value over 100 billion USD as I’m writing this in 2012), but the missions only obtained about two tons of lunar rocks. (Of course, the technological results from the moon landings program in their application to civil use also produced enormous benefits, but these benefits are hard to quantify and so cannot serve as deciding factors in consideration of policy decisions.)


In sum, development in space is a huge risk, economically and technologically. Making space our new home and betting the human future on this huge of a risk is not something governments can accept.


The reasons listed are a strong argument, seemingly irrefutable, and so have determined the present human space policy and led to the decline of space endeavors. But let us examine what humanity is entirely invested in presently, and what is seen as the single greatest enterprise serving the only road to the survival of human civilization: environmental protection.


In technological terms, space voyages and environmental protection seem different in character, with the former being intense, high speed, and adventurous, with connotations of state-of-the-art technology, while the latter is a gentle green public-service activity, one which, though involving technology, doesn’t give the impression of being as difficult as the former.


But that is only an impression. The true situation is: If we want to achieve the present targets for environmental protection, the technology needed is more difficult to develop than that for large-scale interplanetary travel.


If we want to protect the environment, we must first understand its patterns on a global scale. But Earth’s ecological systems are extremely complex, so even though every field of science has put enormous amounts of research and understanding into every detail of it, on the holistic global scale, present humanity still has not grasped the patterns and laws for either basic science or practical science. For such systems as the operation of the weather, or changes and interactions among animal groups at large scale, what human science knows is very limited.


One could say without exaggeration: Human understanding of the Earth’s surface is not as full as our understanding of the moon’s surface, and soon may not be as full as our understanding of the surface of Mars.


On the level of action, the technology currently needed for environmental protection—for example, replacing petroleum with renewable energy sources, managing and recycling industrial and urban waste, protecting biological diversity, and protecting and recovering forest coverage—all involve complex technologies, among which many are not necessarily easier to develop than planetary travel within the solar system.


But the major technological challenge to environmental protection is not in this. Now, human society has entered a period of sustainable development, especially in underdeveloped areas, where development speed is at previously unknown highs. These high-speed development zones have a common goal: to achieve the economic levels of the Western countries, and to have the comfortable modernized lives they lead. Today it seems to be a goal within grasp. With current speeds of development, in another half century, most underdeveloped zones, including countries like China and Brazil, will be able to catch up to the West in economic terms.


But people have overlooked this fact: If the whole world lived the kind of lives those in the US and in Europe do, the resources necessary would be equal to four and a half Earths.


Under these circumstances, if we wish to achieve the final targets for environmental protection—avoiding collapse of Earth’s ecosystems and bringing the greatest extinction since the Cretaceous period, happening right now, under control—then only reducing pollution and emissions is far from enough. Even if all the targets of the Copenhagen Accord are realized, the Earth’s ecological environment will still sink, just like the Titanic from the iceberg.


The only hope is to stop development. But development cannot be suppressed. For some countries and regions to laze about, fully enjoying the comforts of modern civilization, while letting other parts of the world stagnate in the poverty of an agricultural society goes against the most basic value of humanity, and will be a nonstarter in policies, as well.


And consider another possibility: sudden changes to the environment caused by nonhuman factors. The Earth’s environment has been oscillating; it’s just that human civilization has now been around long enough to perceive this. Each oscillation brings massive change to the whole of Earth’s environment, and could make Earth uninhabitable for humans. The most recent ice age, for example, ended only ten thousand years ago, and if another one were to begin, the continents would be covered in ice and snow, causing worldwide agricultural collapse and spelling final extinction for modern society with its massive population. And these massive changes to the environment are, in the long term, nearly inevitable, so much so that they could well happen in the near future. In the face of such environmental change, present environmental protection methods are like a cup of water brought to a bonfire.


If human civilization wishes to survive long-term as the environment changes due to both human-made and natural factors, then it must turn from passive environmental protection behaviors to actives ones, adjusting and changing the Earth’s environment in an artificial and comprehensive way. For example, many plans have been introduced to slow the greenhouse effect, including solar-powered steamers of large scale on the ocean, to increase cloud cover by spraying evaporated ocean water to high elevations. Or to build an umbrella with a surface area of three million square kilometers at a Lagrange point between Earth and the sun. Each of these plans is a hyperengineering project of historically unprecedented, even God-like, scale, involving superior technology that would be very much at home in science fiction, but whose difficulty is greater than space travel within the solar system.


Besides the technological difficulties, looking at environmental protection from the economic side, we discover that it is also quite similar to space development: both require large amounts of investment, and both will not see clear economic returns in the early period.


But if we compare human investment in environmental protection to investment in space development, the former is an order of magnitude higher. Taking China as an example, the 12th Five-Year Plan has us investing 3 trillion RMB into environmental protection, but we plan to invest only 30 billion or so into space exploration. The plans of other countries are much the same.


The solar system has enormous amounts of resources. Among the eight planets, in the asteroid belt, all the resources necessary for the development of human existence are present in ample amounts, from water to metals to fissile materials for nuclear fusion, such that if we go by the calculation that Earth could at most support a population of 100 billion humans, then the solar system resources could support one hundred thousand Earths.


Now, we face this fact: Humanity has abandoned those hundred thousand Earths in space, and only plans to continue existing on this Earth, and its method for survival will be environmental protection, a venture as difficult and enormous and risky as opening up space for development.


Just as with environmental protection, space development involves technological progress, with space development driving technological progress forward. Before the Apollo program, the US didn’t by any means have the technology needed for a moon landing; a large portion of the technology was developed during the course of the project. Nuclear fission technology is already present on Earth, so to realize nuclear propulsion in space presents no insurmountable obstacles. And although controlled nuclear fusion has not yet been realized, the obstacles are only technological, not theoretical.


We have to face facts like this: In the ships that made it to the moon forty years ago, the power of the guidance and control computers was only the equivalent of one-thousandth of today’s iPhone 4.


Space development will closely resemble the Age of Discovery, involving long-distance voyages to unknown worlds, to open up space for human existence and to have better lives. The Age of Discovery began when Columbus arrived in the New World. The voyages of Columbus obtained the support of Queen Isabella of Spain (or more accurately, she was Queen of Castile, for at that time independent Spain did not exist). The queen herself was hard-pressed to supply this fleet, with some saying she pawned her own jewels to help Columbus supply his voyage. Today’s facts show that this was a very smart, if risky, investment, to such an extent that some say world history begins from 1500, because it was only from that time that people knew what the whole world looked like.


Now, humans are right at the eve of a second Age of Discovery. We are now much more fortunate than Columbus. Columbus could not see the New World he sought; after sailing many days on the Atlantic Ocean, he saw no land. At this time, he must have been filled with doubt. But the new world we want to survey can be seen by merely lifting our heads. It’s just that there is now no one to put up the money.


Perhaps, if we consider human civilization as a whole, it is just like an individual human baby, unable to ever leave its cradle without the help of its parents.


But in the cosmic perspective, Earth’s civilization has no parents. Humanity is an orphan in the universe, so we have to look out for ourselves.