POETIC SCIENCE FICTION


TRANSLATED BY EMILY XUENI JIN


Written December 22, 2014, at Niangzi Pass


First published in In the Loop by Ken Liu, translated by Xiao Aoran et al., by Sichuan Science and Technology Press in March 2015










After “The Paper Menagerie” won the Hugo Award for Best Short Story, I wanted to give Ken Liu a set of paper menageries as a present when he visited Beijing. I discovered subsequently that papercraft was really a wonderful art with many surprises. Usually, there isn’t any evident correspondence between the paper-folding process and the final product. After a series of complex and inexplicable folds, the paper would take on a seemingly random, shapeless form. However, after a simple inside-out flip, it would suddenly come to life as if touched by magic. Remember the boat with a canopy that your mother taught you how to make when you were a child? That is a classic example. Hence, designing a paper menagerie requires exceptional spatial imagination.


I’ve been thinking whether mathematical language could be applied to describing papercraft, such as topology. There are many excellent artists in China who make realistic and delicate paper menageries, avant-garde in design. Unfortunately, considering how vulnerable these artworks could be, I could only give Ken Liu smaller and simpler ones that were easier to carry and store. Even so, when I looked at my gifts to him, I could hardly believe that those magnificent shapes were created from merely folding a single piece of paper, no extra cutting needed. I had to control my urge to pull them apart to examine their structure.


Papercraft, to me, is a kind of art that creates beauty from mathematical precision and rationality. The same goes for Ken Liu’s science fiction.


The heart of literature is an aesthetic pursuit. We can roughly call this kind of aesthetic by the name of “poeticness.” There are two kinds of poeticness in science fiction literature—one of literature’s inherent quality, and one of science fiction as a genre.


As a kind of literature, science fiction shares the same playground as its other literary peers, and therefore it should embody literary poeticness, which stems from the depiction of humans. Human-to-human, human-to-society, and human-to-era relationships constitute the main body of literature. In particular, modern literature focuses on the individual’s inner world, consciousness, and spirituality, which results in profound and multifaceted expressions of life and humanity—integral to the formation of literary poeticness.


On the other hand, science fiction poeticness comes mainly from the exploration of human-to-technology, human-to-universe, and human-to-nature relationships. Science fiction unfolds in a science-based imagination, with world setting at its core. It uses imagination to construct a world that is surreal but not supernatural. The main subject of literary poeticness in mainstream literature, “characters,” is to some extent replaced by “world setting” in science fiction, where environments and species can exist independently as literary figures. The imagination and creativity shown in creating such figures are important components of science fiction poeticness. Science fiction writes the story of real people in surreal world settings. Thus, humanity in a science fiction world is another crucial factor of science fiction poeticness.


Science fiction poeticness is unique to science fiction. Compared to literary poeticness, science fiction poeticness is more closely linked to technology and nature, echoing the rigidness and insurmountability of the laws of nature. Moreover, the aesthetics of science—such as the self-consistency and harmony of logic, symmetry, simplicity, and novelty, which rarely appear in mainstream literature—also constitute a significant part of science fiction poeticness.


Literary poeticness and science fiction poeticness diverge in the way they each tap into aesthetics. Therefore, the two rarely coexist in the same work; they may even have the ability to cancel out each other. Classic science fiction usually excels in one or the other. For instance, traditional Campbellian science fiction such as the works of Arthur C. Clarke and Isaac Asimov embraces science fiction poeticness, whereas the works of Ray Bradbury are classic examples of literary poeticness.


However, Ken Liu, a one-in-a-million science fiction writer, accomplishes the impossible feat of merging literary poeticness and science fiction poeticness.


Ken Liu’s works of science fiction are exquisite and unique in their creative core. For example, “The Bookmaking Habits of Select Species” is comprised of a set of wonderful short stories describing the different ways in which different cosmic civilizations record and ingest information, including brains made of flowing water and the reading of information in everything in the universe, including black holes. This story presents a magical picture of cosmic civilizations and cultures that opens our eyes. “The People of Pele,” on the other hand, illustrates a kind of crystal-based life-form starkly different from the forms of life we know. The composition and evolution of such a life-form overturn our concepts of biology and greatly expand our imagination of life, and I can safely say that it is the most peculiar imagination of extraterrestrial life I have ever seen.


Science fiction ideas in Ken Liu’s other works demonstrate deep reflections on the relationship between human-technology and human-universe. In this regard, “The Countable” is worth our rumination. The story is built upon mathematics; through describing various forms of infinities, it displays a mathematical world that is no longer monotonous, a simple arrangement of strings of numbers, but rather vast and deep as the starry sky. The numbers we encounter via common sense are only the tip of the iceberg. If we reexamine life from this grand mathematical perspective, we will feel that our understanding of life has always been limited and partial. It is through fantastic imagination and profound perspectives that Ken Liu embraces science fiction poeticness.


When describing Ken Liu’s works from the perspective of literature, there isn’t a word better than “poetic.” One can feel a kind of tranquility and softness that rarely appears in science fiction. His writing is like a calm lake in which all the flavors of life in a world of rapidly evolving technology and the sorrows and joys of the universe are reflected. Despite the frustrations, catastrophes, and death involved, the lake is still as placid and smooth as a mirror. This, of course, is not to say that the author is a coldhearted observer who demonstrates no empathy toward the happenings in his stories. We, as readers, can feel how the author has been constantly sympathizing with his surrounding environment. His narrative, so gentle and delicate, filters out the hype and agitation brought about by technology and leaves us with serene poeticness, which can touch the soft spot in our hearts. This kind of gentle, calm poeticness is seen even through “Mono no aware” that depicts an apocalypse and “The Waves” that foreground the grand evolutionary journey of the human race.


When discussing literary poeticness in Ken Liu’s works, we cannot avoid his deployment of Asian cultural elements. To clarify here, I do not wish to overemphasize the influence of Chinese and Asian culture on his works—in fact, his work has a strong footing in American culture, and the Asian elements he draws upon are precisely a manifestation of American culture’s diversity as well as his own deep-seated knowledge. As the author said in an interview, “My work is different from other American writers only in the sense that every American is different from every other American, for such individual difference has been constitutive of what it means to be an American since the days of Alexis de Tocqueville’s visit.” In “All the Flavors,” Chinese and American culture, instead of presented as opposites, are each other’s complement. The protagonist who came from Chinese history says that they will no longer tell the story of when they were Chinese, but rather the story of how they became an American. Despite this, Asian culture still plays a crucial role in Ken Liu’s works that cannot be overlooked. For example, in “Mono no aware,” the mentality and behavior of the people facing the apocalypse, the protagonist and his family’s sacrifice, are characteristic of Asian culture. Apart from stories like “All the Flavors” and “The Paper Menagerie” that make explicit allusions, elements of Asian culture are rather subtle in his stories, seeping into the works and manifesting as undertones. I believe that the tranquil poeticness, delicateness, and gentleness Ken Liu demonstrates in his works resemble Asian culture profoundly.


Ken Liu’s science fiction is a perfect blend of science fiction poeticness and literary poeticness, in which technology is no longer hard and cold or ostracized objects, but rather a part of everyday life and humanity. Before we could notice, our lives are already irreversibly altered and remolded by technology. In this process, no matter what choices are made, life would take on an unfamiliar face, accompanied by unspeakably complex feelings and sensations. In “The Waves,” humans evolve from mortals with flesh-and-blood bodies to demigods. In every difficult step they take, however, they continue to preserve the spark of humanity and dignity.


This is not saying that Ken Liu rejects technological progress; rather, he, with a sober eye, sees the complexity of life changed by high technology and the hard choices people are about to face. In “Arc,” a story about immortality, a character claims that death giving meaning to life is a lie. Still, the protagonist, tired of immortality, chooses aging and ultimately death to escape from the shackles of time. “Mono no aware” depicts the apocalypse, a common trope in science fiction, like a long lyrical poem. The themes of doom, escape, and sacrifices are submerged in poeticness. “The People of Pele” embodies another kind of poeticness, where the new life of humans in a new world is balanced against the incredible yet artistically beautiful alien life, and tells us that the universe harbors infinite possibilities toward life and living. In “The Message,” practically, the sign that the aliens use to mark the radioactive materials is a failure, but the elegance and magnificence it contains is impressive. The most insightful depiction of life is “The Countable”: In the face of the mathematical nature of Mother Nature, utterly cognitively incomprehensible to us, our own lives also exist beyond our imagination. The “life” that our rational mind can grapple with is only comprised of a few protruding iceberg tips, leaving the bulk uncountable. A world composed of numbers transcends sense and reason—what a confusing and frightening scene!


To be honest, I did not pay enough attention to Ken Liu’s works when I first came across his writing—that was also when I went through a phase of unsettledness and lethargy in reading, where I only skimmed stories for their shock value and thrills. However, things began to change. If every work of science fiction was a piece of music, then as time went on, I found that after all the other tunes have gradually faded out, Ken Liu’s melody still persisted, growing more and more distinct every day. I then went to seek all of Ken Liu’s works and devoured them. I realized, after reading, that science fiction isn’t only about creativity and thrills, but also elegance, profoundness, and poeticness.


On this note, Ken Liu’s works, an impeccable integration of science fiction and literary poeticness, are unique and utterly irreplaceable.