THE DARK FOREST THEORY


TRANSLATED BY EMILY JIN


Written January 2015, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Shanxi Literature, 2015, no. 2










As an old science fiction fan (I won’t hesitate to identify myself as someone who belongs to the first generation of science fiction fandom in China), I have always believed that a multitude of intelligent beings and civilizations exist in the universe. If some of these civilizations know about the existence of other civilizations and communicate with one another, then it is highly possible that a cosmic society of civilizations exists. What does this society look like? What are the relationships between these cosmic civilizations? I have long been fascinated with such questions.


Chinese science fiction usually holds a rose-tinted view of extraterrestrial civilizations. Therefore, for the sake of being rebellious, I decided to try and imagine the worst universe possible.


The only reference in reality for the study of cosmic civilized societies is the human society itself. There are different civilizations on Earth, each of which is extremely complex; the interactions between those civilizations are also intricate and convoluted, with countless political, economic, and cultural factors acting in between. Therefore, it is difficult to reach a clear conclusion of how a cosmic civilized society would look if we merely balance it against the human society.


One day, however, I was inspired by a soccer match—my first live match, at the Workers’ Stadium in Beijing, China vs. Sampdoria. At the time, I had just started working, and could only afford the cheapest tickets. Sitting in the very last row, I gazed down at the stadium far below. The distance had made the complex technical moves of the players a blur. All I could see was an ever-evolving matrix of twenty-three dots (one special dot being the soccer ball). Even Gullit, the star of the night, was nothing but a moving dot to me. While I regretted not bringing my binoculars, I also felt that this soccer match displayed a clear-cut mathematical structure due to the concealment of details.


I suddenly realized that the scene before my eyes was exactly what the stars looked like.


The distance between stars conceals the complex inner structure of each civilized world. In the eyes of observers like us, alien civilizations are merely dots of light; the complexities and nuances of each civilization are represented as each dot’s limited parameters and variables. Therefore, the cosmic society of civilizations should also resemble a mathematical structure.


If we are to examine the cosmic society of civilizations through this perspective, we need to first establish our footing with an axiomatic system on which to base our deductions. The axioms I propose are as follows:


First: Survival is the primary need of civilization.


Second: Civilization continuously grows and expands, but the total matter in the universe remains constant.


The first axiom should be solid. The latter half of the second axiom has not yet been proved by cosmology. However, if I only use these two axioms in science fiction as a part of worldbuilding, I believe that they should make logical sense.


Then, based on facts, we can make three major deductions:


Firstly, mutual communication and understanding between cosmic civilizations is extremely difficult, and it is basically impossible to tell whether the civilization we are interacting with is well-intentioned or malicious. This is because:


a) Given current known laws of physics, communication between stars comes with an extensive time lag due to the sheer distance.


b) The enormous biological difference contributes to the communicational hindrance. On Earth, biological beings are classified into kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. The higher up on the hierarchy, the more different the organisms. It is utterly impossible for humans and organisms of different genus to understand each other. Putting this in the scale of the cosmos, if we take into account the existence of non-carbon-based organisms, then it is very possible for the difference between aliens and humans to exceed the level of kingdom.


Secondly, technological explosion. It took one hundred thousand years for humans to advance from the Stone Age to the Agricultural Age, yet only a mere two hundred years to move from the Steam Age into the Information Age. Any civilized world could welcome technological explosion at any given moment. Therefore, even baby civilizations in their primitive stages or budding civilizations could be dangerous.


Thirdly, detection is reversible. I derived this speculation from “the principle of optical path reversibility” in optics. In the universe, if one civilization could detect the existence of another, then sooner or later, the reverse would happen.


We can make a set of simple deductions based on my proposed axioms and speculations, establishing a sample model of a cosmic civilized society. I have delineated the process of my deduction in The Dark Forest, book 2 of the Three-Body Problem series. As I had hoped, I arrived at the worst universe possible. As the title reveals, my universe is unbelievably dark, and only one kind of relationship exists between civilizations: The moment one civilization discovers another, it would do anything to destroy it. This relationship has nothing to do with the ethical values of the civilizations themselves; as long as the two axioms that I had previously proposed hold true, “destroy others” would be an inevitable code of conduct for all cosmic civilizations. My Chinese readers coined my conclusion the “Dark Forest theory.”


My conclusion, on the other hand, is a possible explanation for the Fermi paradox—possibly the darkest: If any civilization in the universe revealed its existence, it would be wiped out within a blink of an eye. Therefore, our universe is utterly silent.


Of course, my speculation is only one possibility out of many that science fiction could offer. At present, we are still unable to confirm or dispel the Dark Forest theory in the face of the uncanny silence of the universe.


Science fiction is fundamentally a literature of speculation. It lists a multitude of possibilities for its readers to enjoy and ponder over, and the most fascinating ones are usually the most unlikely ones. However, in this magical universe, any impossibility may become a reality. As some astrophysicists have posited, the thing about stars is that, if they didn’t actually exist, it would have been easy to prove that they didn’t exist.


So, I believe that offering the worst possibility of all the possibilities of the universe is, at the very least, a responsible approach.