THE BATTLE BETWEEN SCI-FI AND FANTASY


TRANSLATED BY ADAM LANPHIER


Written March 5, 2002, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World, 2002, no. 5










Last year on Tsinghua’s SMTH BBS,* I saw an interesting discussion on this topic: If the worlds of science and magic went to war, which would prevail? The initial consensus was that magic is the stronger force. As one BBSer said, “Try to nuke me, and I’ll just ride off on my broomstick.” But look closer, and you’ll see that’s not how it would happen. Why would you run, after all? You’d run because in the world of magic, there aren’t any weapons to match a thermonuclear bomb. There’s Sun Wukong’s Gold-Banded Staff of Compliance in the East, and Zeus with his thunderbolts in the West—but in terms of power, neither of these weapons is in the same league as a human-made twenty-megaton nuclear bomb. Besides, even your broomstick may not save you. The broomsticks in Harry Potter don’t seem to go much faster than an Apache helicopter, which isn’t fast enough to escape the blast radius of a nuclear bomb.


Here’s another obvious imbalance: The world of science sticks to reality, whereas the world of magic is fictional. In reality, brooms can’t fly, enchant them as you will, whereas twenty-megaton thermonuclear warheads really do exist. In fact, most of the real artifacts of science have already matched or exceeded what’s been imagined in myth: the TV in your house, for instance, or the computer on your desk, or the cell phone in your pocket—the list goes on. What would happen if we used the fiction of science fiction to counter the fantasies of magic? An antimatter bomb as big as the Golden Apple in Helen’s hand would suffice to sink Mount Olympus in all its glory to the bottom of the sea forever. A slightly larger version of this sci-fi weapon could, in a single strike, boil the oceans dry, or shatter the Earth. A bit bigger still, and it could vaporize the entire magical universe in a powerful beam of light. The world of fantasy and myth isn’t really that large. The universe, as depicted in Eastern and Western mythology alike, is hardly ever larger than two astronomical units in radius. The notion of a light-year could never have made it into a myth because such a scale is beyond the capacity of the mythological imagination. The most magnificent deities of the world of magic are dwarfed by the stars of the world of sci-fi, and its most terrible demons pale in comparison to the sci-fi world’s black holes.


The brawl between science and magic has been underway for quite some time, within the confines of fantasy literature. Among its more extreme belligerents, there’s Bighorn,† who clamors for the overthrow of hard science fiction—and I, for my part, have fiercely advocated for the separation of science fiction from literature. We’ve both been roundly lambasted as a result. That’s just how people express themselves online; when Yao Haijun requested that I write this article, he asserted that he “welcome[s] radical views, as long as they’re clear,” and said that I “don’t have to consider every facet of the issue.” This is precisely how people talk online—if they didn’t, no one would listen. However, we know very well that these extreme views of ours are neither accurate nor reasonable. The truth is that sci-fi and fantasy have many more similarities than differences. They have the same goal: both strive to create ethereal, free worlds of the imagination from which readers can derive the shocks and delights of beauty. (Personally, I’ve never thought it’s sci-fi’s job to represent reality or human nature.) The only difference between the two is the source of their imaginings.


Fantasy has been around since antiquity, and there’s been so much of it. The years have taken their toll and depleted some of its imaginative power. The rapid progress of science, on the other hand, constantly infuses fresh blood into the science-fictional imagination. The worlds described in today’s sci-fi are entirely different from those of a few decades ago, whereas today’s fantasy worlds aren’t so different from those of the Middle Ages. What’s more, the imaginings that science enables are far more capacious and abundant than fantasy’s. Without science, talk of distances like 15 billion light-years or 10−30 millimeters would be nothing but the ravings of a madman. It was science that introduced such notions into the realm of the imagination, expanding by countless times the scale of what humanity can conceive. Given the circumstances, why would fantasy reject science?


There’s another very important reason that fantasy needs science: We tend to imagine that readers of fantasy recognize that what they’re reading is make-believe, which is certainly true today, but wasn’t necessarily so in ancient times. People of ages past regarded fantasies and myths as nothing less than fact. Back then, the real world and the world of magic were mixed together as an inseparable whole, and a large part of the appeal of magical fantasy was its perceived realism. Now, its sense of realism is gone for good, which is why modernity can produce only fairy tales, never myths. When readers know a story won’t and, indeed, couldn’t happen, that story’s power to shock is greatly diminished. However, science fiction is able to provide that sense of realism, which makes the advent of modern myths possible, and may even prove able to bring us back to an era in which reality and mythology are fused.


As to the state of sci-fi and fantasy in movies, I think what we’re seeing now, in the late nineties and early 2000s, is a mere market fluctuation. A thorough look at the history of cinema shows that fantasy films haven’t enjoyed a significant advantage over sci-fi films. After the glut of sci-fi blockbusters we had some time ago, moviegoers naturally wanted to see something different. This by no means implies fantasy’s victory over sci-fi. In truth, fantasy and sci-fi aren’t even at odds—elements of science fiction will come increasingly to permeate fantasy, and sci-fi may follow fantasy’s excellent model and learn the modes of expression it uses to engage readers and enhance its readability.


In summary, all of us should stick to our sci-fi visions and continue expressing them online, in language as pungent as mustard. And the sci-fi community as a whole should maintain a tolerant stance toward different genres (including fantasy) and adopt what’s best in them. This is how we’ll usher in a new spring for sci-fi and fantasy literature alike, so that their hundred blossoms will bloom.