THE MESSENGER


TRANSLATED BY ANDY DUDAK


Written January 2001, at Niangzi Pass


First published in King of Science Fiction, 2001, no. 11










The old man had only yesterday noticed the listener downstairs. His spirits were quite low these days, and except for when he played his violin, he didn’t look out the window much. He meant to isolate himself from the outside world with the window curtain, and with his music, but it was impossible.


Many years ago, over on the other side of the Atlantic, when he rocked a baby pram in a narrow garret and flipped through uninteresting patent applications in a bustling patent office, his ideas were still immersed in a beautiful world. In that world, he ran at the speed of light. Now he was in the quiet, secluded little town of Princeton. The detachment of his youth was gone. The outside world was constantly perplexing and disturbing.


Two matters in particular troubled him. One was quantum theory, originated by Max Planck and now the obsession of so many young physicists. It made him uneasy, particularly the theory’s indeterminacy. “God doesn’t play dice,” he often said to himself these days. He had, in the latter half of his life, devoted himself to concocting a unified field theory, but had made no progress. What he’d built was pure math and no physics. The other matter that troubled him was the atom bomb. It had been a long time since Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a long time since the war, but his pain, which had been a dull wound, had now flared with agony. Such a small, simple formula. All it did was relate mass to energy. Truth be told, before Fermi’s reactor pile was built, the old man thought humans turning mass into energy at the atomic level was a wild fantasy. Helen Dukas had been consoling him a lot lately. But she didn’t realize he was unconcerned with his own merits, errors, honor, or disgrace—his worries were more far-reaching.


In recent dreams, he kept hearing a fearful sort of din, like a deluge or a volcano. Finally, one night, the clamor woke him and he discovered it was only a small puppy snoring on the patio. The noise never invaded his dreams again. He dreamt of a wasteland, the setting sun reflected on melting snow. He tried to escape this wasteland, but it was too big, seemingly limitless. Later he saw an ocean, the setting sun again, the sea bloodred, and he understood. The whole world was a wasteland covered in melting snow. He woke with a start once more. This time, a question emerged in his mind like a dark reef at ebb tide:


Does humanity still have a future?


The question tormented him like a raging fire, nearly intolerable.


The person downstairs was young. He wore a stylish nylon jacket. The old man realized this visitor was listening to his violin. For the next three days, whenever the old man began his evening playing, the visitor would arrive and stand quietly in the fading glow of the Princeton sunset. Around nine o’clock the old man would put down his violin, and the listener would slowly depart. Maybe he was a Princeton University student, or just someone who’d heard the old man lecture. The old man had long ago grown weary of his countless worshippers, the sycophants of every kind, from kings to housewives. But this stranger downstairs, this friend so interested in his musical talent, this one gave him a kind of consolation. On the fourth night, the old man had just begun to play when it started raining. He looked out the window and saw the young man standing under the only available shelter: a Chinese parasol tree. The rain worsened, and the tree’s sparse autumnal foliage provided little cover. The old man stopped playing, wishing to release his audience early. But the young man seemed to know this wasn’t the concert’s proper ending time. He remained standing there, unmoving, his saturated jacket shining under the streetlamp. The old man put down his violin. He went unsteadily down the stairs and out into the misty rain, and finally he was standing before the young visitor.


“If you … eh, would like to listen, why not come upstairs?”


Not waiting for an answer, the old man turned and went back inside. The visitor stood there staring, as if into limitless distance, as if what just happened had been a dream. The music resumed upstairs. The visitor entered the front door in a kind of trance. He went upstairs, as if drawn by the spirit of the music. The old man’s door was half open. The visitor went inside. The old man faced the window and watched the rain as he played. He didn’t turn his head, but he sensed the young man had arrived. He felt a bit apologetic toward his audience, this person so infatuated with his violin’s voice. He didn’t play particularly well. Today’s selection in particular, his favorite Mozart rondo, he often played out of tune. Sometimes he forgot a phrase and used his imagination to fill the gap. He still had this cheap violin, his old friend, its voice far from precise. But the young listener seemed calm and content. The two of them were soon immersed in the instrument’s flawed but imaginative sound.


This was an unremarkable night in the mid-twentieth century. The Iron Curtain separated East from West. Humanity’s future, recently fallen under the nuclear shadow, was like the dim, misty, rainy autumn evening. On this night, in the rain, Mozart’s rondo floated out of this little house in Princeton, New Jersey.


Time seemed to pass faster than usual. Nine o’clock rolled around soon enough. The old man stopped playing and looked up to see his guest bow, then turn to go.


“Eh, will you come and listen tomorrow?” the old man asked.


The young man stood at the door and didn’t turn around. “I’m afraid not, Professor. Tomorrow you will have a visitor.” He opened the door, then seemed to recall something. “Oh, that’s right. Your guest will leave at 8:10. Will you still play afterward?”


The old man nodded distractedly, not grasping the implication of these words.


“Very well then, I will come. Thank you.”


The rain continued unabated the next day, and evening did indeed bring a guest, the Israeli ambassador. The old man had always given that remote, newborn country his blessing—they were his people over there, his tribe—and he’d donated the proceeds from selling his original manuscripts to the cause. But this time, the ambassador wanted something else. The old man didn’t know whether to laugh or cry. They wanted him to be president of Israel! He firmly declined. He accompanied the ambassador back into the rain, and fished out his pocket watch just before the man got in his car. Under the streetlamp, the timepiece showed 8:10. A memory stirred.


“Your … eh, your visit … did anyone else know about it?”


“Rest assured, Professor. This is all a rigorously kept secret. Nobody knows.”


Perhaps that young visitor knew, but somehow he also knew … The old man asked a very odd question: “So, had you planned on leaving at 8:10?”


“Pardon me? Well, no. I hoped to chat with you at length, but since you’ve refused, I’ve no wish to disturb you. We understand, Professor.”


The old man returned upstairs, perplexed, but when he took out his little violin, he forgot his bewilderment. The music had just begun when the young man appeared.


Their concert ended at ten o’clock, and the old man repeated yesterday’s invitation: “Will you come and listen tomorrow?” He thought a bit and added, “I think this is nice.”


“Well, tomorrow I can listen from below again.”


“But I think it will still be raining tomorrow. These are cloudy days.”


“You’re right, it will rain tomorrow, but not when it comes time for you to play. The next day, when you play again, I’ll come up to listen. The rain won’t stop until 11 A.M. the following morning.”


The old man laughed, thinking the young visitor very funny indeed, but watching him leave, he had a sudden premonition that none of this was a joke.


His premonition was correct. The weather over the next few days bore out the young man’s predictions. On the rainless evening, he remained downstairs listening. It was raining at concert time the following day, and he came upstairs. It stopped raining in Princeton at precisely 11 A.M. the next morning.


The first clear night after the weather, the young visitor forwent listening downstairs and came up to the old man’s room, bringing with him a small violin. Saying nothing, he presented it with both hands to the old man.


“No no, please. I have no use for another violin.” The old man waved it away. Many people had offered him violins, among them famous and valuable Italian instruments, ones that had belonged to celebrated players—and he’d politely refused them one by one, feeling his skill did not merit such great violins.


“I’m lending this to you. After a while you’ll return it to me. Sorry, Professor, you can’t keep it.”


The old man took it, and on close inspection it seemed a common sort of violin. It didn’t seem to have strings, surprisingly, though a more careful look revealed that it did, but the strings were extremely fine, like spider threads. The old man didn’t dare press down on them. The gossamer seemed a breath away from breaking. He looked up at the visitor, who smiled and nodded, so he lightly pressed the strings. They didn’t snap, indeed they felt impossibly strong beneath his fingertips. He brought the bow to bear, inadvertently sliding it along one string and making it sound—and it was like hearing the cry of Nature itself.


It was the voice of the Sun, the Sun of all voices.


The old man launched upon the rondo, and right away he was one with the boundless cosmos. He saw light waves propagating through space, slowly, like mist blown by a morning breeze; undulating gravitational swells of the vast space-time membrane, and the countless stars floating on that membrane like sparkling dewdrops; a mighty gale of energy blowing across the membrane, conjuring dreamlike secondary rainbows.


When the old man woke from his musical reverie, the young visitor had gone.


The old man was fascinated with the violin. He played every day, and into the late hours of the night. Dukas and his doctor both urged him to consider his health, but they also knew that every time that violin music started, a vigor he’d never known would surge through his veins.


The young visitor had yet to return.


After ten days, he started playing the strange violin less, even sometimes going back to his original violin, that old friend. He’d started worrying that excessive use might wear down or even break the fine gossamer strings. But he couldn’t resist the sounds that came out of that instrument. It was like he was enchanted. He began to think of the young visitor’s return, whenever that might be, and having to give up the violin, and he resumed playing it all night long like he had at first. Every night, in the wee hours, when he reluctantly stopped playing, he would carefully examine the strings. His vision had gone dim with age, but he had Dukas find a magnifying glass, under which the strings showed no sign of wear or abrasion. Their surface was like precious stone, glossy, sparkling, translucent, in the dark, even fluorescing blue.


Another ten days passed.


It was late, and it had become his habit to gaze at the violin just before falling asleep. Something about the strings struck him as peculiar. He picked up the magnifying glass and examined the strings closely, confirming his suspicion. Actually, the inkling had begun several days before, but only now had the change become pronounced enough to easily perceive.


The strings were thickening with use.


The next night, when the old man had just put bow to string, the young visitor suddenly appeared.


“You’ve come for this, haven’t you?” the old man asked uneasily.


The visitor nodded.


“Eh … perhaps you could let me have it?”


“Absolutely not. My apologies, Professor, but it’s impossible. I can’t leave anything behind now.”


The old man thought about this and began to understand. He offered up the violin with both hands. “It’s not from this time, is it?”


The young man shook his head, standing by the window. Outside, the Milky Way traversed the vast sky, the stars resplendent. He was a black silhouette before this magnificent backdrop.


The old man understood more. He recalled the visitor’s mysterious predictive talents. It was quite simple really. He hadn’t been predicting. He’d been remembering.


“I’m a messenger. In our time, we unexpectedly saw how worried you are, so I was dispatched.”


“And you brought me what?” the old man said, unamazed. “This violin?” Throughout his life, the cosmos had been one big wonder to him. It was precisely because of this that he’d surpassed others and been the first to glimpse the universe’s deepest mystery.


“No, the violin is just proof that I’m from the future.”


“Proof?”


“In this era of yours, people convert mass into energy. You have the atom bomb and very soon you’ll have the fusion bomb. In our era, we can turn energy into mass. You see…” He pointed at the violin strings. “… they’re getting thicker. The increased mass is converted sonic energy, from when you play.”


The old man shook his head in bafflement.


“I know these revelations go against your theory. Firstly, I can’t possibly travel back in time. Secondly, according to your formula, it would take a huge amount of energy to increase the strings’ mass as much as you have.”


The old man was silent awhile. He smiled indulgently. “Eh … theory is ambiguous, gray.” He sighed. “And the tree of my life has also turned gray. Okay, child, what have you brought for me?”


“Two pieces of news.”


“And the first is?”


“Humanity has a future.”


The old man sank into an armchair, relieved. He was like every old man who finally settles his life’s ultimate and long-cherished wish. A sense of well-being suffused him from head to toe. He could really rest. “I suppose I should have known that, child, since you are here.”


“The atom bombs used on Japan will be the last nuclear weapons used in combat. By the end of the 1990s, most countries will have signed an international agreement banning nuclear weapons testing and preventing proliferation. Fifty years after that, the last warhead will be destroyed. And I’ll be born two hundred years after that.”


The young man picked up the violin he meant to reclaim. “I should go. I’ve already delayed many journeys in order to hear your music. I still have three eras to visit, and five people to meet, among them the creator of the unified field theory. I’m afraid that’s a matter for a century hence.”


What he didn’t mention was that he always chose a time near death to pay these formal visits to great people, to minimize affecting the future.


“And what is the second piece of news you have for me?”


The young man had opened the door. He turned, smiling apologetically.


“Professor, I’m afraid God does indeed play dice.”


The old man watched through his window as the visitor left the house. It was quite late and the street was empty. The young man began to undress. It seemed he didn’t want to bring this era’s clothes with him. The skintight suit he wore underneath fluoresced in the dim light—his era’s garb, obviously. He didn’t exit by transforming into white light, as the old man had imagined. He rose into the air, rapidly, at an angle, and a few seconds later he vanished among the brilliant stars of the night sky. His speed had been constant—no acceleration. Clearly, he had not risen as such. Earth had revolved while he had remained static, at absolute rest in this space-time. The old man reckoned the messenger could use his absolute space-time coordinates as a starting point, like standing on the bank of the long river of space-time, and watch time surging by, and if he wanted, go anywhere he liked upriver or down.


Albert Einstein stood there for a while in silence, then slowly turned, and once more picked up his old violin.