THE “CHURCH” OF SCI-FI


On Depictions of the Universe in Science Fiction


TRANSLATED BY ADAM LANPHIER


Written December 20, 1999, at Niangzi Pass


First published on February 22, 2001, on the “Science Fiction” message board of Tsinghua University’s SMTH BBS










There are many things that current Chinese science fiction lacks, among which is one thing that, despite its extreme importance, has never been noticed or mentioned.


Chinese science fiction lacks religious feeling.


I’ll start off by saying that I’m a committed atheist; we know that science and religion are often incompatible. One would think sci-fi and religion ought to be, as well. However, there are scholars who believe that the reason modern natural sciences were born in the West has something to do with the deep religiosity of Western culture. Even a tome too heavy to lift wouldn’t be able to get to the bottom of that topic, so I won’t try to explore it in any detail here. Instead, I’ll limit my topic to the religious feeling in science fiction.


Mind you, what we’re discussing isn’t religion, per se, but religious feeling. This isn’t the feeling someone has toward God—it’s atheistic, and not in the complicated way of Spinoza or whomever. The religious feeling of science fiction is a deep sense of awe at the great mysteries of the universe.


Consider the two passages below, both of which are the sort of narrative that can be found in many domestic sci-fi stories. The first describes an interplanetary police chase:


The police ship swept past planet after planet in hot pursuit of the smuggler craft. The smugglers’ captain carefully observed the terrain of each planet they passed, desperate to find one where they could land and stage a showdown with their pursuers. None presented itself, however, and he was left glancing back at the police ship, which was steadily gaining on them, gritting his teeth, and flying onward.


The second describes a head-on encounter between two giant interstellar ships traveling at a substantial fraction of the speed of light:


“They just passed straight by us!” shouted the navigator; hearing this, the pilot pulled back hard on the ship’s steering lever, yawing the Starship XX into a wingover to reverse its course, and took off in pursuit.


The first gives the impression that the universe isn’t much bigger than a small town in a police movie, and that planets are like little shops on one of its roads; the second makes the reader feel as if an interstellar spacecraft flying at near-light speed handles more or less like a cab on the street. Passages like these reveal an author who is insensible to the grandeur of the universe. Such scenes can be used to positive effect, like in Sheckley’s The Alternative Detective. This sort of fiction is allegorical; it uses the universe merely as a tool to develop its plots. The main appeal of science fiction, however, lies elsewhere.


A huge, cosmic craft, flying through the darkness and silence of space toward a distant target, accelerates for two millennia, maintains cruising speed for three, then decelerates for two. Generations of humanity are born and die aboard. The Earth has become a dim, vague, prehistoric dream; onboard archaeologists have been unable to find anything that might confirm its existence among the remains of the ship’s tumultuous history. Their remote destination, too, has become like a myth: a religious vision, passed down for thousands of years. Generation upon generation of people who can’t figure out where they came from; generation upon generation of people who don’t know where they’re going. Most people believe that the ship is an eternal world, that it has existed and will exist forever. Only a few wise people are firm in their belief that the Destination exists. Day and night, they peer out ahead of the ship, into the limitless depth of the cosmic abyss …


This is the theme of a number of works of Western sci-fi. What do you get a feel for when you read such a passage? The depth and vastness of space? The brevity of human life? It may give you a glimpse through God’s eyes, a universal vantage from which to look down on all human history, and you’re overcome by the realization that our civilization is but a tiny grain of sand in the desert of cosmic space-time.


One may think that the faster-than-light travel and space-time-leap tech of sci-fi would surely make the universe feel smaller, just as airplanes and modern communications have made the Earth smaller. This is true. If faster-than-light technology is truly possible, then maybe one day, the universe will feel no larger than a village to humankind, much like the “global village” of today. However, we’re talking about fiction. Which of the following two novels would you rather read: a story about Columbus on the vast Atlantic Ocean, terrified and faint of hope as he seeks out the New World of his dreams, or the story of a corporate employee’s flight from Paris to New York for work?


What’s more, the Earth has not, in fact, shrunk. Its vast continents and oceans still exist; modern people still traverse the land by foot and organize the America’s Cup regatta, experiencing something of the romance and excitement their distant ancestors did as they trekked across the planet’s surface. Most people today have no opportunity even to leave the atmosphere. As such, there is no point for sci-fi to shrink the universe into a village. More importantly, even in the age of faster-than-light travel, the universe as a whole will remain full of great mystery and shocking phenomena.


In “Father to the Stars,” Frederik Pohl tells the story of a billionaire who devotes his life and fortune to constructing dozens of spaceships powered by conventional rocket engines. They take off toward open space with tens of thousands of people on board in hopes of expanding humanity’s Lebensraum. Decades after they depart, science on Earth makes faster-than-light spaceships a reality, and the protagonist, already an old man, boards one. They catch up with the ships that had departed decades prior in a mere one or two days, turning the protagonist’s life’s work and the lives of the tens of thousands of pioneers aboard the other ships into a meaningless tragedy. In this story, Pohl uses the contrast between two forms of technology to impart to the reader, in equal measure, a sense of the vastness of space, of the tragedy of the pioneers, and of the remorselessness of fate.


The finest portrayal of space-time jumps in science fiction appears in Arthur C. Clarke’s 2001: A Space Odyssey. The fear, loneliness, and awe that humankind displays for the mysterious universe in that novel leaves an indelible mark on the reader. It’s unforgettable. I remember finishing it on a winter night twenty years ago and walking outside to look up at the night sky. I suddenly felt as if everything around me had disappeared, that the ground beneath my feet had become a snow-white, geometric plane that extended into infinity—and that there on that infinite, two-dimensional plane, beneath the resplendent stars, stood I alone, face-to-face with a great mystery beyond the ability of the human mind to comprehend. Ever since then, the stars at night have looked different to me. It felt as if I’d left my pond and seen the ocean. That experience gave me a deep appreciation for the power of science fiction.


In our harried, pragmatic modern world, most people are blinkered by society and practicality. People rarely look up at space. I once asked fifteen people whether the moon is ever visible during the day. One wasn’t sure; the other fourteen were quite certain it’s not. Modern society also makes its inhabitants numb to numbers. No one has seriously imagined (I mean imagined, not calculated) how long a light-year really is, and deep in most people’s minds, there’s the notion that fifteen billion light-years (i.e., the measure of the universe) is about the same distance as fifteen billion kilometers. Numbness to the universe is pervasive in society.


It is science fiction’s mission to broaden and deepen people’s minds. If someone on the way home from work at night pauses to look thoughtfully up at the stars for a while because of a sci-fi story they’ve read, then that work is a great success. Unfortunately, our current sci-fi is also benumbed to a considerable extent, and I see two possible reasons.


The first is conceptual. There’s an idea that sci-fi, like mainstream literature, is about relationships between people. This idea reduces the universe to nothing but a prop, a set piece, a supporting role. It cannot be denied that this idea has given rise to many excellent works, but sci-fi is at its strongest and most charming when it depicts the relationship between people and the universe. In sci-fi, the universe itself should be a protagonist, as much as any of its characters. The two sequels to 2001: A Space Odyssey—2010: Odyssey Two and 2061: Odyssey Three—didn’t resonate as deeply because the author shifted their focus to the various relationships between people within society, which undermined the mystery and ethereality of the universe as established in 2001.


Second, grokking the universe is no easy thing. When you stand on the roof of a tall building, you feel like you’re on top of something; when you’re in a hot-air balloon at one thousand meters, this feeling is stronger, such that it’s dizzying. But when you look down from a passenger plane flying at twenty thousand meters, your sense of height is weakened, and from a space shuttle orbiting the Earth at an altitude of several hundred kilometers, it may take a good deal of imagination to get a feel for how high up you are. From the moon, 300,000 kilometers away, the Earth looks like nothing more than a pretty, blue bauble. Our human faculties have great difficulty making sense of superlarge distances. The vastness of the universe manifests not only in its great size, but in its microscopic detail, and this sort of vastness is even harder for human senses to apprehend. Modern science, meanwhile, has reached such a deep level of thought about our macrocosmos and microcosmos that the universe it portrays isn’t merely beyond what we do imagine—it’s beyond what we can imagine. Truly to appreciate the grandeur of the universe and to capture that grandeur in fiction requires a superior imagination and superlative expressive technique, as well as an author with a fairly in-depth understanding of the cutting edge of modern science. This is sci-fi’s eternal, enormous struggle—and its most alluring goal.


Yet all of this is predicated on whether an author regards the universe with religious feeling.


A professor of philosophy once said that lesson one for freshmen in his field should consist of a long, hard look late at night at the stars. I think this would be an even more apt first lesson for aspiring writers of sci-fi. It would give them true access to the seed of sci-fi feeling, which they’d find in the deepest part of their being.


The universe, mysterious and grand, is the “God” of science fiction. The “creed” of the “church” of sci-fi is as follows:


Experience the greatness of the Lord; experience the depth of the Lord; record your experiences for the eyes of busy people, that they may share them and themselves experience the greatness and the depth of the Lord, as you have. You and those busy people are thereby blessed alike.