THIRTY YEARS OF MAKING MAGIC OUT OF ORDINARINESS


Celebrating Science Fiction World’s Thirtieth Anniversary


TRANSLATED BY HENRY ZHANG


Written June 19, 2009, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World: The 30th Anniversary Supplement in September 2009










Science Literature (now known as Science Fiction World) has been an integral part of my life since its founding, from the craze for science fiction in the 1980s to the long chill in interest between then and now. But strangely enough, after promising the editor to write about these past three decades, I was unable to come up with much. Because I live so far away, my dealings with the magazine mostly consist in sending and receiving manuscripts; even today, I’m not acquainted with most of the staff, and I haven’t learned anything about their personal lives or work lives. So even though most of my fiction this past decade has been published in Science Fiction World, the magazine remains as mysterious to me as it must be to ordinary readers.


I first learned of Science Literature in freshman year of college, in the eighties. I read about its inception in the news (I think it was China Youth Daily). I remember it was advertised as China’s first “large-scale science fiction magazine.” The story that stood out for me the most in the first few editions was “The Beta Mystery,” an homage to I, Robot, though most readers then wouldn’t have realized. It stood out not because of any particular sci-fi content, but because one of its characters, the director of a research institute, had worked as part of the underground resistance in Free China, during the Second Sino-Japanese War. I recently attended a local writers’ association meeting where someone mentioned how incredibly rich and varied literature in the eighties was, even though it had just emerged from the prison of socialist realism. Stories about different types of people, and different socioeconomic classes, poured into publishing presses. But now, fiction has narrowed in scope and vision. This is the case with science fiction as well. In the eighties, despite how simple science fiction was from a literary perspective, the kinds of science it imagined were myriad. Just look at some of the stories published in Science Literature. They included exploiting the geothermal energy of the Himalayas, using infrasonic waves to exterminate pests, transferring human consciousness into a turtle’s brain and displaying it holographically, using corn to harvest gold, and building environmentally friendly, smoke-ring-blowing chimneys, to name just some.


But another story that stood out to me had nothing to do with science fiction. I’ve forgotten its title. That day, I saw a roommate pick up my recently received copy of Science Literature, and express his appreciation for a particular story. When I took the magazine and looked, I wasn’t even sure that what I was reading was fiction: it was the account of two people, an intellectual—a freedom fighter—and an old revolutionary. The intellectual marries the revolutionary, not by choice, but because her superiors force her. On the night of the marriage, a gunshot sounds from the bride and groom’s bedroom. The story had nothing to do with science fiction, but did, in a sense, illuminate the predicament in which Chinese science fiction had landed itself. The story gave me a bad feeling about science fiction’s future, and it wasn’t long before my fears were confirmed, and Chinese science fiction entered a dark age.


I graduated and entered the workforce, joining the first batch of computer engineers to maintain the electric power system. Because life and work suddenly turned a lot more stressful, and Chinese science fiction was in such dire straits, I totally forgot about Science Literature for a while. A few years later, after work and life settled down a bit, I once again had leisure time. After losing an entire month’s salary during a game of cards in the men’s dormitory, I decided to pick up some old, less expensive hobbies, like science fiction; that was when I started writing Supernova Era. This was the nineties, and the seas of Chinese science fiction were deathly still, but I still picked up my ancient, dust-laden copy of Science Literature, and wrote a letter to the address on its cover, sure that the magazine had shut down, and that I was writing into the void. I never expected to receive such a quick reply, where I was told enthusiastically of the magazine’s survival, and that it had changed names to Exotic Tales, and then to Science Fiction World.


I also received a complimentary copy of the magazine, and a stack of flyers that I was asked to read and then put up. These were poorly printed, monochrome ads. I’m ashamed to say that I didn’t read them and lacked the nerve to share them, but thinking back, I wonder what people would have thought had such ads suddenly appeared overnight on the walls of our factory. But I’ve kept the ads to this day. That was obviously the most difficult period the magazine had gone through. The stories included were very short: one was about looking for the singularity at the beginning of the big bang, and another one was about a giant, living planet. They all showed a certain trend: Compared to the eighties, the writers’ concerns had broadened, and the emphasis had changed from technological inventions to scientific theory. I sent back the thick, first draft of Supernova Era to the head of publishing, Yang Xiao, and even though she wasn’t able to publish it (it was very hard to publish entire science fiction novels then), her enthusiasm and sincerity moved and encouraged me to keep writing.


When I sent the manuscript, I also asked for Zheng Wenguang’s address; he’d been the person I most wanted to meet since middle school. But after receiving the information, I never got the chance to visit him. One night in 2002, when Beijing Normal University was hosting the Galaxy Awards, Yao Haijun and a few others decided to visit Mr. Zheng’s house. At first, I was going to join them, but someone wanted to drag me to a dance party, and so I stayed behind, thinking there would be more chances to meet him. Alas, there weren’t.


In 1999, I attended my first science fiction conference, and the one that left the deepest impression on me, not just because the senior editor of Journal of Short Stories gave a talk about literature, but also because it was the first time I spoke to people in person about science fiction, and saw them talk to each other about it. It was a strange, almost unreal moment. I went to more conferences, and what struck me the most was that the authors kept changing. Except for a few older writers, it seemed like each time, half the faces were new ones, whereas many people who’d shown up at one conference the previous year were nowhere to be seen. But after 2006, the ranks of fiction writers born in the eighties had basically stabilized. And the 2006 conference saw a major change: a crowd of people who looked entirely different than the science fiction writers appeared. They were fashionable and lively, in contrast to the melancholic, doom-obsessed sci-fi writers. These were the fantasy writers. It was an important transitional period for Chinese science fiction.


In truth, whether we’re talking about science fiction across the globe or in China, it’s far too early to get nostalgic. Even to an individual, thirty years is hardly a slog; the glories and obstacles of the past are just a speck compared to the vastness of the future. Nostalgia ages people, but science fiction is a literature of youth. Its spirit is the youthful yearning for new worlds, and new ways of living. Mainstream literature is like Chinese baijiu, tasting better as it ages; science fiction, on the other hand, is like tap beer—you’ve got to drink it quick. Read today, even sci-fi classics seem feeble, not revelatory. The nature of science fiction is to shine brightest in the present, then to be quickly forgotten. But science fiction shouldn’t be afraid of obsolescence. As a literature of innovation, it uses a constant stream of inventions and shocks to hold back obsolescence, like an everlasting fire. Just as ash falls, the flame springs back to life, emitting dazzling light. To accomplish this, it must hold on to its youthfulness. Only tonight can we permit ourselves a moment of nostalgia. Tomorrow morning, we ought to try and return to a child’s way of seeing things, and face that future of infinite possibilities that only children possess.