WHALE SONG


TRANSLATED BY S. QIOUYI LU


Written January 1999, at Niangzi Pass


First published in Science Fiction World, 1999, no. 6










Uncle Warner stood at the bow of the boat contemplating the Atlantic Ocean’s tranquil surface. He rarely contemplated things, eschewing elaborate forethought in favor of following his instinct.


But now, the game had changed.


Uncle Warner wasn’t the demon that the media made him out to be. In fact, he looked like Santa Claus. Incisive gaze aside, he always had a bold yet sweet smile on his face. He was never armed, except for the exquisite knife he carried in his breast pocket, which he used to peel fruit and to kill people.


He smiled doing both.


In addition to the eighty subordinates and two South American girls aboard, Uncle Warner also had twenty-five tons of pure heroin stashed in his three-thousand-ton megayacht—two years’ worth of product from his refinery deep in the jungles of South America. A couple of months ago, the National Army of Colombia had surrounded the refinery to seize the shipment. His younger brother and more than thirty of his subordinates died in the struggle.


He badly needed the money he’d get from this shipment to construct a new refinery, perhaps in Bolivia this time, or even in Southeast Asia’s Golden Triangle. He had to ensure the continued survival of the drug empire he’d worked so hard to build. But even after floating on the sea for a month, he still hadn’t gotten a single gram of product onto US shores. Going through customs was completely out of the question. The instant a neutrino detector goes off, it becomes impossible to keep drugs hidden. A year ago, they tried casting heroin into the cores of steel bars to be imported, but they’d been found out all too easily.


Then, Uncle Warner thought up an ingenious plan: They’d load about 50 kg of product onto a light aircraft, usually a cheap Cessna, and fly in via Miami. Once they reached the shore, the pilot would strap the product onto their body and jump out with a parachute. Although it was a waste of an aircraft, the 50 kg of product still fetched a hefty profit. It was an invincible strategy for a while, but then the Americans used satellites and land-based radar to construct an aerial surveillance system capable of discovering and even tracking the parachuting pilots. Before Uncle Warner’s brave lads could take the plunge, they’d find police already waiting for them on the ground.


Uncle Warner then attempted to use small boats to get product ashore, but the results were even more disastrous. The Coast Guard’s speedboats had all been outfitted with neutrino detectors. As soon as one of Uncle Warner’s boats came within three thousand meters of the patrol, a scan instantly revealed the drugs on board. Uncle Warner even considered using mini submarines, but the Americans had long since perfected their underwater monitoring network, first created during the Cold War. The submarine would be detected long before it reached the shore.


Uncle Warner was at his wits’ end. He hated scientists—they were the ones who’d caused all this. Then again, scientists could also be of service to him here. He put his American-educated son to work on that front. Money wasn’t an issue.


That morning, Warner Jr. disembarked from another boat and boarded the yacht, telling his father that he had found the person they were looking for.


“He’s a genius, Dad. I met him at Caltech.”


Warner Sr. wrinkled his nose disdainfully. “Hmph. You’ve wasted three years at Caltech and you’re still no genius. Are they really that easy to come by?”


“He really is a genius, Dad!”


Warner Sr. turned and sat on a chair laid out on the forward deck. He took out his exquisite knife and began peeling a pineapple. The two South American girls stepped over to rub his meaty shoulders. The person Warner Jr. brought had kept far off to one side, looking out toward the ocean, but he came over now. He was shockingly thin. His neck was like a dowel—it was hard to believe that it could prop up such an unsurpassably huge head, rendering his appearance uncanny.


“This is Dave Hopkins. He holds a Ph.D. in marine biology,” Warner Jr. said, introducing the man.


“I heard you can help us out, sir.” Warner Sr. smiled his Santa smile.


“Yes, I can help you get the shipment ashore,” Hopkins said, expressionless.


“Using what?”


“Whales.”


Warner Jr. gestured for a couple of his people to carry over a strange object. It was a submersible made of some kind of clear plastic. A meter tall and two meters long, the submersible’s streamlined cabin was about the same size as a small car’s. There were two seats, a simple dashboard with a small screen, and a designated space behind the seats, clearly intended for storing the product.


“This submersible can carry two people and about a ton of product,” Hopkins said.


“And how is this thing supposed to go five hundred kilometers underwater to get to Miami’s shore?”


“In a whale’s mouth.”


Warner Sr. guffawed, the sound sharp at first before growing coarse. He used that laugh to express everything: amusement, fury, doubt, despair, fear, grief … every time he laughed, only he knew why.


“Clever kid! So how much do I have to pay the fish for it to take us to our destination?”


“Whales aren’t fish. They’re marine mammals with blowholes. You can give the money to me. I’ve already installed a bioorganic device in its brain, along with a computer that can receive incoming signals and convert them into the whale’s brainwaves. You can control the whale’s behavior with this.”


Hopkins retrieved a device from his pocket that resembled a television remote control.


Warner Sr.’s laughter became even more uproarious.


“Hahaha … This kid must’ve seen Pinocchio, haha … Ahaha…” He bent over double, wheezing, the pineapple in his hand tumbling to the ground. “Haha … that puppet, ah, Pinocchio—with an old man, too, swallowed into the belly of a fish … haha…”


“Dad, just listen, his plan could really work!” Warner Jr. pleaded.


“… Ahahaha … Pinocchio and the old man were in that fish’s belly for a while. Maybe they’re still in there! Hahaha … still lighting candles … hahahaha…”


Warner Sr. stopped laughing then, his wild guffawing ceasing abruptly like a light going out, though his Santa smile remained. He asked one of the girls behind him, “What happens when Pinocchio lies?”


“His nose grows,” the girl replied.


Warner Sr. stood, the knife he’d used to peel the pineapple in one hand, his other hand on Hopkins’s chin, tilting his face up so he could observe his nose as the girls behind him watched mildly.


“Is his nose getting longer?” he asked the girls with a smile.


“It is, Uncle Warner!” the girls said in saccharine unison, as if seeing people meet their demise at his hands was a pleasure of theirs.


“Then let’s help him out,” Warner Sr. said. His son wasn’t quick enough to stop him. Warner Sr.’s quick knife sliced off the tip of Hopkins’s nose. Blood gushed from the wound, but Hopkins was still as tranquil as ever. Even after Warner Sr. released his hold on Hopkins’s chin, Hopkins continued to stand there with his arms hanging by his sides, letting the blood flow freely, as if his nose weren’t even part of his face.


“Put this genius in that contraption and throw him into the ocean.” Warner Sr. waved a hand. The two girls shoved Hopkins into the clear submersible. Then, Warner Sr. picked up the remote and handed it to Hopkins through the door, as amiably as if he were Santa Claus handing a gift to a child.


“Take it. Summon your precious fish. Hahaha…”


He guffawed again. But as soon as the submersible hit the water with a huge splash, his smile disappeared, revealing a rare moment of solemnity.


“He’ll die there sooner or later,” he said to his son.


The submersible sank into the ocean waves, as weak and helpless as a bubble.


Suddenly, the two girls screamed. A massive swell of water surged forth about two hundred meters away from the yacht. It moved astonishingly fast, soon splitting into two great waves as a black ridge broke the surface.


“It’s a whale. Forty-eight meters long. Hopkins calls it Poseidon, after the Greek god of the ocean,” Warner Jr. said into his father’s ear.


The ridge disappeared a dozen meters away from the submersible, its colossal fluke waving in its wake like a black sail. Then, the whale’s enormous head appeared beside the submersible. It opened its massive maw and swallowed the submersible in one gulp, as if it were an ordinary fish eating bread crumbs. After that, the whale came back around to the megayacht. The living mountain approached solemnly, bombarding the yacht with breaking waves as it boomed out a rumbling call. Even a person as arrogant as Warner Sr. could be awed by such a sight. He was witnessing a god: an embodiment of the ocean’s might, an incarnation of nature’s power.


The whale completed its circle around the yacht. Then, it turned and stormed the ship, its massive head breaking the water’s surface right beside it. The people aboard could clearly see the barnacles clinging to the whale’s coarse, pebbled skin. It was only then that they truly realized how huge the whale was.


The whale opened its jaws and spit out the tiny submersible. The submersible arced over the side of the yacht in nearly a straight line before clattering onto the deck. The door opened. Hopkins emerged, the front of his shirt wet with blood from his nose, but he was otherwise unscathed.


“Hurry and call the doctor! Can’t you see that Pinocchio’s injured?!” Warner Sr. bellowed, as if Hopkins’s injury had nothing to do with him.


“My name is Dave Hopkins,” Hopkins said severely.


“I’m calling you Pinocchio,” Warner said, once again donning his Santa Claus smile.


A few hours later, Warner and Hopkins wormed into the submersible, placing the ton of heroin wrapped in a waterproof bag behind the seats. Warner had decided to go himself. He needed to take risks to invigorate the sluggish blood in his veins, and this would be, without a doubt, the most invigorating trip he’d ever had. The sailors on the yacht lowered the submersible with thick cables to the ocean’s surface, then cruised away.


Waves jolted the two passengers. The submersible bobbed on the water’s surface, illuminated by the setting sun. Hopkins pressed a button on the remote to summon the whale. There was a low, muffled sound of something stirring far off in distant waters. The sound grew louder and louder until the whale’s maw broke through the surface. It pressed on toward them, then sucked the submersible into a black abyss. The light retreated, narrowing into a thin gap before going out completely, plunging them into the dark. There was a loud chomp: the sound of the whale’s titanic teeth crashing shut. Then, a zero-gravity feeling like plummeting in an elevator. The whale was diving into deeper, stealthier waters.


“How clever, Pinocchio! Hahaha…” Warner broke out into raucous laughter again in the dark, either expressing or masking his terror.


“Let’s light some candles, sir,” Hopkins said, his voice happy and at ease. This was his domain. When Warner realized that, his terror deepened. A ceiling light came on in the cabin, bathing them in a dim ultramarine light.


The first thing Warner saw outside the submersible was a row of white pillars, each as tall as a person and tapered to a sharp point. The upper and lower pillars interlocked into a row of bars. He quickly realized that he was looking at the whale’s teeth. The submersible seemed to be resting on a soft, wriggling mire. Above them was a vaulted ceiling supported by row after row of arched bone. The mire and roof beams all tilted toward an enormous black hole that kept changing shape. Warner’s manic laughter started up again. The hole led to the whale’s throat. Shrouded in a wet haze under the blue light’s glow, the two of them seemed to be in a mythical grotto.


The display in the submersible showed a nautical chart of the Bahamas and the area around Miami. Hopkins used the remote to “drive” the whale. A line tracing the ship’s path appeared, mapping out a route to Warner’s destination on Miami’s shores.


“We’ve embarked on our journey. Poseidon is fast. We should arrive in about five hours,” Hopkins said.


“Won’t we suffocate?” Warner asked, doing his best to hide his anxiety.


“Of course not. I told you, whales have blowholes. They breathe oxygen, too. We’ve got more than enough around us. Once it’s been filtered, we can breathe like we normally do.”


“Pinocchio, you truly are the Devil! How did you come up with all this? For a start, how did you insert the controls and computer into this big fella’s brain?”


“One person can’t do it alone. To begin, the animal needs to be sedated with a five-hundred-kilogram dose of anesthesia. Poseidon is property of the US Navy; I oversaw the multibillion-dollar military research project that he was part of. He was used during the Cold War to transport spies and special forces to the shores of the Warsaw Pact countries. I oversaw other projects as well, such as implanting devices into the brains of dolphins and sharks so that they could be strapped with explosives and used as torpedoes. I did so much for my country, but, as soon as there were budget cuts, they kicked me to the curb. As I left the research lab, I took Poseidon with me. These past few years, we’ve swum the seven seas together…”


“Then Pinocchio, do you have any, hmm, ethical qualms about using your Poseidon for these kinds of activities? Of course, I’m sure me talking about ethics is laughable to you, but I had chemists and engineers working for me in my refinery who often had those kinds of misgivings.”


“I have no such thing, sir. Humanity recruiting innocent creatures into their vile wars is already the greatest sin. I devoted myself to my country and its military; I had the qualifications to get what I wanted. And since society denied me that, I might as well go take it myself.”


“Hahahaha … Yes, best to take it yourself! Hahaha…” Warner laughed, then stopped suddenly. “Listen—what’s that sound?”


“It’s the sound of Poseidon spouting water. He’s breathing. The submersible is fitted with a sensitive sonar that can amplify the sounds outside. Listen…”


A droning sound mixed with the crashing of the waves, going from soft to loud, then loud to soft again, until it gradually faded out.


“It’s a ten-thousand-ton oil tanker.”


Before them, the two rows of teeth yawned open. Seawater boomed as it surged in, drowning the submersible. Hopkins pressed a button. The nautical charts on the screen disappeared, replaced by a complicated waveform: Poseidon’s brainwaves.


“Oh! Poseidon’s discovered a school of fish. It’s lunchtime.”


The whale bared its gullet, revealing the pitch-black of a deep ocean abyss. A school of fish surfaced and streamed into Poseidon’s maw, banging against the submersible as they flooded past, dazzling and flashing silver in the submersible’s light. Believing that they were swimming into a cave full of coral, the fish were unaware of their fate.


A crash pulsed through the flurry of fish. Barely visible beyond the wall of teeth coming together were the whale’s still-parted lips. A howling torrent of water tumbled the fish backward until they were plastered against the pillars of teeth. The whale was expelling the seawater in its mouth, and the great pressure was also filtering out the tide that had come in with the school of fish. Astonished, Warner watched as water surged perpendicularly past the submersible. The whale soon emptied out the rest of the water, leaving the fish flopping wildly against each other in front of the pillars of teeth. The soft “ground” beneath the submersible began to squirm, turning into a great, undulating wave that coaxed the fish backward. By the time Warner realized what was happening, terror had gripped him from head to toe.


“Don’t worry. Poseidon won’t swallow us,” Hopkins said, understanding the reason for Warner’s terror. “It can filter us out, just as we can separate the shell from the kernel while eating sunflower seeds. The submersible affects its eating, but it’s used to it. Sometimes, when there’s a large school of fish, it’ll temporarily spit out the submersible before eating.”


Warner let out a relieved sigh. He wanted to laugh again, but he didn’t have the strength to. He stared, dumbstruck, as the fish flopped past the absolutely stationary submersible to the black abyss behind them. Once the two or three tons of fish disappeared into the whale’s gullet, there was a boom like a landslide.


The shock sank Warner into a long silence. Hopkins nudged him: “Did you hear that?” As he spoke, he turned up the volume on the sonar’s loudspeaker.


Warner heard a low rumble. Confused, he looked at Hopkins.


“Poseidon is singing. It’s a whale song.”


Gradually, Warner picked a rhythm and even a melody out of the low, intermittent call. “What is it doing? Looking for a mate?”


“Not entirely. Marine biologists have been researching the topic for a long time, but even now, the meaning of whale song isn’t entirely clear.”


“Maybe it’s meaningless.”


“Precisely the opposite. The meaning is too deep for humans to understand. Researchers believe it’s a kind of musical language, but one that can express far more than any human language.”


Whale song is the soul of the ocean singing. In whale song, ancient lightning strikes the primordial sea, life glimmering in the chaos of the ocean; in whale song, life opens its curious and awestruck eyes, stepping out of the sea for the first time on scaled feet onto continents still alive with volcanoes; in whale song, a dinosaur empire goes extinct in a flash of cold—time slips by, and a world of changes passes in an instant, wisdom like blades of grass sprouting in the warmth left after a glacier’s passage; in whale song, civilization rises like a specter on every continent, and Atlantis crumbles into the sea in a grand cataclysm … Naval war after naval war stains the ocean red with blood; countless empires rise and fall, each a wisp of smoke passing before one’s eyes …


The whale drew from its ancient, unfathomable memory to sing the song of life, completely unaware of the tiny, insignificant evil in its mouth.


The whale reached Miami at midnight, stopping a couple of hundred meters from the shore so it wouldn’t run aground. Everything went surprisingly smoothly. The moonlight that evening was good; Warner and Hopkins could clearly see the groves of palm trees on the shore and the eight runners wearing wetsuits waiting for them. They swiftly moved the ton of product ashore and readily paid the highest price Warner asked, even promising to buy however much product they had in the future. They were amazed that the little clear submersible could get past the strictly enforced maritime defense line; at first, they hadn’t been sure if Warner and Hopkins were people or ghosts (Hopkins had already instructed Poseidon to swim far away).


Half an hour later, with the runners long gone, Hopkins once again summoned Poseidon. He hauled two briefcases of American bills as he and Warner boarded for their return journey.


“Excellent, Pinocchio!” Warner cheered. “Today’s profits are all yours. We’ll split future profits. You’re rich, Pinocchio! Hahaha … We’ll still have to make another twenty-something runs to distribute the rest of the twenty-something tons.”


“We might not need to make that many trips. With a few changes, I think we can transport two or three tons at a time.”


“Hahahaha … Outstanding, Pinocchio!”


During the tranquil underwater journey, Warner fell asleep. After some time, Hopkins woke him. He glanced at the map and route on the small screen and realized that they’d already traveled two-thirds of their journey. Nothing seemed out of the ordinary.


“Listen.”


He heard a ferry on the surface. They had been a common sight on the last journey. Uncomprehending, he looked at Hopkins. But as he kept listening, he realized that the ferry didn’t sound right. It was different from before. This time, the volume didn’t change.


The boat was following the whale.


“How long has it been following us?” Warner asked.


“About half an hour. I’ve changed our route several times.”


“How can this be? The Coast Guard’s patrol boat wouldn’t detect a whale on a scan.”


“So what if they do a scan? The whale’s not carrying any drugs right now.”


“Plus, if they wanted to take care of us, it would’ve been easier to do so in Miami. Why wait until now?” Baffled, Warner peered at the nautical map on the screen. They’d already passed through the Straits of Florida and were headed toward Cuba.


“Poseidon has to breathe. We have no choice but to surface—just a few seconds should be enough.” Hopkins picked up the remote. Warner nodded; Hopkins pressed the remote. A weight settled on them as the whale ascended. With a breaking wave, the whale surfaced.


The sonar made a sudden, muffled sound. The submersible shuddered. The sonar sounded again; the whale thrashed more wildly, tumbling the submersible around its mouth. The submersible slammed heavily into the whale’s teeth a few times, landing with a crack that nearly knocked Warner and Hopkins unconscious.


“The ship’s started firing at us!” Hopkins yelled in surprise. He did his best to calm the whale with the remote and send neural instructions, but the whale ignored the commands as it continued its aimless thrashing on the ocean’s surface.


The whale’s massive body was trembling—a tremble of pain.


“We have to get out, or else!” Warner shouted.


Hopkins issued the command to eject the submersible. This time, the whale obeyed. With shocking speed, the submersible burst out of its mouth and plunked onto the surface. The sun had already risen over the Atlantic, making them squint. But they quickly realized that they were sitting in water. The battering they’d taken in the whale’s mouth had cracked the hull, and seawater was flooding in. The entire submersible was mangled; even with all their strength, they couldn’t pull open the hatch to escape. They started to use whatever they could to plug up the holes, even using bundles of bills from the briefcases, but it was no use—the seawater continued to surge in, and soon, the water in the submersible was chest-deep.


Before the submersible sank, Hopkins saw the other boat. It was huge and had a strangely shaped cannon at its bow. With a flash, the cannon fired a harpoon into the struggling whale’s back.


The whale beat against the waves with the last of its strength. Its blood had already stained the water red.


The submersible sank into the infinite billows of the whale’s crimson blood.


“Who’s responsible for our death?” Warner asked, the water up to his chin.


“The whaler,” Hopkins replied.


Warner guffawed for the last time.


“The international pledge completely banned whaling five years ago! These sons of bitches!” Hopkins said, letting loose a stream of obscenities.


Warner continued laughing. “Hahaha … they’re unscrupulous … hahahaha … society won’t give it to them … hahaha … they’ll get it themselves … haha … get it themselves…”


As the seawater filled the submersible, in their last moments of consciousness, Hopkins and Warner heard Poseidon sing its solemn whale song again. Life’s last song carried through the bloody Atlantic, echoing, echoing, everlasting.