26


'I don't know,' said Zaphod, for what seemed to him like the thirty-seventh time, 'they could have killed me, but they didn't. Maybe they just thought I was a kind of wonderful guy or something. I could understand that.'
The others silently registered their opinions of this theory.
  Zaphod lay on the cold floor of the flight deck. His back seemed to wrestle the floor as pain thudded through him and banged at his heads.
  'I think,' he whispered, 'that there is something wrong with those anodized dudes, something fundamentally weird.'
'They are programmed to kill everybody,' Slartibartfast pointed out. 'That,' wheezed Zaphod between the whacking thuds, 'could be it.' He
didn't seem altogether convinced.
  'Hey, baby,' he said to Trillian, hoping this would make up for his previous behaviour.
'You all right?' she said gently. 'Yeah,' he said, 'I'm fine.'
  'Good,' she said, and walked away to think. She stared at the huge visi- screen over the eight couches and, twisting a switch, she flipped local images over it. One image was the blankness of the dust cloud. One was the sun of Krikkit. One was Krikkit itself. She flipped between them fiercely.
  'Well, that's goodbye Galaxy, then,' said Arthur, slapping his knees and standing up.
  'No,' said Slartibartfast, gravely. 'Our course is clear.' He furrowed his brow until you could grow some of the smaller root vegetables in it. He stood up, he paced around. When he spoke again, what he said frightened him so much he had to sit down again.
  'We must go down to Krikkit,' he said. A deep sigh shook his old frame and his eyes seemed almost to rattle in their sockets.
'Once again,' he said, 'we have failed pathetically. Quite pathetically.' 'That,' said Ford quietly, 'is because we don't care enough, I told you.'
  He swung his feet up onto the instrument panel and picked fitfully at something on one of his fingernails.
  'But unless we determine to take action,' said the old man querulously, as if struggling against something deeply insouciant in his nature, 'then we shall all be destroyed, we shall all die. Surely we care about that?'
  'Not enough to want to get killed over it,' said Ford. He put on a sort of hollow smile and flipped it round the room at anyone who wanted to see it.


  Slartibartfast clearly found this point of view extremely seductive and he fought against it. He turned again to Zaphod, who was gritting his teeth and sweating with the pain.
'You surely must have some idea,' he said, 'of why they spared your life.
It seems most strange and unusual.'
  'I kind of think they didn't even know,' shrugged Zaphod. 'I told you. They hit me with the most feeble blast, just knocked me out, right? They lugged me into their ship, dumped me in a corner and ignored me. Like they were embarrassed about me being there. If I said anything they knocked me out again. We had some great conversations. "Hey . . . ugh!" "Hi there . . . ugh!" "I wonder . . . ugh!" Kept me amused for hours, you know.' He winced again.
  He was toying with something in his fingers. He held it up. It was the Gold Bail - the Heart of Gold, the heart of the Infinite Improbability Drive. Only that and the Wooden Pillar had survived the destruction of the Lock intact.
  'I hear your ship can move a bit,' he said. 'So how would you like to zip me back to mine before you . . .'
'Will you not help us?' said Slartibartfast. 'Us?' said Ford sharply. 'Who's us?'
  'I'd love to stay and help you save the Galaxy,' insisted Zaphod, raising himself up onto his shoulders, 'but I have the mother and father of a pair of headaches, and I feel a lot of little headaches coming on. But next time it needs saving, I'm your guy. Hey, Trillian baby?'
She looked round briefly. 'Yes?'
  'You want to come? Heart of Gold? Excitement and adventure and really wild things?'
'I'm going down to Krikkit,' she said.


27


It was the same hill, and yet not the same.
  This time it was not an Informational Illusion. This was Krikkit itself and they were standing on it. Near them, behind the trees, stood the strange


Italian restaurant which had brought these, their real bodies, to this, the real, present world of Krikkit.
  The strong grass under their feet was real, the rich soil real too. The heady fragrances from the tree, too, were real. The night was real night.
Krikkit.
  Possibly the most dangerous place in the Galaxy for anyone who isn't a Krikkiter to stand. The place that could not countenance the existence of any other place, whose charming, delightful, intelligent inhabitants would howl with fear, savagery and murderous hate when confronted with anyone not their own.
Arthur shuddered. Slartibartfast shuddered. Ford, surprisingly, shuddered.
  It was not surprising that he shuddered, it was surprising that he was there at all. But when they had returned Zaphod to his ship Ford had felt unexpectedly shamed into not running away.
  Wrong, he thought to himself, wrong wrong wrong. He hugged to himself one of the Zap guns with which they had armed themselves out of Zaphod's armoury.
Trillian shuddered, and frowned as she looked into the sky. This, too, was not the same. It was no longer blank and empty.
  Whilst the countryside around them had changed little in the two thousand years of the Krikkit Wars, and the mere five years that had elapsed locally since Krikkit was sealed in its Slo-Time envelope ten billion years ago, the sky was dramatically different.
Dim lights and heavy shapes hung in it.
  High in the sky, where no Krikkiter ever looked, were the War Zones, the Robot Zones - huge warships and tower blocks floating in the Nil-O-Grav fields far above the idyllic pastoral lands of the surface of Krikkit.
Trillian stared at them and thought. 'Trillian,' whispered Ford Prefect to her. 'Yes?' she said.
'What are you doing?' 'Thinking.'
'Do you always breathe like that when you're thinking?' 'I wasn't aware that I was breathing.'
'That's what worried me.'


'I think I know . . .' said Trillian.
  'Shhhh!' said Slartibartfast in alarm, and his thin trembling hand motioned them further back beneath the shadow of the tree.
  Suddenly, as before in the tape, there were lights coming along the hill path, but this time the dancing beams were not from lanterns but electric torches - not in itself a dramatic change, but every detail made their hearts thump with fear. This time there were no lilting whimsical songs about flowers and farming and dead dogs, but hushed voices in urgent debate.
  A light moved in the sky with slow weight. Arthur was clenched with a claustrophobic terror and the warm wind caught at his throat.
  Within seconds a second party became visible, approaching from the other side of the dark hill. They were moving swiftly and purposefully, their torches swinging and probing around them.
The parties were clearly converging, and not merely with each other.
They were converging deliberately on the spot where Arthur and the others were standing.
  Arthur heard the slight rustle as Ford Prefect raised his Zap gun to his shoulder, and the slight whimpering cough as Slartibartfast raised his. He felt the cold unfamiliar weight of his own gun, and with shaking hands he raised it.
  His fingers fumbled to release the safety catch and engage the extreme danger catch as Ford had shown him. He was shaking so much that if he'd fired at anybody at that moment he probably would have burnt his signature on them.
  Only Trillian didn't raise her gun. She raised her eyebrows, lowered them again, and bit her lip in thought.
  'Has it occurred to you,' she began, but nobody wanted to discuss anything much at the moment.
  A light stabbed through the darkness from behind them and they spun around to find a third party of Krikkiters behind them, searching them out with their torches.
  Ford Prefect's gun crackled viciously, but fire spat back at it and it crashed from his hands.
  There was a moment of pure fear, a frozen second before anyone fired again.
And at the end of the second nobody fired.


  They were surrounded by pale-faced Krikkiters and bathed in bobbing torchlight.
The captives stared at their captors, the captors stared at their captives. 'Hello?' said one of the captors. 'Excuse me, but are you . . . aliens?'


28


Meanwhile, more millions of miles away than the mind can comfortably encompass, Zaphod Beeblebrox was throwing a mood again.
  He had repaired his ship - that is, he'd watched with alert interest whilst a service robot had repaired it for him. It was now, once again, one of the most powerful and extraordinary ships in existence. He could go anywhere, do anything. He fiddled with a book, and then tossed it away. It was the one he'd read before.
  He walked over to the communications and opened an all-frequency channel.
'Anyone want a drink?' he said.
  'This is an emergency, feller?' crackled a voice from halfway across the Galaxy.
'Got any mixers?' said Zaphod. 'Go take a ride on a comet.'
  'OK, OK,' said Zaphod and flipped the channel shut again. He sighed and sat down. He got up again and wandered over to a computer screen. He pushed a few buttons. Little blobs started to rush around the screen eating each other.
'Pow!' said Zaphod. 'Freeeooooo! Pop!'
  'Hi there,' said the computer brightly after a minute of this, 'you have scored three points. Previous best score, seven million five hundred and ninety-seven thousand two hundred and . . .'
'OK, OK,' said Zaphod and flipped the screen blank again.
  He sat down again. He played with a pencil. This too began slowly to lose its fascination.
  'OK, OK,' he said, and fed his score and the previous best one into the computer.
His ship made a blur of the Universe.


29


'Tell us,' said the thin, pale-faced Krikkiter who had stepped forward from the ranks of the others and stood uncertainly in the circle of torchlight, handling his gun as if he was just holding it for someone else who'd just popped off somewhere but would be back in a minute, 'do you know anything about something called the balance of nature?'
  There was no reply from their captives, or at least nothing more articulate than a few confused mumbles and grunts. The torchlight continued to play over them. High in the sky above them dark activity continued in the Robot Zones.
  'It's just,' continued the Krikkiter uneasily, 'something we heard about, probably nothing important. Well, I suppose we'd better kill you, then.'
He looked down at his gun as if he was trying to find which bit to press. 'That is,' he said, looking up again, 'unless there's anything you want to
chat about?'
  Slow, numb astonishment crept up the bodies of Slartibartfast, Ford and Arthur. Very soon it would reach their brains, which were at the moment solely occupied with moving their jawbones up and down. Trillian was shaking her head as if trying to finish a jigsaw by shaking the box.
  'We're worried, you see,' said another man from the crowd, 'about this plan of universal destruction.'
  'Yes,' added another, 'and the balance of nature. It just seemed to us that if the whole of the rest of the Universe is destroyed it will - somehow upset the balance of nature. We're quite keen on ecology, you see.' His voice trailed away unhappily.
  'And sport,' said another, loudly. This got a cheer of approval from the others.
  'Yes,' agreed the first, 'and sport . . .' He looked back at his fellows uneasily and scratched fitfully at his cheek. He seemed to be wrestling with some deep inner confusion, as if everything he wanted to say and everything he thought were entirely different things, between which he could see no possible connection.
  'You see,' he mumbled, 'some of us . . .' and he looked around again as if for confirmation. The others made encouraging noises. 'Some of us,' he continued, 'are quite keen to have sporting links with the rest of the Galaxy,


and though I can see the argument about keeping sport out of politics, I think that if we want to have sporting links with the rest of the Galaxy, which we do, then it's probably a mistake to destroy it. And indeed the rest of the Universe . . .' his voice trailed away again '. . . which is what seems to be the idea now . . .'
'Wh . . .' said Slartibartfast. 'Wh . . .' 'Hhhh . . . ?' said Arthur.
'Dr . . .' said Ford Prefect.
  'OK,' said Trillian. 'Let's talk about it.' She walked forward and took the poor confused Krikkiter by the arm. He looked about twenty-five, which meant, because of the peculiar manglings of time that had been going on in this area, that he would have been just twenty when the Krikkit Wars were finished, ten billion years ago.
  Trillian led him for a short walk through the torchlight before she said anything more. He stumbled uncertainly after her. The encircling torch beams were drooping now slightly as if they were abdicating to this strange, quiet girl who alone in this Universe of dark confusion seemed to know what she was doing.
  She turned and faced him, and lightly held both his arms. He was a picture of bewildered misery.
'Tell me,' she said.
  He said nothing for a moment, whilst his gaze darted from one of her eyes to the other.
  'We . . .' he said, 'we have to be alone . . . I think.' He screwed up his face and then dropped his head forward, shaking it like someone trying to shake a coin out of a money box. He looked up again. 'We have this bomb now, you see,' he said, 'it's just a little one.'
'I know,' she said.
  He goggled at her as if she'd said something very strange about beetroots.
'Honestly,' he said, 'it's very, very little.' 'I know,' she said again.
  'But they say,' his voice trailed on, 'they say it can destroy everything that exists. And we have to do that, you see, I think. Will that make us alone? I don't know. It seems to be our function, though,' he said, and dropped his head again.
'Whatever that means,' said a hollow voice from the crowd.


  Trillian slowly put her arms around the poor bewildered young Krikkiter and patted his trembling head on her shoulder.
  'It's all right,' she said quietly but clearly enough for all the shadowy crowd to hear, 'you don't have to do it.'
She rocked him.
'You don't have to do it,' she said again. She let him go and stood back.
'I want you to do something for me,' she said, and unexpectedly laughed. 'I want,' she said, and laughed again. She put her hand over her mouth
and then said with a straight face, 'I want you to take me to your leader,' and she pointed into the War Zones in the sky. She seemed somehow to know that their leader would be there.
  Her laughter seemed to discharge something in the atmosphere. From somewhere at the back of the crowd a single voice started to sing a tune which would have enabled Paul McCartney, had he written it, to buy the world.


30


Zaphod Beeblebrox crawled bravely along a tunnel, like the hell of a guy he was. He was very confused, but continued crawling doggedly anyway because he was that brave.
  He was confused by something he had just seen, but not half as confused as he was going to be by something he was about to hear, so it would now be best to explain exactly where he was.
  He was in the Robot War Zones many miles above the surface of the planet Krikkit.
  The atmosphere was thin here and relatively unprotected from any rays or anything which space might care to hurl in this direction.
  He had parked the starship Heart of Gold amongst the huge jostling dim hulks that crowded the sky here above Krikkit, and had entered what appeared to be the biggest and most important of the sky buildings, armed with nothing but a Zap gun and something for his headaches.
  He had found himself in a long, wide and badly lit corridor in which he was able to hide until he worked out what he was going to do next. He hid because every now and then one of the Krikkit robots would walk along it,


and although he had so far led some kind of charmed life at their hands, it had nevertheless been an extremely painful one, and he had no desire to stretch what he was only half-inclined to call his good fortune.
  He had ducked, at one point, into a room leading off the corridor, and had discovered it to be a huge and, again, dimly lit chamber.
  In fact, it was a museum with just one exhibit - the wreckage of a spacecraft. It was terribly burnt and mangled, and, now that he had caught up with some of the Galactic history he had missed through his failed attempts to have sex with the girl in the cybercubicle next to him at school, he was able to put in an intelligent guess that this was the wrecked spaceship which had drifted through the dust cloud all those billions of years ago and started this whole business off.
  But, and this is where he had become confused, there was something not at all right about it.
  It was genuinely wrecked. It was genuinely burnt, but a fairly brief inspection by an experienced eye revealed that it was not a genuine spacecraft. It was as if it was a full-scale model of one - a solid blueprint. In other words it was a very useful thing to have around if you suddenly decided to build a spaceship yourself and didn't know how to do it. It was not, however, anything that would ever fly anywhere itself.
  He was still puzzling over this - in fact he'd only just started to puzzle over it - when he became aware that a door had slid open in another part of the chamber, and a couple of Krikkit robots had entered, looking a little glum.
  Zaphod did not want to tangle with them and, deciding that just as discretion was the better part of valour, so was cowardice the better part of discretion, he valiantly hid himself in a cupboard.
  The cupboard in fact turned out to be the top part of a shaft which led down through an inspection hatch into a wide ventilation tunnel. He let himself down into it and started to crawl along it, which is where we found him.
  He didn't like it. It was cold, dark and profoundly uncomfortable, and it frightened him. At the first opportunity - which was another shaft a hundred yards further along - he climbed back up out of it.
  This time he emerged into a smaller chamber, which appeared to be a computer intelligence centre. He emerged in a dark narrow space between a large computer bank and the wall.


  He quickly learned that he was not alone in the chamber and started to leave again, when he began to listen with interest to what the other occupants were saying.
  'It's the robots, sir,' said one voice. 'There's something wrong with them.'
'What, exactly?'
  These were the voices of two War Command Krikkiters. All the War Commanders lived up in the sky in the Robot War Zones, and were largely immune to the whimsical doubts and uncertainties which were afflicting their fellows down on the surface of the planet.
  'Well, sir, I think it's just as well that they are being phased out of the war effort, and that we are now going to detonate the supernova bomb. In the very short time since we were released from the envelope-'
'Get to the point.'
'The robots aren't enjoying it, sir.' 'What?'
  'The war, sir, it seems to be getting them down. There's a certain world- weariness about them, or perhaps I should say Universe-weariness.'
'Well, that's all right, they're meant to be helping to destroy it.'
  'Yes, well they're finding it difficult, sir. They are afflicted with a certain lassitude. They're just finding it hard to get behind the job. They lack oomph.'
'What are you trying to say?'
'Well, I think they're very depressed about something, sir.' 'What on Krikkit are you talking about?'
  'Well, in the few skirmishes they've had recently, it seems that they go into battle, raise their weapons to fire and suddenly think, why bother?
What, cosmically speaking, is it all about? And they just seem to get a little tired and a little grim.'
'And then what do they do?'
  'Er, quadratic equations mostly, sir. Fiendishly difficult ones by all accounts. And then they sulk.'
'Sulk?'
'Yes, sir.'
'Whoever heard of a robot sulking?' 'I don't know, sir.'
'What was that noise?'


It was the noise of Zaphod leaving with his head spinning.


31


In a deep well of darkness a crippled robot sat. It had been silent in its metallic darkness for some time. It was cold and damp, but being a robot it was supposed not to be able to notice these things. With an enormous effort of will, however, it did manage to notice them.
  Its brain had been harnessed to the central intelligence core of the Krikkit War Computer. It wasn't enjoying the experience, and neither was the central intelligence core of the Krikkit War Computer.
  The Krikkit robots who had salvaged this pathetic metal creature from the swamps of Squornshellous Zeta had done so because they had recognized almost immediately its gigantic intelligence, and the use which this could be to them.
  They hadn't reckoned with the attendant personality disorders, which the coldness, the darkness, the dampness, the crampedness and the loneliness were doing nothing to decrease.
It was not happy with its task.
  Apart from anything else, the mere coordination of an entire planet's military strategy was taking up only a tiny part of its formidable mind, and the rest of it had become extremely bored. Having solved all the major mathematical, physical, chemical, biological, sociological, philosophical, etymological, meteorological and psychological problems of the Universe except his own, three times over, he was severely stuck for something to do, and had taken up composing short dolorous ditties of no tone, or indeed tune. The latest one was a lullaby.
'Now the world has gone to bed,' Marvin droned, 'Darkness won't engulf my head,
'I can see by infra-red, 'How I hate the night.'
  He paused to gather the artistic and emotional strength to tackle the next verse.
'Now I lay me down to sleep, 'Try to count electric sheep,
'Sweet dream wishes you can keep,


'How I hate the night.'


'Marvin!' hissed a voice.
  His head snapped up, almost dislodging the intricate network of electrodes which connected him to the central Krikkit War Computer.
  An inspection hatch had opened and one of a pair of unruly heads was peering through whilst the other kept on jogging it by continually darting to look this way and that extremely nervously.
'Oh, it's you,' muttered the robot. 'I might have known.'
  'Hey, kid,' said Zaphod in astonishment, 'was that you singing just then?'
  'I am,' Marvin acknowledged bitterly, 'in particularly scintillating form at the moment.'
Zaphod poked his head in through the hatchway and looked around. 'Are you alone?' he said.
  'Yes,' said Marvin. 'Wearily I sit here, pain and misery my only companions. And vast intelligence, of course. And infinite sorrow. And . . .'
'Yeah,' said Zaphod. 'Hey, what's your connection with all this?' 'This,' said Marvin, indicating with his less damaged arm all the
electrodes which connected him with the Krikkit computer.
'Then,' said Zaphod awkwardly, 'I guess you must have saved my life.
Twice.'
'Three times,' said Marvin.
  Zaphod's head snapped round (his other one was looking hawkishly in entirely the wrong direction) just in time to see the lethal killer robot directly behind him seize up and start to smoke. It staggered backwards and slumped against a wall. It slid down it. It slipped sideways, threw its head back and started to sob inconsolably.
Zaphod looked back at Marvin.
'You must have a terrific outlook on life,' he said. 'Just don't even ask,' said Marvin.
  'I won't,' said Zaphod, and didn't. 'Hey look,' he added, 'you're doing a terrific job.'
  'Which means, I suppose,' said Marvin, requiring only one ten thousand million billion trillion grillionth part of his mental powers to make this particular logical leap, 'that you're not going to release me or anything like that.'


'Kid, you know I'd love to.' 'But you're not going to.' 'No.'
'I see.'
'You're working well.'
'Yes,' said Marvin. 'Why stop now just when I'm hating it?'
'I got to go find Trillian and the guys. Hey, you any idea where they are?
I mean, I just got a planet to choose from. Could take a while.'
  'They are very close,' said Marvin dolefully. 'You can monitor them from here if you like.'
  'I better go get them,' asserted Zaphod. 'Er, maybe they need some help, right?'
  'Maybe,' said Marvin with unexpected authority in his lugubrious voice, 'it would be better if you monitored them from here. That young girl,' he added unexpectedly, 'is one of the least benightedly unintelligent organic life forms it has been my profound lack of pleasure not to be able to avoid meeting.'
  Zaphod took a moment or two to find his way through this labyrinthine string of negatives and emerged at the other end with surprise.
  'Trillian?' he said. 'She's just a kid. Cute, yeah, but temperamental. You know how it is with women. Or perhaps you don't. I assume you don't. If you do I don't want to hear about it. Plug us in.'
'. . . totally manipulated.' 'What?' said Zaphod.
It was Trillian speaking. He turned round.
  The wall against which the Krikkit robot was sobbing had lit up to reveal a scene taking place in some other unknown part of the Krikkit Robot War Zones. It seemed to be a council chamber of some kind - Zaphod couldn't make it out too clearly because of the robot slumped against the screen.
  He tried to move the robot, but it was heavy with its grief and tried to bite him, so he just looked around it as best he could.
  'Just think about it,' said Trillian's voice, 'your history is just a series of freakishly improbable events. And I know an improbable event when I see one. Your complete isolation from the Galaxy was freakish for a start. Right out on the very edge with a dust cloud around you. It's a set-up. Obviously.'
  Zaphod was mad with frustration that he couldn't see the screen. The robot's head was obscuring his view of the people Trillian was talking to, its


multifunctional battleclub was obscuring the background, and the elbow of the arm it had pressed tragically against its brow was obscuring Trillian herself.
'Then,' said Trillian, 'this spaceship that crash-landed on your planet.
That's really likely, isn't it? Have you any idea of what the odds are against a drifting spaceship accidentally intersecting with the orbit of a planet?'
'Hey,' said Zaphod, 'she doesn't know what the zark she's talking about.
I've seen that spaceship. It's a fake. No deal.'
'I thought it might be,' said Marvin from his prison behind Zaphod. 'Oh yeah,' said Zaphod. 'It's easy for you to say that. I just told you.
Anyway, I don't see what it's got to do with anything.'
  'And especially,' continued Trillian, 'the odds against it intersecting with the orbit of the one planet in the Galaxy, or the whole of the Universe as far as I know, that would be totally traumatized to see it. You don't know what the odds are? Nor do I, they're that big. Again, it's a set-up. I wouldn't be surprised if that spaceship was just a fake.'
  Zaphod managed to move the robot's battleclub. Behind it on the screen were the figures of Ford, Arthur and Slartibartfast, who appeared astonished and bewildered by the whole thing.
'Hey, look,' said Zaphod excitedly. 'The guys are doing great. Ra ra ra!
Go get 'em, guys.'
  'And what about,' said Trillian, 'all this technology you suddenly managed to build for yourselves almost overnight? Most people would take thousands of years to do all that. Someone was feeding you what you needed to know, someone was keeping you at it.
  'I know, I know,' she added in response to some unseen interruption, 'I know you didn't realize it was going on. That is exactly my point. You never realized anything at all. Like this supernova bomb.'
'How do you know about that?' said an unseen voice.
  'I just know,' said Trillian. 'You expect me to believe that you are bright enough to invent something that brilliant and too dumb to realize it would take you with it as well? That's not just stupid, that is spectacularly obtuse.'
'Hey, what's this bomb thing?' said Zaphod in alarm to Marvin. 'The supernova bomb?' said Marvin. 'It's a very, very small bomb.' 'Yeah?'
  'That would destroy the Universe in toto,' added Marvin. 'Good idea, if you ask me. They won't get it to work, though.'


'Why not, if it's so brilliant?'
  'It's brilliant,' said Marvin, 'they're not. They got as far as designing it before they were locked in the envelope. They've spent the last five years building it. They think they've got it right but they haven't. They're as stupid as any other organic life form. I hate them.'
Trillian was continuing.
  Zaphod tried to pull the Krikkit robot away by its leg, but it kicked and growled at him, and then quaked with a fresh outburst of sobbing. Then suddenly it slumped over and continued to express its feelings out of everybody's way on the floor.
  Trillian was standing alone in the middle of the chamber, tired out but with fiercely burning eyes.
  Ranged in front of her were the pale-faced and wrinkled Elder Masters of Krikkit, motionless behind their widely curved control desk, staring at her with helpless fear and hatred.
  In front of them, equidistant between their control desk and the middle of the chamber, where Trillian stood, as if on trial, was a slim white pillar about four feet tall. On top of it stood a white globe, about three, maybe four inches in diameter.
Beside it stood a Krikkit robot with its multifunctional battleclub.
'In fact,' explained Trillian, 'you are so dumb stupid' (She was sweating.
Zaphod felt that this was an unattractive thing for her to be doing at this point) 'you are all so dumb stupid that I doubt, I very much doubt, if you've been able to build the bomb properly without any help from Hactar for the last five years.'
'Who's this guy Hactar?' said Zaphod, squaring his shoulders.
  If Marvin replied, Zaphod didn't hear him. All his attention was concentrated on the screen.
  One of the Elders of Krikkit made a small motion with his hand towards the Krikkit robot. The robot raised its club.
  'There's nothing I can do,' said Marvin. 'It's on an independent circuit from the others.'
'Wait,' said Trillian.
  The Elder made a small motion. The robot halted. Trillian suddenly seemed very doubtful of her own judgment.
'How do you know all this?' said Zaphod to Marvin at this point. 'Computer records,' said Marvin. 'I have access.'


  'You're very different, aren't you,' said Trillian to the Elder Masters, 'from your fellow worldlings down on the ground. You've spent all your lives up here, unprotected by the atmosphere. You've been very vulnerable. The rest of your race is very frightened, you know, they don't want you to do this. You're out of touch, why don't you check up?'
  The Krikkit Elder grew impatient. He made a gesture to the robot which was precisely the opposite of the gesture he had last made to it.
The robot swung its battleclub. It hit the small white globe. The small white globe was the supernova bomb.
  It was a very, very small bomb which was designed to bring the entire Universe to an end.
  The supernova bomb flew through the air. It hit the back wall of the council chamber and dented it very badly.
'So how does she know all this?' said Zaphod. Marvin kept a sullen silence.
  'Probably just bluffing,' said Zaphod. 'Poor kid, I should never have left her alone.'


32


'Hactar!' called Trillian. 'What are you up to?'
  There was no reply from the enclosing darkness. Trillian waited, nervously. She was sure that she couldn't be wrong. She peered into the gloom from which she had been expecting some kind of response. But there was only cold silence.
  'Hactar?' she called again. 'I would like you to meet my friend Arthur Dent. I wanted to go off with a Thunder God, but he wouldn't let me and I appreciate that. He made me realize where my affections really lay.
Unfortunately Zaphod is too frightened by all this, so I brought Arthur instead. I'm not sure why I'm telling you all this.
'Hello?' she said again. 'Hactar?' And then it came.
  It was thin and feeble, like a voice carried on the wind from a great distance, half heard, a memory or a dream of a voice.
  'Won't you both come out,' said this voice. 'I promise that you will be perfectly safe.'


  They glanced at each other, and then stepped out, improbably, along the shaft of light which streamed out of the open hatchway of the Heart of Gold into the dim granular darkness of the dust cloud.
  Arthur tried to hold her hand to steady and reassure her, but she wouldn't let him. He held on to his airline holdall with its tin of Greek olive oil, its towel, its crumpled postcards of Santorini and its other odds and ends. He steadied and reassured that instead.
They were standing on, and in, nothing.
  Murky, dusty nothing. Each grain of dust of the pulverized computer sparkled dimly as it turned and twisted slowly, catching the sunlight in the darkness. Each particle of the computer, each speck of dust, held within itself, faintly and weakly, the pattern of the whole. In reducing the computer to dust the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax had merely crippled the computer, not killed it. A weak and insubstantial field held the particles in slight relationships with each other.
  Arthur and Trillian stood, or rather floated, in the middle of this bizarre entity. They had nothing to breathe, but for the moment this seemed not to matter. Hactar kept his promise. They were safe. For the moment.
  'I have nothing to offer you by way of hospitality,' said Hactar faintly, 'but tricks of the light. It is possible to be comfortable with tricks of the light, though, if that is all you have.'
  His voice evanesced, and in the dark dust a long velvet paisley-covered sofa coalesced into a hazy shape.
  Arthur could hardly bear the fact that it was the same sofa which had appeared to him in the fields of prehistoric Earth. He wanted to shout and shake with rage that the Universe kept doing these insanely bewildering things to him.
  He let this feeling subside, and then sat on the sofa - carefully. Trillian sat on it too.
It was real.
  At least, if it wasn't real, it did support them, and as that is what sofas are supposed to do, this, by any test that mattered, was a real sofa.
The voice on the solar wind breathed to them again. 'I hope you are comfortable,' it said.
They nodded.
  'And I would like to congratulate you on the accuracy of your deductions.'


  Arthur quickly pointed out that he hadn't deduced anything much himself, Trillian was the one. She had simply asked him along because he was interested in Life, the Universe and Every thing.
'That is something in which I too am interested,' breathed Hactar.
  'Well,' said Arthur, 'we should have a chat about it sometime. Over a cup of tea.'
  There slowly materialized in front of them a small wooden table on which sat a silver teapot, a bone-china milk jug, a bone-china sugar bowl, and two bone-china cups and saucers.
  Arthur reached forward, but they were just a trick of the light. He leaned back on the sofa, which was an illusion his body was prepared to accept as comfortable.
'Why,' said Trillian, 'do you feel you have to destroy the Universe?'
  She found it a little difficult talking into nothingness with nothing on which to focus. Hactar obviously noticed this. He chuckled a ghostly chuckle.
  'If it's going to be that sort of session,' he said, 'we may as well have the right sort of setting.'
  And now there materialized in front of them something new. It was the dim hazy image of a couch - a psychiatrist's couch. The leather with which it was upholstered was shiny and sumptuous, but again, it was only a trick of the light.
  Around them, to complete the setting, was the hazy suggestion of wood- panelled walls. And then, on the couch, appeared the image of Hactar himself, and it was an eye-twisting image.
  The couch looked normal size for a psychiatrist's couch - about five or six feet long.
  The computer looked normal size for a black spaceborne computer satellite - about a thousand miles across.
  The illusion that the one was sitting on top of the other was the thing which made the eyes twist.
  'All right,' said Trillian firmly. She stood up off the sofa. She felt that she was being asked to feel too comfortable and to accept too many illusions.
  'Very good,' she said. 'Can you construct real things too? I mean solid objects?'
  Again there was a pause before the answer, as if the pulverized mind of Hactar had to collect its thoughts from the millions and millions of miles


over which it was scattered.
'Ah,' he sighed. 'You are thinking of the spaceship.'
  Thoughts seemed to drift by them and through them, like waves through the ether.
'Yes,' he acknowledged, 'I can.
  'But it takes enormous effort and time. All I can do in my . . . particle state, you see, is encourage and suggest. Encourage and suggest. And suggest . . .'
  The image of Hactar on the couch seemed to billow and waver, as if finding it hard to maintain itself.
It gathered new strength.
  'I can encourage and suggest,' it said, 'tiny pieces of space debris - the odd minute meteor, a few molecules here, a few hydrogen atoms there - to move together. I encourage them together. I can tease them into shape, but it takes many aeons.'
  'So, did you make,' asked Trillian again, 'the model of the wrecked spacecraft?'
  'Er . . . yes,' murmured Hactar. 'I have made . . . a few things. I can move them about. I made the spacecraft. It seemed best to do so.'
  Something then made Arthur pick up his holdall from where he had left it on the sofa and grasp it tightly.
  The mist of Hactar's ancient shattered mind swirled about them as if uneasy dreams were moving through it.
  'I repented, you see,' he murmured dolefully. 'I repented of sabotaging my own design for the Silastic Armorfiends. It was not my place to make such decisions. I was created to fulfil a function and I failed in it. I negated my own existence.'
Hactar sighed, and they waited for him to continue his story.
  'You were right,' he said at length. 'I deliberately nurtured the planet of Krikkit till they would arrive at the same state of mind as the Silastic Armorfiends, and require of me the design of the bomb I failed to make the first time. I wrapped myself around the planet and coddled it. Under the influence of events I was able to engineer, and influences I was able to generate, they learnt to hate like maniacs. I had to make them live in the sky. On the ground my influences were too weak.
  'Without me, of course, when they were locked away from me in the envelope of Slo-Time, their responses became very confused and they were


unable to manage.
'Ah well, ah well,' he added, 'I was only trying to fulfil my function.'
  And very gradually, very, very slowly, the images in the cloud began to fade, gently to melt away.
And then, suddenly, they stopped fading.
  'There was also the matter of revenge, of course,' said Hactar, with a sharpness which was new in his voice.
  'Remember,' he said, 'that I was pulverized, and then left in a crippled and semi-impotent state for billions of years. I honestly would rather like to wipe out the Universe. You would feel the same way, believe me.'
He paused again, as eddies swept through the dust.
  'But primarily,' he said in his former, wistful tone, 'I was trying to fulfil my function. Ah well.'
Trillian said, 'Does it worry you that you have failed?'
  'Have I failed?' whispered Hactar. The image of the computer on the psychiatrist's couch began slowly to fade again.
  'Ah well, ah well,' the fading voice intoned again. 'No, failure doesn't bother me now.'
  'You know what we have to do?' said Trillian, her voice cold and businesslike.
  'Yes,' said Hactar, 'you're going to disperse me. You are going to destroy my consciousness. Please be my guest - after all these aeons, oblivion is all I crave. If I haven't already fulfilled my function, then it's too late now.
Thank you and good night.' The sofa vanished.
The tea table vanished.
  The couch and the computer vanished. The walls were gone. Arthur and Trillian made their curious way back into the Heart of Gold.


'Well, that,' said Arthur, 'would appear to be that.'
  The flames danced higher in front of him and then subsided. A few last licks and they were gone, leaving him with just a pile of Ashes, where a few minutes previously there had been the Wooden Pillar of Nature and Spirituality.
  He scooped them off the hob of the Heart of Gold's Gamma Barbecue, put them in a paper bag, and walked back into the bridge.
'I think we should take them back,' he said. 'I feel that very strongly.'


  He had already had an argument with Slartibartfast on this matter, and eventually the old man had got annoyed and left. He had returned to his own ship, the Bistromath, had a furious row with the waiter and disappeared off into an entirely subjective idea of what space was.
  The argument had arisen because Arthur's idea of returning the Ashes to Lord's Cricket Ground at the moment that they were originally taken would involve travelling back in time a day or so, and this was precisely the sort of gratuitous and irresponsible mucking about that the Campaign for Real Time was trying to put a stop to.
  'Yes,' Arthur had said, 'but you try and explain that to the MCC,' and he would hear no more against the idea.
  'I think,' he said again, and stopped. The reason he started to say it again was because no one had listened to him the first time, and the reason he stopped was because it looked fairly clear that no one was going to listen to him this time either.
  Ford, Zaphod and Trillian were watching the visi-screen intently. Hactar was dispersing under pressure from a vibration field which the Heart of Gold was pumping into it.
'What did it say?' asked Ford.
  'I thought I heard it say,' said Trillian in a puzzled voice, '"What's done is done . . . I have fulfilled my function . . ."'
  'I think we should take these back,' said Arthur holding up the bag containing the Ashes. 'I feel that very strongly.'


33


The sun was shining calmly on a scene of complete havoc.
  Smoke was still billowing across the burnt grass in the wake of the theft of the Ashes by the Krikkit robots. Through the smoke, people were running panic-stricken, colliding with each other, tripping over stretchers, being arrested.
  One policeman was attempting to arrest Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged for insulting behaviour, but was unable to prevent the tall grey- green alien from returning to his ship and arrogantly flying away, thus causing even more panic and pandemonium.


  In the middle of this, for the second time that afternoon, the figures of Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect suddenly materialized. They had teleported down out of the Heart of Gold, which was now in parking orbit round the planet.
'I can explain,' shouted Arthur. 'I have the Ashes! They're in this bag.' 'I don't think you have their attention,' said Ford.
  'I have also helped saved the Universe,' called Arthur to anyone who was prepared to listen, in other words no one.
'That should have been a crowd-stopper,' said Arthur to Ford. 'It wasn't,' said Ford.
Arthur accosted a policeman who was running past.
  'Excuse me,' he said. 'The Ashes. I've got them. They were stolen by those white robots a moment ago. I've got them in this bag. They were part of the Key to the Slo-Time envelope, you see, and, well, anyway you can guess the rest, the point is I've got them and what should I do with them?'
  The policeman told him, but Arthur could only assume that he was speaking metaphorically.
He wandered about disconsolately.
  'Is no one interested?' he shouted out. A man rushed past him and jogged his elbow, he dropped the paper bag and it spilt its contents all over the ground. Arthur stared down at it with a tightset mouth.
Ford looked at him. 'Wanna go now?' he said.
  Arthur heaved a heavy sigh. He looked around at the planet Earth for what he was now certain would be the last time.
'OK,' he said.
  At that moment, through the clearing smoke, he caught sight of one of the wickets, still standing in spite of everything.
'Hold on a moment,' he said to Ford. 'When I was a boy . . .' 'Can you tell me later?'
'I had a passion for cricket, you know, but I wasn't very good at it.' 'Or not at all, if you prefer.'
  'And I always dreamed, rather stupidly, that one day I would bowl at Lord's.'
  He looked around him at the panic-stricken throng. No one was going to mind very much.


  'OK,' said Ford wearily. 'Get it over with. I shall be over there,' he added, 'being bored.' He went and sat down on a patch of smoking grass.
  Arthur remembered that on their first visit there that afternoon, the cricket ball had actually landed in his bag, and he looked through the bag.
  He had already found the ball in it before he remembered that it wasn't the same bag that he'd had at the time. Still, there the ball was amongst his souvenirs of Greece.
  He took it out and polished it against his hip, spat on it and polished it again. He put the bag down. He was going to do this properly.
He tossed the hard red ball from hand to hand, feeling its weight.
  With a wonderful feeling of lightness and unconcern, he trotted off away from the wicket. A medium-fast pace he decided and measured a good long run-up.
  He looked up into the sky. The birds were wheeling about it, a few white clouds scudded across it. The air was disturbed with the sound of police and ambulance sirens, and people screaming and yelling, but he felt curiously happy and untouched by it all. He was going to bowl a ball at Lord's.
  He turned and pawed a couple of times at the ground with his bedroom slippers. He squared his shoulder, tossed the ball in the air and caught it again.
He started to run.
As he ran, he saw that standing at the wicket was a batsman. Oh, good, he thought that should add a little . . .
  Then, as his running feet took him nearer, he saw more clearly. The batsman standing ready at the wicket was not one of the English cricket team. He was not one of the Australian cricket team. It was one of the robot Krikkit team. It was a cold, hard, lethal white killer-robot that presumably had not returned to its ship with the others.
  Quite a few thoughts collided in Arthur Dent's mind at this moment, but he didn't seem to be able to stop running. Time seemed to be going terribly, terribly slowly, but still he didn't seem to be able to stop running.
  Moving as if through syrup, he slowly turned his troubled head and looked at his own hand, the hand which was holding the small hard red ball.
  His feet were pounding slowly onwards, unstoppably, as he stared at the ball gripped in his helpless hand. It was emitting a deep red glow and flashing intermittently. And still his feet were pounding inexorably forward.


  He looked at the Krikkit robot again standing implacably still and purposeful in front of him, battleclub raised in readiness. Its eyes were burning with a deep cold fascinating light, and Arthur could not move his own eyes from them. He seemed to be looking down a tunnel at them - nothing on either side seemed to exist.
  Some of the thoughts which were colliding in his mind at this time were these:
He felt a hell of a fool.
  He felt that he should have listened rather more carefully to a number of things he had heard said, phrases which now pounded round his mind as his feet pounded onwards to the point where he would inevitably release the ball to the Krikkit robot, who would inevitably strike it.
  He remembered Hactar saying, 'Have I failed? Failure doesn't bother me.'
  He remembered the account of Hactar's dying words, 'What's done is done, I have fulfilled my function.'
  He remembered Hactar saying that he had managed to make 'a few things'.
  He remembered the sudden movement in his holdall that had made him grip it tightly to himself when he was in the dust cloud.
  He remembered that he had travelled back in time a couple of days to come to Lord's again.
He also remembered that he wasn't a very good bowler.
  He felt his arm coming round, gripping tightly on to the ball which he now knew for certain was the supernova bomb that Hactar had built himself and planted on him, the bomb which would cause the Universe to come to an abrupt and premature end.
  He hoped and prayed that there wasn't an afterlife. Then he realized there was a contradiction involved here and merely hoped that there wasn't an afterlife.
He would feel very, very embarrassed meeting everybody.
  He hoped, he hoped, he hoped that his bowling was as bad as he remembered it to be, because that seemed to be the only thing now standing between this moment and universal oblivion.
  He felt his legs pounding, he felt his arm coming round, he felt his feet connecting with the airline holdall he'd stupidly left lying on the ground in front of him, he felt himself falling heavily forward but, having his mind so


terribly full of other things at this point, he completely forgot about hitting the ground and didn't.
  Still holding the ball firmly in his right hand he soared up into the air whimpering with surprise.
He wheeled and whirled through the air, spinning out of control.
  He twisted down towards the ground, flinging himself hectically through the air, at the same time hurling the bomb harmlessly off into the distance.
  He hurtled towards the astounded robot from behind. It still had its multi- functional battleclub raised, but had suddenly been deprived of anything to hit.
  With a sudden mad access of strength, he wrested the battleclub from the grip of the startled robot, executed a dazzling banking turn in the air, hurtled back down in a furious power-dive and with one crazy swing knocked the robot's head from the robot's shoulders.
'Are you coming now?' said Ford.
OceanofPDF.com






Epilogue: Life, the Universe and Everything
And at the end they travelled again.
  There was a time when Arthur Dent would not. He said that the Bistromathic Drive had revealed to him that time and distance were one, that mind and Universe were one, that perception and reality were one, and that the more one travelled the more one stayed in one place, and that what with one thing and another he would rather just stay put for a while and sort it all out in his mind, which was now at one with the Universe so it shouldn't take too long, and he could get a good rest afterwards, put in a little flying practice and learn to cook which he had always meant to do.
The can of Greek olive oil was now his most prized possession, and he said that the way it had unexpectedly turned up in his life had again given him a certain sense of the oneness of things which, which made him feel that . . .
He yawned and fell asleep.
  In the morning as they prepared to take him to some quiet and idyllic planet where they wouldn't mind him talking like that they suddenly picked up a computer-driven distress call and diverted to investigate.
  A small but apparently undamaged spacecraft of the Merida class seemed to be dancing a strange little jig through the void. A brief computer scan revealed that the ship was fine, its computer was fine, but that its pilot was mad.
  'Half-mad, half-mad,' the man insisted as they carried him, raving, aboard.
  He was a journalist with the Siderial Daily Mentioner. They sedated him and sent Marvin in to keep him company until he promised to try and talk sense.
'I was covering a trial,' he said at last, 'on Argabuthon.'
  He pushed himself up onto his thin wasted shoulders, his eyes stared wildly. His white hair seemed to be waving at someone it knew in the next room.
'Easy, easy,' said Ford. Trillian put a soothing hand on his shoulder.
  The man sank back down again and stared at the ceiling of the ship's sick bay.


  'The case,' he said, 'is now immaterial, but there was a witness . . . a witness . . . a man called . . . called Prak. A strange and difficult man. They were eventually forced to administer a drug to make him tell the truth, a truth drug.'
His eyes rolled helplessly in his head.
  'They gave him too much,' he said in a tiny whimper. 'They gave him much too much.' He started to cry. 'I think the robots must have jogged the surgeon's arm.'
'Robots?' said Zaphod sharply. 'What robots?'
  'Some white robots,' whispered the man hoarsely, 'broke into the courtroom and stole the judge's sceptre, the Argabuthon Sceptre of Justice, nasty Perspex thing. I don't know why they wanted it.' He began to cry again. 'And I think they jogged the surgeon's arm . . .'
  He shook his head loosely from side to side, helplessly, sadly, his eyes screwed up in pain.
  'And when the trial continued,' he said in a weeping whisper, 'they asked Prak a most unfortunate thing. They asked him,' he paused and shivered, 'to tell the Truth, the Whole Truth and Nothing but the Truth. Only, don't you see?'
  He suddenly hoisted himself up onto his elbows again and shouted at them.
'They'd given him much too much of the drug!'
  He collapsed again, moaning quietly. 'Much too much too much too much too . . .'
  The group gathered round his bedside glanced at each other. There were goose pimples on backs.
'What happened?' said Zaphod at last.
  'Oh, he told it all right,' said the man savagely, 'for all I know he's still telling it now. Strange, terrible things . . . terrible, terrible!' he screamed.
They tried to calm him, but he struggled to his elbows again.
  'Terrible things, incomprehensible things,' he shouted, 'things that would drive a man mad!'
He stared wildly at them.
'Or in my case,' he said, 'half-mad. I'm a journalist.'
  'You mean,' said Arthur quietly, 'that you are used to confronting the truth?'


  'No,' said the man with a puzzled frown. 'I mean that I made an excuse and left early.'
He collapsed into a coma from which he recovered only once and briefly. On that one occasion, they discovered from him the following:
  When it became clear what was happening, and as it became clear that Prak could not be stopped, that here was truth in its absolute and final form, the court was cleared.
  Not only cleared, it was sealed up, with Prak still in it. Steel walls were erected around it, and, just to be on the safe side, barbed wire, electric fences, crocodile swamps and three major armies were installed, so that no one would ever have to hear Prak speak.
'That's a pity,' said Arthur. 'I'd like to hear what he had to say.
Presumably he would know what the Question to the Ultimate Answer is. It's always bothered me that we never found out.'
'Think of a number,' said the computer, 'any number.'
  Arthur told the computer the telephone number of King's Cross railway station passenger inquiries, on the grounds that it must have some function, and this might turn out to be it.
  The computer injected the number into the ship's reconstituted Improbability Drive.
  In Relativity, Matter tells Space how to curve, and Space tells Matter how to move.
  The Heart of Gold told space to get knotted, and parked itself neatly within the inner steel perimeter of the Argabuthon Chamber of Law.


The courtroom was an austere place, a large dark chamber clearly designed for Justice rather than, for instance, for Pleasure. You wouldn't hold a dinner party there - at least, not a successful one. The decor would get your guests down.
  The ceilings were high, vaulted and very dark. Shadows lurked there with grim determination. The panelling for the walls and benches, the cladding of the heavy pillars, all were carved from the darkest and most severe tree in the fearsome Forest of Arglebard. The massive black Podium of Justice which dominated the centre of the chamber was a monster of gravity. If a sunbeam had ever managed to slink this far into the Justice complex of Argabuthon it would have turned around and slunk straight back out again.


  Arthur and Trillian were the first in, whilst Ford and Zaphod bravely kept a watch on their rear.
  At first it seemed totally dark and deserted. Their footsteps echoed hollowly round the chamber. This seemed curious. All the defences were still in position and operative around the outside of the building, they had run scan checks. Therefore, they had assumed, the truth-telling must still be going on.
But there was nothing.
  Then, as their eyes became accustomed to the darkness, they spotted a dull red glow in a corner, and behind the glow a live shadow. They swung a torch round onto it.
Prak was lounging on a bench, smoking a listless cigarette.
  'Hi,' he said, with a little half-wave. His voice echoed through the chamber. He was a little man with scraggy hair. He sat with his shoulders hunched forward and his head and knees kept jiggling. He took a drag of his cigarette.
They stared at him.
'What's going on?' said Trillian.
'Nothing,' said the man and jiggled his shoulders. Arthur shone his torch full on Prak's face.
  'We thought,' he said, 'that you were meant to be telling the Truth, the Whole Truth and Nothing but the Truth.'
  'Oh, that,' said Prak. 'Yeah. I was. I finished. There's not nearly as much of it as people imagine. Some of it's pretty funny, though.'
  He suddenly exploded into about three seconds of maniacal laughter and stopped again. He sat there, jiggling his head and knees. He dragged on his cigarette with a strange half-smile.
Ford and Zaphod came forward out of the shadows. 'Tell us about it,' said Ford.
  'Oh, I can't remember any of it now,' said Prak. 'I thought of writing some of it down, but first I couldn't find a pencil, and then I thought, why bother?'
  There was a long silence, during which they thought they could feel the Universe age a little. Prak stared into the torchlight.
'None of it?' said Arthur at last. 'You can remember none of it?'
'No. Except most of the good bits were about frogs, I remember that.'


  Suddenly he was hooting with laughter again and stamping his feet on the ground.
  'You would not believe some of the things about frogs,' he gasped. 'Come on, let's go out and find ourselves a frog. Boy, will I ever see them in a new light!' He leapt to his feet and did a tiny little dance. Then he stopped and took a long drag at his cigarette.
  'Let's find a frog I can laugh at,' he said simply. 'Anyway, who are you guys?'
  'We came to find you,' said Trillian, deliberately not keeping the disappointment out of her voice. 'My name is Trillian.'
Prak jiggled his head.
'Ford Prefect,' said Ford Prefect with a shrug. Prak jiggled his head.
  'And I,' said Zaphod, when he judged that the silence was once again deep enough to allow an announcement of such gravity to be tossed in lightly, 'am Zaphod Beeblebrox.'
Prak jiggled his head.
  'Who's this guy?' said Prak jiggling his shoulder at Arthur, who was standing silent for a moment, lost in disappointed thoughts.
'Me?' said Arthur. 'Oh, my name's Arthur Dent.' Prak's eyes popped out of his head.
'No kidding?' he yelped. 'You are Arthur Dent? The Arthur Dent?'
  He staggered backwards, clutching his stomach and convulsed with fresh paroxysms of laughter.
  'Hey, just think of meeting you!' he gasped. 'Boy,' he shouted, 'you are the most . . . wow, you just leave the frogs standing!'
  He howled and screamed with laughter. He fell over backwards onto the bench. He hollered and yelled in hysterics. He cried with laughter, he kicked his legs in the air, he beat his chest. Gradually he subsided, panting. He looked at them. He looked at Arthur. He fell back again howling with laughter. Eventually he fell asleep.
  Arthur stood there with his lips twitching whilst the others carried Prak comatose onto the ship.


'Before we picked up Prak,' said Arthur, 'I was going to leave. I still want to, and I think I should do so as soon as possible.'


  The others nodded in silence, a silence which was only slightly undermined by the heavily muffled and distant sound of hysterical laughter which came drifting from Prak's cabin at the farthest end of the ship.
  'We have questioned him,' continued Arthur, 'or at least, you have questioned him - I, as you know, can't go near him - on everything, and he doesn't really seem to have anything to contribute. Just the occasional snippet, and things I don't wish to hear about frogs.'
The others tried not to smirk.
  'Now, I am the first to appreciate a joke,' said Arthur and then he had to wait for the others to stop laughing.
  'I am the first . . .' He stopped again. This time he stopped and listened to the silence. There actually was silence this time, and it had come very suddenly.
  Prak was quiet. For days they had lived with constant maniacal laughter ringing round the ship, only occasionally relieved by short periods of light giggling and sleep. Arthur's very soul was clenched with paranoia.
  This was not the silence of sleep. A buzzer sounded. A glance at a board told them that the buzzer had been sounded by Prak.
  'He's not well,' said Trillian quietly. 'The constant laughing is completely wrecking his body.'
Arthur's lips twitched but he said nothing. 'We'd better go and see him,' said Trillian.


Trillian came out of the cabin wearing her serious face.
  'He wants you to go in,' she said to Arthur, who was wearing his glum and tight-lipped one. He thrust his hands deep into his dressing-gown pockets and tried to think of something to say which wouldn't sound petty. It seemed terribly unfair, but he couldn't.
'Please,' said Trillian.
  He shrugged and went in, taking his glum and tight-lipped face with him, despite the reaction this always provoked from Prak.
  He looked down at his tormentor, who was lying quietly on the bed, ashen and wasted. His breathing was very shallow. Ford and Zaphod were standing by the bed looking awkward.
  'You wanted to ask me something,' said Prak in a thin voice and coughed slightly.
Just the cough made Arthur stiffen, but it passed and subsided.


'How do you know that?' he asked.
Prak shrugged weakly. ' 'Cos it's true,' he said simply. Arthur took the point.
  'Yes,' he said at last in rather a strained drawl. 'I did have a question. Or rather, what I actually have is an Answer. I wanted to know what the Question was.'
Prak nodded sympathetically, and Arthur relaxed a little.
  'It's . . . well, it's a long story,' he said, 'but the Question I would like to know is the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe and Everything. All we know about it is that the Answer is Forty-two, which is a little aggravating.'
Prak nodded again.
'Forty-two,' he said. 'Yes, that's right.'
  He paused. Shadows of thought and memory crossed his face like the shadows of clouds crossing the land.
  'I'm afraid,' he said at last, 'that the Question and the Answer are mutually exclusive. Knowledge of one logically precludes knowledge of the other. It is impossible that both can ever be known about the same Universe.'
  He paused again. Disappointment crept into Arthur's face and snuggled down into its accustomed place.
  'Except,' said Prak, struggling to sort a thought out, 'if it happened, it seems that the Question and the Answer would just cancel each other out and take the Universe with them, which would then be replaced by something even more bizarrely inexplicable. It is possible that this has already happened,' he added with a weak smile, 'but there is a certain amount of Uncertainty about it.'
A little giggle brushed through him. Arthur sat down on a stool.
  'Oh well,' he said with resignation, 'I was just hoping there would be some sort of reason.'
'Do you know,' said Prak, 'the story of the Reason?'
Arthur said that he didn't, and Prak said that he knew that he didn't. He told it.
  One night, he said, a spaceship appeared in the sky of a planet which had never seen one before. The planet was Dalforsas, the ship was this one. It appeared as a brilliant new star moving silently across the heavens.


  Primitive tribesmen who were sitting huddled on the Cold Hillsides looked up from their steaming night-drinks and pointed with trembling fingers, swearing that they had seen a sign, a sign from their gods which meant that they must now arise at last and go and slay the evil Princes of the Plains.
  In the high turrets of their palaces, the Princes of the Plains looked up and saw the shining star, and received it unmistakably as a sign from their gods that they must go and set about the accursed Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides.
  And between them, the Dwellers in the Forest looked up into the sky and saw the sign of the new star, and saw it with fear and apprehension, for though they had never seen anything like it before, they too knew precisely what it foreshadowed, and they bowed their heads in despair.
They knew that when the rains came, it was a sign. When the rains departed, it was a sign.
When the winds rose, it was a sign. When the winds fell, it was a sign.
  When in the land there was born at the midnight of a full moon a goat with three heads, that was a sign.
  When in the land there was born at some time in the afternoon a perfectly normal cat or pig with no birth complications at all, or even just a child with a retroussÈ nose, that too would often be taken as a sign.
  So there was no doubt at all that a new star in the sky was a sign of a particularly spectacular order.
  And each new sign signified the same thing - that the Princes of the Plains and the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides were about to beat the hell out of each other again.
  This in itself wouldn't be so bad, except that the Princes of the Plains and the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides always elected to beat the hell out of each other in the Forest, and it was always the Dwellers in the Forest who came off worst in these exchanges, though as far as they could see it never had anything to do with them.
  And sometimes, after some of the worst of these outrages, the Dwellers in the Forest would send a messenger to either the leader of the Princes of the Plains or the leader of the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides and demand to know the Reason for this intolerable behaviour.


  And the leader, whichever one it was, would take the messenger aside and explain the Reason to him, slowly and carefully, and with great attention to the considerable detail involved.
  And the terrible thing was, it was a very good one. It was very clear, very rational, and tough. The messenger would hang his head and feel sad and foolish that he had not realized what a tough and complex place the real world was, and what difficulties and paradoxes had to be embraced if one was to live in it.
'Now do you understand?' the leader would say. The messenger would nod dumbly.
'And you see these battles have to take place?' Another dumb nod.
  'And why they have to take place in the Forest, and why it is in everybody's best interest, the Forest Dwellers included, that they should?'
'Er . . .'
'In the long run.' 'Er, yes.'
  And the messenger did understand the Reason, and he returned to his people in the Forest. But as he approached them, as he walked through the Forest and amongst the trees, he found that all he could remember of the Reason was how terribly clear the argument had seemed. What it actually was he couldn't remember at all.
  And this, of course, was a great comfort when next the Tribesmen and the Princes came hacking and burning their way through the Forest, killing every Forest Dweller in their way.


Prak paused in his story and coughed pathetically.
  'I was the messenger,' he said, 'after the battles precipitated by the appearance of your ship, which were particularly savage. Many of our people died. I thought I could bring the Reason back. I went and was told it by the leader of the Princes, but on the way back it slipped and melted away in my mind like snow in the sun. That was many years ago, and much has happened since then.'
He looked up at Arthur and giggled again very gently.
  'There is one other thing I can remember from the truth drug. Apart from the frogs, and that is God's last message to his creation. Would you like to hear it?'


For a moment they didn't know whether to take him seriously. ' 'S true,' he said. 'For real. I mean it.'
  His chest heaved weakly and he struggled for breath. His head lolled slightly.
  'I wasn't very impressed with it when I first knew what it was,' he said, 'but now I think back to how impressed I was by the Prince's Reason, and how soon afterwards I couldn't recall it at all, I think it might be a lot more helpful. Would you like to know what it is? Would you?'
They nodded dumbly.
  'I bet you would. If you're that interested I suggest you go and look for it. It is written in thirty-foot-high letters of fire on top of the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains in the land of Sevorbeupstry on the planet Preliumtarn, third out from the sun Zarss in Galactic Sector QQ7 Active J Gamma. It is guarded by the Lajestic Vantrashell of Lob.'
  There was a long silence following this announcement, which was finally broken by Arthur.
'Sorry, it's where?' he said.
  'It is written,' repeated Prak, 'in thirty-foot-high letters of fire on top of the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains in the land of Sevorbeupstry on the planet Preliumtarn, third out from the . . .'
'Sorry,' said Arthur again, 'which mountains?'
  'The Quentulus Quazgar Mountains in the land of Sevorbeupstry on the planet . . .'
'Which land was that? I didn't quite catch it.' 'Sevorbeupstry, on the planet . . .'
'Sevorbe-what?'
'Oh, for Heaven's sake,' said Prak and died testily.


In the following days Arthur thought a little about this message, but in the end he decided that he was not going to allow himself to be drawn by it, and insisted on following his original plan of finding a nice little world somewhere to settle down and lead a quiet retired life. Having saved the Universe twice in one day he thought that he could take things a little easier from now on.
  They dropped him off on the planet Krikkit, which was now once again an idyllic pastoral world, even if the songs did occasionally get on his nerves.


He spent a lot of time flying.
  He learnt to communicate with birds and discovered that their conversation was fantastically boring. It was all to do with wind speed, wing spans, power-to-weight ratios and a fair bit about berries.
Unfortunately, he discovered, once you have learnt birdspeak you quickly come to realize that the air is full of it the whole time, just inane bird chatter. There is no getting away from it.
  For that reason Arthur eventually gave up the sport and learnt to live on the ground and love it, despite a lot of the inane chatter he heard down there as well.
  One day, he was walking through the fields humming a ravishing tune he'd heard recently when a silver spaceship descended from the sky and landed in front of him.
  A hatchway opened, a ramp extended, and a tall grey-green alien marched out and approached him.
  'Arthur Phili . . .' it said, then glanced sharply at him and down at his clipboard. He frowned. He looked up at him again.
'I've done you before, haven't I?' he said.
OceanofPDF.com


















SO LONG, AND THANKS FOR ALL THE FISH






OceanofPDF.com


















For Jane
with thanks
To Rick and Heidi for the loan of their stable event
To Mogens and Andy and all at Huntsham Court for a number of unstable events
And especially to Sonny Mehta for being stable through all events.
OceanofPDF.com






Foreword
by Neil Gaiman




Note to the reader: If you have not read this book before, and have come here having just read the previous three books, you should skip this introduction and go straight to the beginning of the book. I give stuff away here. There are spoilers ahead. Just read the book.
I'll be here when you get back. No, I mean it.
  I'll put down some asterisks. I'll see you after them, when you've read the book.


* * *


Douglas Adams was tall. He was brilliant: I've met a handful of geniuses, and I'd count him as one of them. He was a frustrated performer, a remarkable explainer and communicator, an enthusiast. He was an astonishing comic writer: he could craft sentences that changed the way a reader viewed the world, and sum up complex and difficult issues in aptly chosen metaphors. He combined the trappings of science fiction with profound social commentary and a healthy sense of humour to create fresh worlds. He loved computers and was an astonishingly fine public speaker. He was a bestselling author. He was a competent guitarist, a world traveller, an environmentalist, a man who held remarkably wonderful parties, a gourmand.
  What he was not, and this may seem somewhat odd, especially when you consider how many of them he wrote and sold, and how famously well he wrote them, was a novelist. And this, I suspect unarguably, is the oddest of his novels.
  So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish was Douglas's first attempt to write a novel from scratch.


  In many ways it could be seen as an experiment. A transitional novel between the galaxy-spanning romps of the first three Hitchhiker books and the more Earthbound adventures of Dirk Gently. It was, after all, the first of the three of Douglas's books not to have originated in the extraordinary period of creativity that took him from the creation of the Hitchhiker's radio series to the end of his time as script editor of Doctor Who. His first two books, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and The Restaurant at the End of the Universe, had strong foundations: they were built on the backs of the scripts that Douglas, and (for the second series) Douglas and John Lloyd, had crafted for the original Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy BBC Radio 4 series. The third book, Life, the Universe and Everything, was adapted from an unused outline Douglas had written for a Doctor Who film, Doctor Who and the Krikketmen. His next book, the remarkable Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency, was adapted from Douglas's unfilmed Doctor Who story Shada (with a sprinkling of ideas from the filmed Doctor Who story City of Death).
  The first books had been written by Douglas as a young man for a world that expected nothing, as paperback originals. Now Douglas was, for the first time, being published in hardback. He was a bestselling novelist, who had not yet written a book he was proud of. This may partly have been because he was not a novelist.
  Now he needed to write a book he had been paid a lot of money to write. His accountant had embezzled most of the money and then killed himself. Douglas Adams had gone to Hollywood on his first, abortive, quest to get The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy made into a film. He had lived there for over a year, doing drafts of the film, did not have a good time and, surprised and a little battered, he had returned home to a small converted stable house off Upper Street in Islington where, eventually, and under pressure, he put off actually writing So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish.
  His publishers, Pan, found themselves, early in 1984, soliciting a book that was, for the most part, unwritten and, for that matter, mostly unplotted. The lenticular image on the original cover showed a walrus that became a dinosaur, because Douglas had mentioned that there would be a walrus in the book.
There would be no walrus in the book.
  It became part of the story of the book that, as the publishing date of the book got closer and the book got no closer to being written, publisher


Sonny Mehta had taken a hotel suite and essentially locked Douglas in to write it, editing the pages as they came through. It was a strange way for a book to be written, and something Douglas used as an excuse for any problems that the book had.
  But it was a book he was still particularly proud of when it came out. I remember that.
  Douglas Adams had returned from America to Islington, and So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish occurs in the space that Southern California isn't. Which is to say that both Douglas's Outer Space and his Southern California are extremely Californian: the hotel in which rock stars read Language, Truth and Logic by the pool and the bar in which Ford Prefect attempts to pay his bill with an American Express card are not a galaxy apart, and the hooker who has a special service for rich people could exist as easily in one world as another.
  Arthur Dent, in previous stories a flat character who existed mostly to boggle at the improbabilities, often in finite, he was confronted with, became someone signicantly more like Douglas. Douglas's return from America was echoed in Arthur Dent's return from hitchhiking across all of time and space to an Earth that the readers believed to have been destroyed, and his explanation to the world that he had been in America.
  It might be seen as a problem for a writer who was considered a social satirist to have, a few pages into the first book in a bestselling series, destroyed the Earth. On the good side it sets you free to explore the vastness of the infinite. On the downside, it rather limits you as an observational humourist, when it comes to specifics, and while Douglas may not have been a novelist, he was definitely an observational humourist.
  Still, I think there's another reason for the restoration of the Earth at the beginning of this book.
  Like it or not, and when it came out some people did and some people didn't, So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish is a love story, and the novel puts an Earth back for there to be a love story on. Underneath all the glitter, Arthur and Fenchurch and the unlikely circumstances of their meeting, their love and the travails thereof are the true subjects of the book.
  And as we grow older our reading of books changes. As a young man, writing a book about Douglas Adams and The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, I remember picking up on the awkwardness of Chapter 25, and Douglas's rhetorical question as to whether or not Arthur Dent has . . .


'. . . spirit? Has he no passion? Does he not, to put it in a nutshell, fuck?'
Those who wish to know should read on. Others may wish to
skip on to the last chapter which is a good bit and has Marvin in it.


  I took it, at the time, as a manifestation of Douglas's contempt and discomfort with his audience, and was uncomfortable with it. Rereading it a quarter of a century later, I found myself reading those paragraphs as worried bluster, as if Douglas was scared that he was out of his depth, and was trying to respond to critics or to friends ahead of time. I still suspect that, had there been time to rewrite, to rethink, to revise, that strange breaking of the fourth wall and the author-reader compact, might never have happened.
  I do not think it would have been a better book for not having been finished in a hotel bedroom while Sonny Mehta watched videos in the room next door. After all, it is part of its charm that So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish reads as if it has not so much been plotted as stumbled upon or backed into. It is surrealist in the way that a book extracted from the author without pause for inspection, for second thoughts or thousandth thoughts can only be. Characters appear and fade, dreamlike. Reality is frangible.
The novel circles one event: a couple making love naked in the clouds, in perfect flying magical dream-sex, an event that is practically a poem.
  So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish has, beneath the elegant veneer, the simplest, easiest, most traditional of plots: boy meets girl, boy loses girl, boy finds girl, makes love to her in the clouds and sets off with her to find God's Final Message To His Creation. And does. After all, for a book suffused from start to finish with gloom and melancholia, a book in which the universe itself is fundamentally perverse, when it is not actually malicious, So Long, and Thanks For All the Fish is often peculiarly upbeat: Chapter 18 for example, gives us, triumphantly, something unseen in the Hitchhiker universe until now: transient and barely recognizable, but it's there: joy.


He hadn't realized that life speaks with a voice to you, a voice that brings you answers to the questions you continually ask of it, had never consciously detected it or recognized its tones till it now said something it had never said to him before, which was 'Yes'.


NEIL GAIMAN
  Author of Don't Panic: Douglas Adams and The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, and subsequently a famous author


OceanofPDF.com






Prologue
Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the Western Spiral Arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow sun.
  Orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is an utterly insignificant little blue-green planet whose ape-descended life forms are so amazingly primitive that they still think digital watches are a pretty neat idea.
  This planet has - or had - a problem, which was this: most of the people living on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time. Many solutions were suggested for this problem, but most of these were largely concerned with the movements of small green pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole it wasn't the small green pieces of paper which were unhappy.
  And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and most of them were unhappy, even the ones with digital watches.
  Many were increasingly of the opinion that they'd all made a big mistake in coming down from the trees in the first place. And some said that even the trees had been a bad move, and that no one should ever have left the oceans.
  And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man had been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice to people for a change, a girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in Rickmansworth suddenly realized what it was that had been going wrong all this time, and she finally knew how the world could be made a good and happy place.
This time it was right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to anything.
  Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone about it, the Earth was unexpectedly demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass, and so the idea was lost, seemingly for ever.
This is her story.
OceanofPDF.com






1
That evening it was dark early, which was normal for the time of year. It was cold and windy, which was normal.
It started to rain, which was particularly normal. A spacecraft landed, which was not.
  There was nobody around to see it except for some spectacularly stupid quadrupeds who hadn't the faintest idea what to make of it, or whether they were meant to make anything of it, or eat it, or what. So they did what they did to everything, which was to run away from it and try to hide under each other, which never worked.
  It slipped down out of the clouds, seemingly balanced on a single beam of light.
  From a distance you would scarcely have noticed it through the lightning and the storm clouds, but seen from close to it was strangely beautiful - a grey craft of elegantly sculpted form: quite small.
  Of course, one never has the slightest notion what size or shape different species are going to turn out to be, but if you were to take the findings of the latest Mid-Galactic Census report as any kind of accurate guide to statistical averages you would probably guess that the craft would hold about six people, and you would be right.
  You'd probably guessed that anyway. The Census report, like most such surveys, had cost an awful lot of money and didn't tell anybody anything they didn't already know - except that every single person in the Galaxy had 2.4 legs and owned a hyena. Since this was clearly not true the whole thing had eventually to be scrapped.
  The craft slid quietly down through the rain, its dim operating lights wrapping it in tasteful rainbows. It hummed very quietly, a hum which became gradually louder and deeper as it approached the ground, and which at an altitude of six inches became a heavy throb.
At last it dropped and was quiet.
A hatchway opened. A short flight of steps unfolded itself.
  A light appeared in the opening, a bright light streaming out into the wet night, and shadows moved within.


  A tall figure appeared in the light, looked around, flinched, and hurried down the steps, carrying a large shopping bag under its arm.
  It turned and gave a single abrupt wave back to the ship. Already the rain was streaming through its hair.
'Thank you,' he called out, 'thank you very-'
  He was interrupted by a sharp crack of thunder. He glanced up apprehensively, and in response to a sudden thought quickly started to rummage through the large plastic shopping bag, which he now discovered had a hole in the bottom.
  It had large characters printed on the side which read (to anyone who could decipher the Centaurian alphabet) DUTY FREE MEGA-MARKET, PORT BRASTA, ALPHA CENTAURI. BE LIKE THE TWENTY- SECOND ELEPHANT WITH HEATED VALUE IN SPACE - BARK!
'Hold on!' the figure called, waving at the ship.
  The steps, which had started to fold themselves back through the hatchway, stopped, re-unfolded, and allowed him back in.
  He emerged again a few seconds later carrying a battered and threadbare towel which he shoved into the bag.
  He waved again, hoisted the bag under his arm, and started to run for the shelter of some trees as, behind him, the spacecraft had already begun its ascent.
  Lightning flitted through the sky and made the figure pause for a moment, and then hurry onwards, revising his path to give the trees a wide berth. He moved swiftly across the ground, slipping here and there, hunching himself against the rain which was falling now with ever- increasing concentration, as if being pulled from the sky.
  His feet sloshed through the mud. Thunder grumbled over the hills. He pointlessly wiped the rain off his face and stumbled on.
More lights.
  Not lightning this time, but more diffused and dimmer lights which played slowly over the horizon and faded.
  The figure paused again on seeing them, and then redoubled his pace, making directly towards the point on the horizon at which they had appeared.
  And now the ground was becoming steeper, sloping upwards, and after another two or three hundred yards it led at last to an obstacle. The figure


paused to examine the barrier and then dropped the bag he was carrying over it before climbing over himself.
  Hardly had the figure touched the ground on the other side when there came sweeping out of the rain towards him a machine, lights streaming through the wall of water. The figure pressed back as the machine streaked towards him. It was a low bulbous shape, like a small whale surfing - sleek, grey and rounded and moving at terrifying speed.
  The figure instinctively threw up his hands to protect himself, but was hit only by a sluice of water as the machine swept past and off into the night.
  It was illuminated briefly by another flicker of lightning crossing the sky, which allowed the soaked figure by the roadside a split second to read a small sign at the back of the machine before it disappeared.
  To the figure's apparent incredulous astonishment the sign read, 'My other car is also a Porsche.'


2


Rob McKenna was a miserable bastard and he knew it because he'd had a lot of people point it out to him over the years and he saw no reason to disagree with them except the obvious one which was that he liked disagreeing with people, particularly people he disliked, which included, at the last count, everybody.
He heaved a sigh and shoved down a gear.
  The hill was beginning to steepen and his lorry was heavy with Danish thermostatic radiator controls.
  It wasn't that he was naturally predisposed to be so surly, at least he hoped not. It was just the rain which got him down, always the rain.
It was raining now, just for a change.
  It was a particular type of rain that he particularly disliked, particularly when he was driving. He had a number for it. It was rain type 17.
  He had read somewhere that the Eskimos had over two hundred different words for snow, without which their conversation would probably have got very monotonous. So they would distinguish between thin snow and thick snow, light snow and heavy snow, sludgy snow, brittle snow, snow that came in flurries, snow that came in drifts, snow that came in on the bottom of your neighbour's boots all over your nice clean igloo floor, the snows of


winter, the snows of spring, the snows you remember from your childhood that were so much better than any of your modern snow, fine snow, feathery snow, hill snow, valley snow, snow that falls in the morning, snow that falls at night, snow that falls all of a sudden just when you were going out fishing, and snow that despite all your efforts to train them the huskies have pissed on.
  Rob McKenna had two hundred and thirty-one different types of rain entered in his little book, and he didn't like any of them.
  He shifted down another gear and the lorry heaved its revs up. It grumbled in a comfortable sort of way about all the Danish thermostatic radiator controls it was carrying.
  Since he had left Denmark the previous afternoon, he had been through types 33 (light pricking drizzle which made the roads slippery), 39 (heavy spotting), 47 to 51 (vertical light drizzle through to sharply slanting light to moderate drizzle freshening), 87 and 88 (two finely distinguished varieties of vertical torrential downpour), 100 (post-downpour squalling, cold), all the sea-storm types between 192 and 213 at once, 123, 124, 126, 127 (mild and intermediate cold gusting, regular and syncopated cab-drumming), 11 (breezy droplets) and now his least favourite of all, 17.
  Rain type 17 was a dirty blatter battering against his windscreen so hard that it didn't make much odds whether he had his wipers on or off.
  He tested this theory by turning them off briefly, but as it turned out the visibility did get quite a lot worse. It just failed to get better again when he turned them back on.
In fact one of the wiper blades began to flap off.
  Swish swish swish flop swish swish flop swish swish flop swish flop swish flop flop flap scrape.
  He pounded his steering wheel, kicked the floor, thumped his cassette player till it suddenly started playing Barry Manilow, thumped it again till it stopped, and swore and swore and swore and swore and swore.
  It was at the very moment that his fury was peaking that there loomed swimmingly in his headlights, hardly visible through the blatter, a figure by the roadside.
  A poor bedraggled figure, strangely attired, wetter than an otter in a washing machine, and hitching.
  'Poor miserable sod,' thought Rob McKenna to himself, realizing that here was somebody with a better right to feel hard done by than himself,


'must be chilled to the bone. Stupid to be out hitching on a filthy night like this. All you get is cold, wet, and lorries driving through puddles at you.'
  He shook his head grimly, heaved another sigh, gave the wheel a turn and hit a large sheet of water square on.
  'See what I mean?' he thought to himself as he ploughed swiftly through it. 'You get some right bastards on the road.'
  Splattered in his rear mirror a couple of seconds later was the reflection of the hitchhiker, drenched by the roadside.
  For a moment he felt good about this. A moment or two later he felt bad about feeling good about it. Then he felt good about feeling bad about feeling good about it and, satisfied, drove on into the night.
  At least it made up for having been finally overtaken by that Porsche he had been diligently blocking for the last twenty miles.


And as he drove on, the rainclouds dragged down the sky after him, for, though he did not know it, Rob McKenna was a Rain God. All he knew was that his working days were miserable and he had a succession of lousy holidays. All the clouds knew was that they loved him and wanted to be near him, to cherish him, and to water him.


3


The next two lorries were not driven by Rain Gods, but they did exactly the same thing.
  The figure trudged, or rather sloshed, onwards till the hill resumed and the treacherous sheet of water was left behind.
  After a while the rain began to ease and the moon put in a brief appearance from behind the clouds.
  A Renault drove by, and its driver made frantic and complex signals to the trudging figure to indicate that normally he would have been delighted to give the figure a lift, only he couldn't this time because he wasn't going in the direction that the figure wanted to go, whatever direction that might be, and he was sure the figure would understand. He concluded the signalling with a cheery thumbs-up sign, as if to say that he hoped the figure felt really fine about being cold and almost terminally wet, and he would catch him next time around.


  The figure trudged on. A Fiat passed and did exactly the same as the Renault.
  A Maxi passed on the other side of the road and flashed its lights at the slowly plodding figure, though whether this was meant to convey a 'Hello' or a 'Sorry we're going the other way' or a 'Hey look, there's someone in the rain, what a jerk' was entirely unclear. A green strip across the top of the windscreen indicated that whatever the message was, it came from Steve and Carola.
  The storm had now definitely abated, and what thunder there was now grumbled over more distant hills, like a man saying 'And another thing . . .' twenty minutes after admitting he's lost the argument.
  The air was clearer now, the night cold. Sound travelled rather well. The lost figure, shivering desperately, presently reached a junction, where a side road turned off to the left. Opposite the turning stood a signpost which the figure suddenly hurried to and studied with feverish curiosity, only twisting away from it as another car passed suddenly.
And another.
  The first whisked by with complete disregard, the second flashed meaninglessly. A Ford Cortina passed and put on its brakes.
  Lurching with surprise, the figure bundled his bag to his chest and hurried forward towards the car, but at the last moment the Cortina spun its wheels in the wet and careered off up the road rather amusingly.
The figure slowed to a stop and stood there, lost and dejected.
  As it chanced, the following day the driver of the Cortina went into hospital to have his appendix out, only due to a rather amusing mix-up the surgeon removed his leg in error, and before the appendectomy could be rescheduled, the appendicitis complicated into an entertainingly serious case of peritonitis and justice, in its way, was served.
The figure trudged on.
A Saab drew to a halt beside him.
Its window wound down and a friendly voice said, 'Have you come far?'
  The figure turned towards it. He stopped and grasped the handle of the door.


* * *


  The figure, the car and its door handle were all on a planet called the Earth, a world whose entire entry in The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy comprised the two words 'Mostly harmless'.
  The man who wrote this entry was called Ford Prefect, and he was at this precise moment on a far from harmless world, sitting in a far from harmless bar, recklessly causing trouble.


4


Whether it was because he was drunk, ill or suicidally insane would not have been apparent to a casual observer, and indeed there were no casual observers in the Old Pink Dog Bar on the lower south side of Han Dold City because it wasn't the sort of place you could afford to do things casually in if you wanted to stay alive. Any observers in the place would have been mean hawklike observers, heavily armed, with painful throbbings in their heads which caused them to do crazy things when they observed things they didn't like.
  One of those nasty hushes had descended on the place, a sort of missile- crisis sort of hush.
  Even the evil-looking bird perched on a rod in the bar had stopped screeching out the names and addresses of local contract killers, which was a service it provided for free.
All eyes were on Ford Prefect. Some of them were on stalks.
  The particular way in which he was choosing to dice recklessly with death today was by trying to pay for a drinks bill the size of a small defence budget with an American Express card, which was not acceptable anywhere in the known Universe.
  'What are you worried about?' he asked in a cheery kind of voice. 'The expiration date? Have you guys never heard of Neo-Relativity out here?
There's whole new areas of physics which can take care of this sort of thing. Time dilation effects, temporal relastatics . . .'
  'We are not worried about the expiration date,' said the man to whom he addressed these remarks, who was a dangerous barman in a dangerous city. His voice was a low soft purr, like the low soft purr made by the opening of an ICBM silo. A hand like a side of meat tapped on the bar top, lightly denting it.


  'Well, that's good then,' said Ford, packing his satchel and preparing to leave.
  The tapping finger reached out and rested lightly on the shoulder of Ford Prefect. It prevented him from leaving.
  Although the finger was attached to a slablike hand, and the hand was attached to a clublike forearm, the forearm wasn't attached to anything at all, except in the metaphorical sense that it was attached by a fierce doglike loyalty to the bar which was its home. It had previously been more conventionally attached to the original owner of the bar, who on his deathbed had unexpectedly bequeathed it to medical science. Medical science had decided they didn't like the look of it and had bequeathed it right back to the Old Pink Dog Bar.
  The new barman didn't believe in the supernatural or poltergeists or anything kooky like that, he just knew a useful ally when he saw one. The hand sat on the bar. It took orders, it served drinks, it dealt murderously with people who behaved as if they wanted to be murdered. Ford Prefect sat still.
  'We are not worried about the expiration date,' repeated the barman, satisfied that he now had Ford Prefect's full attention. 'We are worried about the entire piece of plastic.'
'What?' said Ford. He seemed a little taken aback.
  'This,' said the barman, holding out the card as if it was a small fish whose soul had three weeks earlier winged its way to the Land Where Fish are Eternally Blessed, 'we don't accept.'
  Ford wondered briefly whether to raise the fact that he didn't have any other means of payment on him, but decided for the moment to soldier on. The disembodied hand was now grasping his shoulder lightly but firmly between its finger and thumb.
  'But you don't understand,' said Ford, his expression slowly ripening from a little taken abackness into rank incredulity. 'This is the American Express card. It is the finest way of settling bills known to man. Haven't you read their junk mail?'
  The cheery quality of Ford's voice was beginning to grate on the barman's ears. It sounded like someone relentlessly playing the kazoo during one of the more sombre passages of a War Requiem.
  One of the bones in Ford's shoulder began to grate against another one of the bones in his shoulder in a way which suggested that the hand had learnt


the principles of pain from a highly skilled chiropractor. He hoped he could get this business settled before the hand started to grate one of the bones in his shoulder against any of the bones in different parts of his body. Luckily, the shoulder it was holding was not the one he had his satchel slung over.
The barman slid the card back across the bar to Ford.
'We have never,' he said with muted savagery, 'heard of this thing.' This was hardly surprising.
  Ford had only acquired it through a serious computer error towards the end of the fifteen years' sojourn he had spent on the planet Earth. Exactly how serious, the American Express company had got to know very rapidly, and the increasingly strident and panic-stricken demands of its debt- collection department were only silenced by the unexpected demolition of the entire planet by the Vogons to make way for a new hyperspace bypass.
  He had kept it ever since because he found it useful to carry a form of currency that no one would accept.
'Credit?' he said. 'Aaaargggh . . .'
These two words were usually coupled together in the Old Pink Dog Bar. 'I thought,' gasped Ford, 'that this was meant to be a class establishment
. . .'
  He glanced around at the motley collection of thugs, pimps and record- company executives that skulked on the edges of the dim pools of light with which the dark shadows of the bar's inner recesses were pitted. They were all very deliberately looking in any direction but his now, carefully picking up the threads of their former conversations about murders, drug rings and music-publishing deals. They knew what would happen and didn't want to watch in case it put them off their drinks.
  'You gonna die, boy,' the barman murmured quietly at Ford Prefect, and the evidence was on his side. The bar used to have one of those signs hanging up which said, 'Please don't ask for credit as a punch in the mouth often offends', but in the interest of strict accuracy this was altered to, 'Please don't ask for credit because having your throat torn out by a savage bird while a disembodied hand smashes your head against the bar often offends'. However, this made an unreadable mess of the notice, and anyway didn't have the same ring to it, so it was taken down again. It was felt that the story would get about of its own accord, and it had.
  'Lemme look at the bill again,' said Ford. He picked it up and studied it thoughtfully under the malevolent gaze of the barman, and the equally


malevolent gaze of the bird, which was currently gouging great furrows in the bar top with its talons.
It was a rather lengthy piece of paper.
  At the bottom of it was a number which looked like one of those serial numbers you find on the underside of stereo sets which always takes so long to copy onto the registration form. He had, after all, been in the bar all day, he had been drinking a lot of stuff with bubbles in it, and he had bought an awful lot of rounds for all the pimps, thugs and record executives who suddenly couldn't remember who he was.
  He cleared his throat rather quietly and patted his pockets. There was, as he knew, nothing in them. He rested his left hand lightly but firmly on the half-opened flap of his satchel. The disembodied hand renewed its pressure on his right shoulder.
  'You see,' said the barman, and his face seemed to wobble evilly in front of Ford's, 'I have a reputation to think of. You see that, don't you?'
  This is it, thought Ford. There was nothing else for it. He had obeyed the rules, he had made a bona fide attempt to pay his bill, it had been rejected. He was now in danger of his life.
'Well,' he said quietly, 'if it's your reputation . . .'
  With a sudden flash of speed he opened his satchel and slapped down on the bar top his copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and the official card which said that he was a field researcher for the Guide and absolutely not allowed to do what he was now doing.
'Want a write up?'
  The barman's face stopped in mid-wobble. The bird's talons stopped in mid-furrow. The hand slowly released its grip.
  'That,' said the barman in a barely audible whisper, from between dry lips, 'will do nicely, sir.'


5


The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a powerful organ. Indeed, its influence is so prodigious that strict rules have had to be drawn up by its editorial staff to prevent its misuse. So none of its field researchers are allowed to accept any kind of services, discounts or preferential treatment of any kind in return for editorial favours unless:


  a) they have made a bona fide attempt to pay for a service in the normal way;
b) their lives would be otherwise in danger;
c) they really want to.
  Since invoking the third rule always involved giving the editor a cut, Ford always preferred to muck about with the first two.
He stepped out along the street, walking briskly.
  The air was stifling, but he liked it because it was stifling city air, full of excitingly unpleasant smells, dangerous music and the distant sound of warring police tribes.
  He carried his satchel with an easy swaying motion so that he could get a good swing at anybody who tried to take it from him without asking. It contained everything he owned, which at the moment wasn't much.
  A limousine careered down the street, dodging between the piles of burning garbage, and frightening an old pack animal which lurched, screeching, out of its way, stumbled against the window of a herbal remedies shop, set off a wailing alarm, blundered off down the street, and then pretended to fall down the steps of a small pasta restaurant where it knew it would get photographed and fed.
  Ford was walking north. He thought he was probably on his way to the spaceport, but he had thought that before. He knew he was going through that part of the city where people's plans often changed quite abruptly.
'Do you want to have a good time?' said a voice from a doorway. 'As far as I can tell,' said Ford, 'I'm having one. Thanks.'
'Are you rich?' said another. This made Ford laugh.
  He turned and opened his arms in a wide gesture. 'Do I look rich?' he said.
  'Don't know,' said the girl. 'Maybe, maybe not. Maybe you'll get rich. I have a very special service for rich people . . .'
'Oh yes?' said Ford, intrigued but careful. 'And what's that?' 'I tell them it's OK to be rich.'
  Gunfire erupted from a window high above them, but it was only a bass player getting shot for playing the wrong riff three times in a row, and bass players are two a penny in Han Dold City.
Ford stopped and peered into the dark doorway. 'You what?' he said.


  The girl laughed and stepped forward a little out of the shadow. She was tall, and had that kind of self-possessed shyness which is a great trick if you can do it.
  'It's my big number,' she said. 'I have a master's degree in social economics and can be very convincing. People love it. Especially in this city.'
  'Goosnargh,' said Ford Prefect, which was a special Betelgeusian word he used when he knew he should say something but didn't know what it should be.
  He sat on a step, took from his satchel a bottle of that Ol' Janx Spirit and a towel. He opened the bottle and wiped the top of it with the towel, which had the opposite effect to the one intended, in that the Ol' Janx Spirit instantly killed off millions of the germs which had been slowly building up quite a complex and enlightened civilization on the smellier patches of his towel.
'Want some?' he said, after he'd had a swig himself. She shrugged and took the proffered bottle.
  They sat for a while, peacefully listening to the clamour of burglar alarms in the next block.
  'As it happens, I'm owed a lot of money,' said Ford, 'so if I ever get hold of it, can I come and see you then maybe?'
'Sure, I'll be here,' said the girl. 'So how much is a lot?' 'Fifteen years' back pay.'
'For?'
'Writing two words.'
'Zarquon,' said the girl. 'Which one took the time?'
  'The first one. Once I'd got that the second one just came one afternoon after lunch.'
  A huge electronic drum kit hurtled through the window high above them and smashed itself to bits in the street in front of them.
  It soon became apparent that some of the burglar alarms on the next block had been deliberately set off by one police tribe in order to lay an ambush for the other. Cars with screaming sirens converged on the area, only to find themselves being picked off by 'copters which came thudding through the air between the city's mountainous tower blocks.
  'In fact,' said Ford, having to shout now above the din, 'it wasn't quite like that. I wrote an awful lot, but they just cut it down.'


He took his copy of the Guide back out of his satchel.
  'Then the planet got demolished,' he shouted. 'Really worthwhile job, eh? They've still got to pay me, though.'
'You work for that thing?' the girl yelled back. 'Yeah.'
'Good number.'
  'You want to see the stuff I wrote?' he shouted. 'Before it gets erased? The new revisions are due to be released tonight over the net. Someone must have found out by now that the planet I spent fifteen years on has been demolished. They missed it on the last few revisions, but it can't escape their notice for ever.'
'It's getting impossible to talk, isn't it?' 'What?'
She shrugged and pointed upwards.
  There was a 'copter above them now which seemed to be involved in a side skirmish with the band upstairs. Smoke was billowing from the building. The sound engineer was hanging out of the window by his fingertips, and a maddened guitarist was beating on his fingers with a burning guitar. The helicopter was firing at all of them.
'Can we move?'
  They wandered down the street, away from the noise. They ran into a street-theatre group which tried to do a short play for them about the problems of the inner city, but then gave up and disappeared into the small restaurant most recently patronized by the pack animal.
  All the time, Ford was poking at the interface panel of the Guide. They ducked into an alleyway. Ford squatted on a garbage can while information began to flood over the screen of the Guide.
He located his entry. 'Earth: Mostly harmless.'
Almost immediately the screen became a mass of system messages. 'Here it comes,' he said.
  'Please wait,' said the messages. 'Entries are being updated over the Sub-Etha Net. This entry is being revised. The system will be down for ten seconds.'
At the end of the alley a steel-grey limousine crawled past.
  'Hey look,' said the girl, 'if you get paid, look me up. I'm a working girl, and there are people over there who need me. I gotta go.'


  She brushed aside Ford's half-articulated protests, and left him sitting dejectedly on his garbage can preparing to watch a large swathe of his working life being swept away electronically into the ether.
  Out in the street things had calmed down a little. The police battle had moved off to other sectors of the city, the few surviving members of the rock band had agreed to recognize their musical differences and pursue solo careers, the street-theatre group were re-emerging from the pasta restaurant with the pack animal, telling it they would take it to a bar they knew where it would be treated with a little respect, and a little way further on the steel- grey limousine was parked silently by the kerbside.
The girl hurried towards it.


* * *


Behind her, in the darkness of the alley, a green flickering glow was bathing Ford Prefect's face, and his eyes were slowly widening in astonishment.
  For where he had expected to find nothing, an erased, closed-off entry, there was instead a continuous stream of data - text, diagrams, figures and images, moving descriptions of surf on Australian beaches, yoghurt on Greek islands, restaurants to avoid in Los Angeles, currency deals to avoid in Istanbul, weather to avoid in London, bars to go everywhere. Pages and pages of it. It was all there, everything he had written.
  With a deepening frown of blank incomprehension he went backwards and forwards through it, stopping here and there at various entries.
'Tips for aliens in New York:
  'Land anywhere, Central Park, anywhere. No one will care, or indeed even notice.
  'Surviving: Get a job as a cab driver immediately. A cab driver's job is to drive people anywhere they want to go in big yellow machines called taxis. Don't worry if you don't know how the machine works and you can't speak the language, don't understand the geography or indeed the basic physics
of the area, and have large green antennae growing out of your head. Believe me, this is the best way of staying inconspicuous.
  'If your body is really weird try showing it to people in the streets for money.
  'Amphibious life forms from any of the worlds in the Swulling, Noxios or Nausalia systems will particularly enjoy the East River, which is said to be


richer in those lovely life-giving nutrients than the finest and most virulent laboratory slime yet achieved.
  'Having fun: This is the big section. It is impossible to have more fun without electrocuting your pleasure centres . . .'
  Ford flipped the switch which he saw was now marked 'Mode Execute Ready' instead of the now old-fashioned 'Access Standby' which had so long ago replaced the appallingly stone-age 'Off'.
  This was a planet he had seen completely destroyed, seen with his own two eyes or rather, blinded as he had been by the hellish disruption of air and light, felt with his own two feet as the ground had started to pound at him like a hammer, bucking, roaring, gripped by tidal waves of energy pouring out of the loathsome yellow Vogon ships. And then at last, five seconds after the moment he had determined as being the last possible moment had already passed, the gently swinging nausea of dematerialization as he and Arthur Dent had been beamed up through the atmosphere like a sports broadcast.
  There was no mistake, there couldn't have been. The Earth had definitely been destroyed. Definitely, definitely. Boiled away into space.
  And yet here - he activated the Guide again - was his own entry on how you would set about having a good time in Bournemouth, Dorset, England, which he had always prided himself on as being one of the most baroque pieces of invention he had ever delivered. He read it again and shook his head in sheer wonder.
  Suddenly he realized what the answer to the problem was, and it was this, that something very weird was happening; and if something very weird was happening, he thought, he wanted it to be happening to him.
  He stashed the Guide back in his satchel and hurried out onto the street again.
  Walking north again he passed a steel-grey limousine parked by the kerbside, and from a nearby doorway he heard a soft voice saying, 'It's OK, honey, it's really OK, you got to learn to feel good about it. Look at the way the whole economy is structured . . .'
  Ford grinned, detoured round the next block which was now in flames, found a police helicopter which was standing unattended in the street, broke into it, strapped himself in, crossed his fingers and sent it hurtling inexpertly into the sky.


  He weaved terrifyingly up through the canyoned walls of the city, and once clear of them hurtled through the black and red pall of smoke which hung permanently above it.
  Ten minutes later, with all the 'copter's sirens blaring and its rapid-fire cannon blasting at random into the clouds, Ford Prefect brought it careering down among the gantries and landing lights at Han Dold spaceport, where it settled like a gigantic, startled and very noisy gnat.
  Since he hadn't damaged it too much he was able to trade it in for a first- class ticket on the next ship leaving the system, and settled into one of its huge, voluptuous body-hugging seats.
  This was going to be fun, he thought to himself, as the ship blinked silently across the insane distances of deep space and the cabin service got into its full extravagant swing.
  'Yes please,' he said to the cabin attendants whenever they glided up to offer him anything at all.
  He smiled with a curious kind of manic joy as he flipped again through the mysteriously reinstated entry on the planet Earth. He had a major piece of unfinished business that he would now be able to attend to, and was terribly pleased that life had suddenly furnished him with a serious goal to achieve.
  It suddenly occurred to him to wonder where Arthur Dent was, and if he knew.


* * *


Arthur Dent was one thousand, four hundred and thirty-seven light years away in a Saab, and anxious.
  Behind him in the back seat was a girl who had made him crack his head on the door as he climbed in. He didn't know if it was just because she was the first female of his own species that he had laid eyes on in years, or what it was, but he felt stupefied with, with . . . This is absurd, he told himself.
Calm down, he told himself. You are not, he continued to himself in the firmest internal voice he could muster, in a fit and rational state. You have just hitchhiked over a hundred thousand light years across the Galaxy, you are very tired, a little confused and extremely vulnerable. Relax, don't panic, concentrate on breathing deeply.
He twisted round in his seat.


'Are you sure she's all right?' he said again.
  Beyond the fact that she was, to him, heart-thumpingly beautiful, he could make out very little, how tall she was, how old she was, the exact shading of her hair. And nor could he ask her anything about herself because, sadly, she was completely unconscious.
  'She's just drugged,' said her brother, shrugging, not moving his eyes from the road ahead.
'And that's all right, is it?' said Arthur, in alarm. 'Suits me,' he said.
'Ah,' said Arthur. 'Er,' he added after a moment's thought. The conversation so far had been going astoundingly badly.
  After an initial flurry of opening hellos, he and Russell - the wonderful girl's brother's name was Russell, a name which, to Arthur's mind, always suggested burly men with blond moustaches and blow-dried hair, who would at the slightest provocation start wearing velvet tuxedos and frilly shirtfronts and would then have to be forcibly restrained from commentating on snooker matches - had quickly discovered they didn't like each other at all.
  Russell was a burly man. He had a blond moustache. His hair was fine and blow-dried. To be fair to him - though Arthur didn't see any necessity for this beyond the sheer mental exercise of it - he, Arthur, was looking pretty grim himself. A man can't cross a hundred thousand light years, mostly in other people's baggage compartments, without beginning to fray a little, and Arthur had frayed a lot.
  'She's not a junkie,' said Russell suddenly, as if he clearly thought that someone else in the car might be. 'She's under sedation.'
  'But that's terrible,' said Arthur, twisting round to look at her again. She seemed to stir slightly and her head slipped sideways on her shoulder. Her dark hair fell across her face, obscuring it.
'What's the matter with her, is she ill?' 'No,' said Russell, 'merely barking mad.' 'What?' said Arthur, horrified.
  'Loopy, completely bananas. I'm taking her back to the hospital and telling them to have another go. They let her out while she still thought she was a hedgehog.'
'A hedgehog?'


  Russell hooted his horn fiercely at a car that came round the corner towards them halfway onto their side of the road, making them swerve. The anger seemed to make him feel better.
  'Well, maybe not a hedgehog,' he said after he'd settled down again. 'Though it would probably be simpler to deal with if she did. If somebody thinks they're a hedgehog, presumably you just give 'em a mirror and a few pictures of hedgehogs and tell them to sort it out for themselves, come down again when they feel better. At least medical science could deal with it, that's the point. Seems that's not good enough for Fenny, though.'
'Fenny . . . ?'
'You know what I got her for Christmas?' 'Well, no.'
'Black's Medical Dictionary.' 'Nice present.'
'I thought so. Thousands of diseases in it, all in alphabetical order.' 'You say her name is Fenny?'
  'Yeah. Take your pick, I said. Anything in here can be dealt with. The proper drugs can be prescribed. But no, she has to have something different. Just to make life difficult. She was like that at school, you know.'
'Was she?'
  'She was. Fell over playing hockey and broke a bone nobody had ever heard of.'
  'I can see how that would be irritating,' said Arthur doubtfully. He was rather disappointed to discover her name was Fenny. It was a rather silly, dispiriting name, such as an unlovely maiden aunt might vote herself if she couldn't sustain the name Fenella properly.
  'Not that I wasn't sympathetic,' continued Russell, 'but it did get a bit irritating. She was limping for months.'
He slowed down.
'This is your turning, isn't it?'
'Ah, no,' said Arthur, 'five miles further on. If that's all right.'
  'OK,' said Russell after a very tiny pause to indicate that it wasn't, and speeded up again.
  It was in fact Arthur's turning, but he couldn't leave without finding out something more about this girl who seemed to have taken such a grip on his mind without even waking up. He could take either of the next two turnings.


  They led back to the village that had been his home, though what he would find there he hesitated to imagine. Familiar landmarks had been flitting by, ghostlike, in the dark, giving rise to the shudders that only very very normal things can create, when seen where the mind is unprepared for them, and in an unfamiliar light.
  By his own personal time scale, so far as he could estimate it, living as he had been under the alien rotations of distant suns, it was eight years since he had left, but what time had passed here he could hardly guess. Indeed, what events had passed were beyond his exhausted comprehension because this planet, his home, should not be here.
  Eight years ago, at lunchtime, this planet had been demolished, utterly destroyed, by the huge yellow Vogon ships which had hung in the lunchtime sky as if the law of gravity was no more than a local regulation, and breaking it no more than a parking offence.
'Delusions,' said Russell.
'What?' said Arthur, started out of his train of thought.
  'She says she suffers from strange delusions that she's living in the real world. It's no good telling her that she is living in the real world because she just says that's why the delusions are so strange. Don't know about you, but I find that kind of conversation pretty exhausting. Give her the tablets and piss off for a beer is my answer. I mean you can only muck about so much can't you?'
Arthur frowned, not for the first time. 'Well . . .'
  'And all this dreams and nightmare stuff. And the doctors going on about strange jumps in her brainwave patterns.'
'Jumps?'
'This,' said Fenny.
  Arthur whirled round in his seat and stared into her suddenly open but utterly vacant eyes. Whatever she was looking at wasn't in the car. Her eyes fluttered, her head jerked once, and then she was sleeping peacefully.
'What did she say?' he asked anxiously. 'She said "this".'
'This what?'
  'This what? How the heck should I know? This hedgehog, that chimney pot, the other pair of Don Alfonso's tweezers. She's barking mad, I thought I'd mentioned that.'


  'You don't seem to care very much.' Arthur tried to say it as matter-of- factly as possible but it didn't seem to work.
'Look, buster . . .'
  'OK, I'm sorry. It's none of my business. I didn't mean it to sound like that,' said Arthur. 'I know you care a lot, obviously,' he added, lying. 'I know that you have to deal with it somehow. You'll have to excuse me. I just hitched from the other side of the Horsehead Nebula.'
He stared furiously out of the window.
  He was astonished that of all the sensations fighting for room in his head on this night as he returned to the home that he thought had vanished into oblivion for ever, the one that was compelling him was an obsession with this bizarre girl of whom he knew nothing other than that she had said 'this' to him, and that he wouldn't wish her brother on a Vogon.
  'So, er, what were the jumps, these jumps you mentioned?' he went on to say as quickly as he could.
'Look, this is my sister, I don't even know why I'm talking to you about .
. .'
'OK, I'm sorry. Perhaps you'd better let me out. This is . . .'
  At the moment he said it, it became impossible, because the storm which had passed them by suddenly erupted again. Lightning belted through the sky, and someone seemed to be pouring something which closely resembled the Atlantic Ocean over them through a sieve.
  Russell swore and steered intently for a few seconds as the sky blattered at them. He worked out his anger by rashly accelerating to pass a lorry marked 'McKenna's All-Weather Haulage'. The tension eased as the rain subsided.
  'It started with all that business of the CIA agent they found in the reservoir, when everybody had all the hallucinations and everything, you remember?'
  Arthur wondered for a moment whether to mention again that he had just hitchhiked back from the other side of the Horsehead Nebula and was for this and various other related and astounding reasons a little out of touch with recent events, but he decided it would only confuse matters further.
'No,' he said.
'That was the moment she cracked up. She was in a cafe somewhere.
Rickmansworth. Don't know what she was doing there, but that was where she cracked up. Apparently she stood up, calmly announced that she had


undergone some extraordinary revelation or something, wobbled a bit, looked confused, and finally collapsed screaming into an egg sandwich.'
Arthur winced. 'I'm very sorry to hear that,' he said a little stiffly. Russell made a sort of grumping noise.
  'So what,' said Arthur in an attempt to piece things together, 'was the CIA agent doing in the reservoir?'
'Bobbing up and down, of course. He was dead.' 'But what . . .'
  'Come on, you remember all that stuff. The hallucinations. Everyone said it was a cock-up, the CIA trying experiments into drug warfare or something. Some crackpot theory that instead of invading a country it would be much cheaper and more effective to make everyone think they'd been invaded.'
  'What hallucinations were those exactly . . . ?' said Arthur in a rather quiet voice.
  'What do you mean, what hallucinations? I'm talking about all that stuff with the big yellow ships, everyone going crazy and saying we're going to die, and then pop, they vanished as the effect wore off. The CIA denied it which meant it must be true.'
  Arthur's head went a little swimmy. His hand grabbed at something to steady himself, and gripped it tightly. His mouth made little opening and closing movements as if it was on his mind to say something, but nothing emerged.
  'Anyway,' continued Russell, 'whatever drug it was it didn't seem to wear off so fast with Fenny. I was all for suing the CIA, but a lawyer friend of mine said it would be like trying to attack a lunatic asylum with a banana, so . . .' He shrugged.
'The Vogon . . .' squeaked Arthur. 'The yellow ships . . . vanished?' 'Well, of course they did, they were hallucinations,' said Russell, and
looked at Arthur oddly. 'You trying to say you don't remember any of this? Where have you been, for heaven's sake?'
  This was, to Arthur, such an astonishingly good question that he half- leapt out of his seat with shock.
  'Christ!!!' yelled Russell, fighting to control the car which was suddenly trying to skid. He pulled it out of the path of an oncoming lorry and swerved up onto a grass bank. As the car lurched to a halt, the girl in the back was thrown against Russell's seat and collapsed awkwardly.


Arthur twisted round in horror. 'Is she all right?' he blurted out.
  Russell swept his hands angrily back through his blow-dried hair. He tugged at his blond moustache. He turned to Arthur.
'Would you please,' he said, 'let go of the handbrake?'


6


From here it was a four-mile walk to his village: a mile further to the turning, to which the abominable Russell had now fiercely declined to take him, and from there a further three miles of winding country lane.
  The Saab seethed off into the night. Arthur watched it go, as stunned as a man might be who, having believed himself to be totally blind for five years, suddenly discovers that he had merely been wearing too large a hat.
  He shook his head sharply in the hope that it might dislodge some salient fact which would fall into place and make sense of an otherwise utterly bewildering Universe, but since the salient fact, if there was one, entirely failed to do this, he set off up the road again, hoping that a good vigorous walk, and maybe even some good painful blisters, would help to reassure him of his own existence at least, if not his sanity.
  It was 10.30 when he arrived, a fact he discovered from the steamed and greasy window of the Horse and Groom pub, in which there had hung for many years a battered old Guinness clock which featured a picture of an emu with a pint glass jammed rather amusingly down its throat.
  This was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime during which first his house and then the entire planet Earth had been demolished, or rather had seemed to be demolished. No, damn it, had been demolished, because if it hadn't then where the bloody heck had he been for the last eight years, and how had he got there if not in one of the big yellow Vogon ships which the appalling Russell had just been telling him were merely drug-induced hallucinations, and yet if it had been demolished, what was he currently standing on . . .?
  He jammed the brake on this line of thought because it wasn't going to get him any further than it had the last twenty times he'd been over it.
He started again.


  This was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime during which whatever it was had happened that he was going to sort out later had happened, and . . .
It still didn't make sense. He started again.
This was the pub in which . . . This was a pub.
Pubs served drinks and he couldn't half do with one.
  Satisfied that his jumbled thought processes had at last arrived at a conclusion, and a conclusion he was happy with, even if it wasn't the one he had set out to achieve, he strode towards the door.
And stopped.
  A small black wire-haired terrier ran out from behind a low wall and then, catching sight of Arthur, began to snarl.
  Now Arthur knew this dog, and he knew it well. It belonged to an advertising friend of his, and was called Know-Nothing Bozo because the way its hair stood up on its head reminded people of the President of the United States of America, and the dog knew Arthur, or at least should do. It was a stupid dog which could not even read an autocue, which was why some people had protested about its name, but it should at least have been able to recognize Arthur instead of standing there, hackles raised, as if Arthur was the most fearful apparition ever to intrude upon its feeble-witted life.
  This prompted Arthur to go and peer at the window again, this time with an eye not for the asphyxiating emu but for himself.
  Seeing himself for the first time suddenly in a familiar context, he had to admit that the dog had a point.
  He looked a lot like something a farmer would use to scare birds with, and there was no doubt but that to go into the pub in his present condition would excite comment of a raucous kind, and worse still, there would doubtless be several people in there at the moment whom he knew, all of whom would be bound to bombard him with questions which, at the moment, he felt ill-equipped to deal with.
  Will Smithers, for instance, the owner of Know-Nothing Bozo the Non- Wonder Dog, an animal so stupid that it had been sacked from one of Will's own commercials for being incapable of knowing which dog food it was


supposed to prefer, despite the fact that the meat in all the other bowls had had engine oil poured over it.
  Will would definitely be in there. Here was his dog, there was his car, a grey Porsche 928S with a sign in the back window which read, 'My other car is also a Porsche.' Damn him.
  He stared at it and realized that he had just learned something he hadn't known before.
  Will Smithers, like most of the overpaid and underscrupulous bastards Arthur knew in advertising, made a point of changing his car every August so that he could tell people his accountant made him do it, though the truth was that his accountant was trying like hell to stop him, what with all the alimony he had to pay, and so on - and this was the same car Arthur remembered him having before. The number plate proclaimed its year.
  Given that it was now winter, and that the event which had caused Arthur so much trouble eight of his personal years ago had occurred at the beginning of September, less than six or seven months could have passed here.
  He stood terribly still for a moment and let Know-Nothing Bozo jump up and down yapping at him. He was suddenly stunned by a realization he could no longer avoid, which was this: he was now an alien on his own world. Try as they might, no one was even going to be able to believe his story. Not only did it sound perfectly potty, but it was flatly contradicted by the simplest observable facts.
  Was this really the Earth? Was there the slightest possibility that he had made some extraordinary mistake?
  The pub in front of him was unbearably familiar to him in every detail - every brick, every piece of peeling paint; and inside he could sense its familiar stuffy, noisy warmth, its exposed beams, its unauthentic cast-iron light fittings, its bar sticky with beer that people he knew had put their elbows in, overlooked by cardboard cutouts of girls with packets of peanuts stapled all over their breasts. It was all the stuff of his home, his world.
He even knew this blasted dog. 'Hey, Know-Nothing!'
  The sound of Will Smithers' voice meant he had to decide what to do quickly. If he stood his ground he would be discovered and the whole circus would begin. To hide would only postpone the moment, and it was bitterly cold now.


  The fact that it was Will made the choice easier. It wasn't that Arthur disliked him as such - Will was quite fun. It was just that he was fun in such an exhausting way because, being in advertising, he always wanted you to know how much fun he was having and where he had got his jacket from.
Mindful of this, Arthur hid behind a van. 'Hey, Know-Nothing, what's up?'
  The door opened and Will came out, wearing a leather flying jacket that he'd got a mate of his at the Road Research Laboratory to crash a car into specially, in order to get that battered look. Know-Nothing yelped with delight and, having got the attention it wanted, was happy to forget Arthur.
  Will was with some friends, and they had a game they played with the dog.
  'Commies!' they all shouted at the dog in chorus. 'Commies, commies, commies!!!'
  The dog went berserk with barking, prancing up and down, yapping its little heart out, beside itself in transports of ecstatic rage. They all laughed and cheered it on, then gradually dispersed to their various cars and disappeared into the night.
  Well, that clears one thing up, thought Arthur from behind the van, this is quite definitely the planet I remember.


7


His house was still there.
  How or why, he had no idea. He had decided to go and have a look while he was waiting for the pub to empty, so that he could go and ask the landlord for a bed for the night when everyone else had gone. And there it was.
  He hurriedly let himself in with a key he kept under a stone frog in the garden, because, astoundingly, the phone was ringing.
  He had heard it faintly all the way up the lane and had started to run as soon as he realized where the sound was coming from.
  The door had to be forced open because of the astonishing accumulation of junk mail on the doormat. It jammed itself stuck on what he would later discover were fourteen identical, personally addressed invitations to apply


for a credit card he already had, seventeen identical threatening letters for non-payment of bills on a credit card he didn't have, thirty-three identical letters saying that he personally had been specially selected as a man of taste and discrimination who knew what he wanted and where he was going in today's sophisticated jet-setting world and would he therefore like to buy some grotty wallet, and also a dead tabby kitten.
  He rammed himself through the relatively narrow opening afforded by all this, stumbled through a pile of wine offers that no discriminating connoisseur would want to miss, slithered over a heap of beach villa holidays, blundered up the dark stairs to his bedroom and got to the phone just as it stopped ringing.
  He collapsed, panting, onto his cold, musty-smelling bed and for a few minutes stopped trying to prevent the world from spinning round his head in the way it obviously wanted to.
  When it had enjoyed its little spin and had calmed down a bit, Arthur reached out for the bedside light, not expecting it to come on. To his surprise it did. This appealed to Arthur's sense of logic. Since the Electricity Board cut him off without fail every time he paid his bill, it seemed only reasonable that they should leave him connected when he didn't. Sending them money obviously only drew attention to yourself.
  The room was much as he had left it, i.e. festeringly untidy, though the effect was muted a little by a thick layer of dust. Half-read books and magazines nestled amongst piles of half-used towels. Half-pairs of socks reclined in half-drunk cups of coffee. What was once a half-eaten sandwich had now half-turned into something that Arthur entirely didn't want to know about. Bung a fork of lightning through this lot, he thought to himself, and you'd start the evolution of life off all over again.
There was only one thing in the room that was different.
  For a moment or so he couldn't see what the one thing that was different was, because it too was covered in a film of disgusting dust. Then his eyes caught it and stopped.
  It was next to a battered old television on which it was only possible to watch Open University Study Courses, because if it tried to show anything more exciting it would break down.
It was a box.
Arthur pushed himself up on his elbows and peered at it.


  It was a grey box, with a kind of dull lustre to it. It was a cubic grey box, just over a foot on a side. It was tied with a single grey ribbon, knotted into a neat bow on the top.
  He got up, walked over and touched it in surprise. Whatever it was was clearly gift-wrapped, neatly and beautifully, and was waiting for him to open it.
  Cautiously, he picked it up and carried it back to the bed. He brushed the dust off the top and loosened the ribbon. The top of the box was a lid, with a flap tucked into the body of the box.
  He untucked it and looked into the box. In it was a glass globe, nestling in fine grey tissue paper. He drew it out, carefully. It wasn't a proper globe because it was open at the bottom, or, as Arthur realized turning it over, at the top, with a thick rim. It was a bowl. A fish bowl.
  It was made of the most wonderful glass, perfectly transparent, yet with an extraordinary silver-grey quality as if crystal and slate had gone into its making.
  Arthur slowly turned it over and over in his hands. It was one of the most beautiful objects he had ever seen, but he was entirely perplexed by it. He looked into the box, but other than the tissue paper there was nothing. On the outside of the box there was nothing.
  He turned the bowl round again. It was wonderful. It was exquisite. But it was a fish bowl.
  He tapped it with his thumbnail and it rang with a deep and glorious chime which was sustained for longer than seemed possible, and when at last it faded seemed not to die away but to drift off into other worlds, as into a deep-sea dream.
  Entranced, Arthur turned it round yet again, and this time the light from the dusty little bedside lamp caught it at a different angle and glittered on some fine abrasions on the fish bowl's surface. He held it up, adjusting the angle to the light, and suddenly saw clearly the finely engraved shapes of words shadowed on the glass.
'So Long,' they said, 'and Thanks . . .'
And that was all. He blinked, and understood nothing.
  For fully five more minutes he turned the object round and around, held it to the light at different angles, tapped it for its mesmerizing chime and pondered on the meaning of the shadowy letters but could find none.
Finally he stood up, filled the bowl with water from the tap and put it back


on the table next to the television. He shook the little Babel fish from his ear and dropped it, wriggling, into the bowl. He wouldn't be needing it any more, except for watching foreign movies.
He returned to lie on his bed, and turned out the light.
  He lay still and quiet. He absorbed the enveloping darkness, slowly relaxed his limbs from end to end, eased and regulated his breathing, gradually cleared his mind of all thought, closed his eyes and was completely incapable of getting to sleep.


* * *


The night was uneasy with rain. The rain clouds themselves had now moved on and were currently concentrating their attention on a small transport cafÈ just outside Bournemouth, but the sky through which they had passed had been disturbed by them and now wore a damply ruffled air, as if it didn't know what else it might not do if further provoked.
  The moon was out in a watery way. It looked like a ball of paper from the back pocket of jeans that have just come out of the washing machine, and which only time and ironing would tell if it was an old shopping list or a five-pound note.
  The wind flicked about a little, like the tail of a horse that's trying to decide what sort of mood it's in tonight, and a bell somewhere chimed midnight.
A skylight creaked open.
  It was stiff and had to be jiggled and persuaded a little because the frame was slightly rotten and the hinge had at some time in its life been rather sensibly painted over, but eventually it was open.
  A strut was found to prop it and a figure struggled out into the narrow gully between the opposing pitches of the roof.
It stood and watched the sky in silence.
  The figure was completely unrecognizable as the wild-looking creature who had burst crazily into the cottage a little over an hour ago. Gone was the ragged threadbare dressing gown, smeared with the mud of a hundred worlds, stained with junk-food condiment from a hundred grimy spaceports, gone was the tangled mane of hair, gone the long and knotted beard, flourishing ecosystem and all.


  Instead, there was Arthur Dent the smooth and casual, in corduroys and a chunky sweater. His hair was cropped and washed, his chin clean-shaven.
Only the eyes still said that whatever it was the Universe thought it was doing to him, he would still like it please to stop.
  They were not the same eyes with which he had last looked out at this particular scene, and the brain which interpreted the images the eyes resolved was not the same brain. There had been no surgery involved, just the continual wrenching of experience.
  The night seemed like an alive thing to him at this moment, the dark earth around him a being in which he was rooted.
  He could feel like a tingle on distant nerve ends the flood of a far river, the roll of invisible hills, the knot of heavy rainclouds parked somewhere away to the south.
  He could sense, too, the thrill of being a tree, which was something he hadn't expected. He knew that it felt good to curl your toes in the earth, but he'd never realized it could feel quite as good as that. He could sense an almost unseemly wave of pleasure reaching out to him all the way from the New Forest. He must try this summer, he thought, and see what having leaves felt like.
  From another direction he felt the sensation of being a sheep startled by a flying saucer, but it was virtually indistinguishable from the feeling of being a sheep startled by anything else it ever encountered, for they were creatures who learned very little on their journey through life, and would be startled to see the sun rising in the morning, and astonished by all the green stuff in the fields.
  He was surprised to find he could feel the sheep being startled by the sun that morning, and the morning before, and being startled by a clump of trees the day before that. He could go further and further back, but it got dull because all it consisted of was sheep being startled by things they'd been startled by the day before.
  He left the sheep and let his mind drift outwards sleepily in developing ripples. It felt the presence of other minds, hundreds of them, thousands in a web, some sleepy, some sleeping, some terribly excited, one fractured.
One fractured.
  He passed it fleetingly and tried to feel for it again, but it eluded him like the other card with an apple on it in Pelmanism. He felt a spasm of excitement because he knew instinctively who it was, or at least knew who


it was he wanted it to be, and once you know what it is you want to be true, instinct is a very useful device for enabling you to know that it is.
  He instinctively knew that it was Fenny and that he wanted to find her; but he could not. By straining too much for it, he could feel he was losing this strange new faculty, so he relaxed the search and let his mind wander more easily once more.
And again, he felt the fracture.
  Again he couldn't find it. This time, whatever his instinct was busy telling him it was all right to believe, he wasn't certain that it was Fenny or - perhaps it was a different fracture this time. It had the same disjointed quality but it seemed a more general feeling of fracture, deeper, not a single mind, maybe not a mind at all. It was different.
  He let his mind sink slowly and widely into the Earth, rippling, seeping, sinking.
  He was following the Earth through its days, drifting with the rhythms of its myriad pulses, seeping through the webs of its life, swelling with its tides, turning with its weight. Always the fracture kept returning, a dull disjointed distant ache.
  And now he was flying through a land of light; the light was time, the tides of it were days receding. The fracture he had sensed, the second fracture, lay in the distance before him across the land, the thickness of a single hair across the dreaming landscape of the days of Earth.
And suddenly he was upon it.
  He danced dizzily over the edge as the dreamland dropped sheer away beneath him, a stupefying precipice into nothing, him wildly twisting, clawing at nothing, flailing in horrifying space, spinning, falling.
  Across the jagged chasm had been another land, another time, an older world, not fractured from, but hardly joined: two Earths. He woke.
  A cold breeze brushed the feverish sweat standing on his forehead. The nightmare was spent and so, he felt, was he. His shoulders dropped, he gently rubbed his eyes with the tips of his fingers. At last he was sleepy as well as very tired. As to what it meant, if it meant anything at all, he would think about in the morning; for now he would go to bed and sleep. His own bed, his own sleep.
  He could see his house in the distance and wondered why this was. It was silhouetted against the moonlight and he recognized its rather dull blockish shape. He looked about him and noticed that he was about eighteen inches


above the rose bushes of one of his neighbours, John Ainsworth. His rose bushes were carefully tended, pruned back for the winter, strapped to canes and labelled, and Arthur wondered what he was doing above them. He wondered what was holding him there, and when he discovered that nothing was holding him there he crashed awkwardly to the ground.
  He picked himself up, brushed himself down and hobbled back to his house on a sprained ankle. He undressed and toppled into bed.
  While he was asleep the phone rang again. It rang for fully fif-teen minutes and caused him to turn over twice. It never, however, stood a chance of waking him up.


8


Arthur awoke feeling wonderful, absolutely fabulous, refreshed, overjoyed to be home, bouncing with energy, hardly disappointed at all to discover it was the middle of February.
  He almost danced to the fridge, found the three least hairy things in it, put them on a plate and watched them intently for two minutes. Since they made no attempt to move within that time he called them breakfast and ate them. Between them they killed a virulent space disease he'd picked up without knowing it in the Flargathon Gas Swamps a few days earlier, which otherwise would have killed off half the population of the Western Hemisphere, blinded the other half and driven everyone else psychotic and sterile, so the Earth was lucky there.
  He felt strong, he felt healthy. He vigorously cleared away the junk mail with a spade and then buried the cat.
  Just as he was finishing that, the phone went, but he let it ring while he maintained a moment's respectful silence. Whoever it was would ring back if it was important.
He kicked the mud off his shoes and went back inside.
  There had been a small number of significant letters in the piles of junk - some documents from the council relating to the proposed demolition of his house, and some other letters about the setting up of a public inquiry into the whole bypass scheme in the area; there was also an old letter from Greenpeace, the ecological pressure group to which he occasionally made contributions, asking for help with their scheme to release dolphins and


orcas from captivity, and some postcards from friends vaguely complaining that he never got in touch these days.
  He collected these together and put them in a cardboard file which he marked 'Things To Do'. Since he was feeling so vigorous and dynamic that morning, he even added the word 'Urgent!'
  He unpacked his towel and another few odd bits and pieces from the plastic bag he had acquired at the Port Brasta Mega-Market. The slogan on the side was a clever and elaborate pun in Lingua Centauri which was completely incomprehensible in any other language and therefore entirely pointless for a duty-free shop at a spaceport. The bag also had a hole in it so he threw it away.
  He realized with a sudden twinge that something else must have dropped out in the small spacecraft that had brought him to Earth, kindly going out of its way to drop him right beside the A303. He had lost his battered and spaceworn copy of the thing which had helped him find his way across the unbelievable wastes of space he had traversed. He had lost The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
Well, he told himself, this time I really won't be needing it again. He had some calls to make.
  He had decided how to deal with the mass of contradictions his return journey precipitated, which was that he would simply brazen it out.
He phoned the BBC and asked to be put through to his department head. 'Oh, hello, Arthur Dent here. Look, sorry I haven't been in for six
months but I've gone mad.'
  'Oh, not to worry. Thought it was probably something like that. Happens here all the time. How soon can we expect you?'
'When do hedgehogs stop hibernating?' 'Sometime in spring, I think.'
'I'll be in shortly after that.' 'Rightyho.'
  He flipped through the Yellow Pages and made a short list of numbers to try.
  'Oh hello, is that the Old Elms Hospital? Yes, I was just phoning to see if I could have a word with Fenella, er . . . Fenella - Good Lord, silly me, I'll forget my own name next, er, Fenella - isn't this ridiculous? Patient of yours, dark-haired girl, came in last night . . .'
'I'm afraid we don't have any patients called Fenella.'


'Oh, don't you? I meant Fiona, of course, we just call her Fen . . .' 'I'm sorry, goodbye.'
Click.
  Six conversations along these lines began to take their toll on his mood of vigorous, dynamic optimism, and he decided that before it deserted him entirely he would take it down to the pub and parade it a little.
  He had had the perfect idea for explaining away every inexplicable weirdness about himself at a stroke, and he whistled to himself as he pushed open the door which had so daunted him last night.
'Arthur!!!!'
  He grinned cheerfully at the boggling eyes that stared at him from all corners of the pub, and told them all what a wonderful time he'd had in Southern California.


9


He accepted another pint and took a pull at it.
'Of course, I had my own personal alchemist too.' 'You what?'
  He was getting silly and he knew it. Exuberance and Hall and Woodhouse best bitter was a mixture to be wary of, but one of the first effects it has is to stop you being wary of things, and the point at which Arthur should have stopped and explained no more was the point at which he started instead to get inventive.
  'Oh yes,' he insisted with a happy glazed smile. 'It's why I've lost so much weight.'
'What?' said his audience.
'Oh yes,' he said again. 'The Californians have rediscovered alchemy.
Oh yes.'
He smiled again.
  'Only,' he said, 'it's in a much more useful form than that which in . . .' He paused thoughtfully to let a little grammar assemble in his head. 'In which the ancients used to practise it. Or at least,' he added, 'failed to practise it. They couldn't get it to work, you know. Nostradamus and that lot. Couldn't cut it.'
'Nostradamus?' said one of his audience.


'I didn't think he was an alchemist,' said another. 'I thought,' said a third, 'he was a seer.'
  'He became a seer,' said Arthur to his audience, the component parts of which were beginning to bob and blur a little, 'because he was such a lousy alchemist. You should know that.'
  He took another pull at his beer. It was something he had not tasted for eight years. He tasted it and tasted it.
  'What has alchemy got to do,' asked a bit of the audience, 'with losing weight?'
  'I'm glad you asked that,' said Arthur. 'Very glad. And I will now tell you what the connection is between . . .' He paused. 'Between those two things. The things you mentioned. I'll tell you.'
  He paused and manoeuvred his thoughts. It was like watching oil tankers doing three-point turns in the English Channel.
  'They've discovered how to turn excess body fat into gold,' he said, in a sudden blurt of coherence.
'You're kidding.'
'Oh yes,' he said, 'no,' he corrected himself, 'they have.'
  He rounded on the doubting part of his audience, which was all of it, and so it took a little while to round on it completely.
  'Have you been to California?' he demanded. 'Do you know the sort of stuff they do there?'
  Three members of his audience said they had and that he was talking nonsense.
  'You haven't seen anything,' insisted Arthur. 'Oh yes,' he added, because someone was offering to buy another round.
  'The evidence,' he said, pointing at himself, and not missing by more than a couple of inches, 'is before your eyes. Fourteen hours in a trance,' he said, 'in a tank. In a trance. I was in a tank. I think,' he added after a thoughtful pause, 'I already said that.'
  He waited patiently while the next round was duly distributed. He composed the next bit of his story in his mind, which was going to be something about the tank needing to be orientated along a line dropped perpendicularly from the Pole Star to a baseline drawn between Mars and Venus, and was about to start trying to say it when he decided to give it a miss.


  'Long time,' he said instead, 'in a tank. In a trance.' He looked round severely at his audience, to make sure it was all following attentively.
He resumed.
'Where was I?' he said. 'In a trance,' said one. 'In a tank,' said another.
  'Oh yes,' said Arthur. 'Thank you. And slowly,' he said, pressing onwards, 'slowly, slowly slowly, all your excess body fat turns . . . to . . .' he paused for effect, 'subcoo . . . subyoo . . . subtoocay . . .' - he paused for breath - 'subcutaneous gold, which you can have surgically removed.
Getting out of the tank is hell. What did you say?' 'I was just clearing my throat.'
'I think you doubt me.'
'I was clearing my throat.'
  'She was clearing her throat,' confirmed a significant part of the audience in a low rumble.
  'Oh yes,' said Arthur, 'all right. And you then split the proceeds . . .' he paused again for a maths break, 'fifty-fifty with the alchemist. Make a lot of money!'
  He looked swayingly around at his audience, and could not help but be aware of an air of scepticism about their jumbled faces.
He felt very affronted by this.
'How else,' he demanded, 'could I afford to have my face dropped?' Friendly arms began to help him home. 'Listen,' he protested, as the cold
February breeze brushed his face, 'looking lived-in is all the rage in California at the moment. You've got to look as if you've seen the Galaxy. Life, I mean. You've got to look as if you've seen life. That's what I got. A face drop. Give me eight years, I said. I hope being thirty doesn't come back into fashion or I've wasted a lot of money.'
  He lapsed into silence for a while as the friendly arms continued to help him along the lane to his house.
'Got in yesterday,' he mumbled. 'I'm very very very happy to be home.
Or somewhere very like it . . .'
  'Jet lag,' muttered one of his friends. 'Long trip from California. Really mucks you up for a couple of days.'
  'I don't think he's been there at all,' muttered another. 'I wonder where he has been. And what's happened to him.'


After a little sleep Arthur got up and pottered round the house a bit. He felt woozy and a little low, still disoriented by the journey. He wondered how he was going to find Fenny.
  He sat and looked at the fish bowl. He tapped it again, and despite being full of water and a small yellow Babel fish which was gulping its way around rather dejectedly, it still chimed its deep and resonant chime as clearly and mesmerically as before.
  Someone is trying to thank me, he thought to himself. He wondered who, and for what.


10


'At the third stroke it will be one . . . thirty-two . . . and twenty seconds. 'Beep . . . beep . . . beep.'
  Ford Prefect suppressed a little giggle of evil satisfaction, realized that he had no reason to suppress it, and laughed out loud, a wicked laugh.
  He switched the incoming signal through from the Sub-Etha Net to the ship's superb hi-fi system, and the odd, rather stilted, sing-song voice spoke out with remarkable clarity round the cabin.
'At the third stroke it will be one . . . thirty-two . . . and thirty seconds. 'Beep . . . beep . . . beep.'
  He tweaked the volume up just a little, while keeping a careful eye on a rapidly changing table of figures on the ship's computer display. For the length of time he had in mind, the question of power consumption became significant. He didn't want a murder on his conscience.
'At the third stroke it will be one . . . thirty-two . . . and forty seconds. 'Beep . . . beep . . . beep.'
He checked around the small ship. He walked down the short corridor. 'At the third stroke . . .'
He stuck his head into the small, functional, gleaming steel bathroom. '. . . it will be . . .'
It sounded fine in there.
He looked into the tiny sleeping quarters. '. . . one . . . thirty-two . . .'
  It sounded a bit muffled. There was a towel hanging over one of the speakers. He took down the towel.


'. . . and fifty seconds.' Fine.
  He checked out the packed cargo hold, and wasn't at all satisfied with the sound. There was altogether too much crated junk in the way. He stepped back out and waited for the door to seal. He broke open a closed control panel and pushed the jettison button. He didn't know why he hadn't thought of that before. A whooshing rumbling noise died away quickly into silence. After a pause a slight hiss could be heard again.
It stopped.
  He waited for the green light to show and then opened the door again onto the now empty cargo hold.
'. . . one . . . thirty-three . . . and fifty seconds.' Very nice.
'Beep . . . beep . . . beep.'
  He then went and had a last thorough examination of the emergency suspended-animation chamber, which was where he particularly wanted it to be heard.
'At the third stroke it will be one . . . thirty-four . . . precisely.'
  He shivered as he peered down through the heavily frosted covering at the dim bulk of the form within. One day, who knew when, it would wake, and when it did, it would know what time it was. Not exactly local time, true, but what the heck.
  He double-checked the computer display above the freezer bed, dimmed the lights and checked it again.
'At the third stroke it will be . . .'
He tiptoed out and went to the control cabin. '. . . one . . . thirty-four and twenty seconds.'
  The voice sounded as clear as if he was hearing it over a phone in London, which he wasn't, not by a long way.
  He gazed out into the inky night. The star the size of a brilliant biscuit crumb he could see in the distance was Zondostina, or as it was known on the world from which the rather stilted, sing-song voice was being received, Pleiades Zeta.
  The bright orange curve that filled over half the visible area was the giant gas planet Sesefras Magna, where the Xaxisian battleships docked, and just rising over its horizon was a small cool blue moon, Epun.
'At the third stroke it will be . . .'


  For twenty minutes he sat and watched as the gap between the ship and Epun closed, as the ship's computer teased and kneaded the numbers that would bring it into a loop around the little moon, close the loop and keep it there, orbiting in perpetual obscurity.
'One . . . fifty-nine . . .'
  His original plan had been to close down all external signalling and radiation from the ship, to render it as nearly invisible as possible unless you were actually looking at it, but then he'd had an idea he preferred. It would now emit one single continuous beam, pencil-thin, broadcasting the incoming time signal to the planet of the signal's origin, which it would not reach for four hundred years, travelling at light speed, but where it would probably cause something of a stir when it did.
'Beep . . . beep . . . beep . . .' He sniggered.
  He didn't like to think of himself as the sort of person who giggled or sniggered, but he had to admit that he had been giggling and sniggering almost continuously for well over half an hour now.
'At the third stroke . . .'
  The ship was now locked almost perfectly into its perpetual orbit round a little known and never visited moon. Almost perfect.
  One thing only remained. He ran again the computer simulation of the launching of the ship's little Escape-O-Buggy, balancing actions, reactions, tangential forces, all the mathematical poetry of motion, and saw that it was good.
Before he left, he turned out the lights.
  As his tiny little cigar tube of an escape craft zipped out on the beginning of its three-day journey to the orbiting space station Port Sesefron, it rode for a few seconds a long pencil-thin beam of radiation that was starting out on a longer journey still.
'At the third stroke, it will be two . . . thirteen . . . and fifty seconds.'
  He giggled and sniggered. He would have laughed out loud but he didn't have room.
'Beep . . . beep . . . beep.'


11


'April showers I hate especially.'
  However noncommittally Arthur grunted, the man seemed determined to talk to him. He wondered if he should get up and move to another table, but there didn't seem to be one free in the whole cafeteria. He stirred his coffee fiercely.
'Bloody April showers. Hate hate hate.'
  Arthur stared, frowning, out of the window. A light, sunny spray of rain hung over the motorway. Two months he'd been back now. Slipping back into his old life had in fact been laughably easy. People had such extraordinarily short memories, including him. Eight years of crazed wanderings round the Galaxy now seemed to him not so much like a bad dream as like a film he had videotaped from the TV and kept in the back of a cupboard without bothering to watch.
  One effect that still lingered, though, was his joy at being back. Now that the Earth's atmosphere had closed over his head for good, he thought, wrongly, everything within it gave him extraordinary pleasure. Looking at the silvery sparkle of the raindrops he felt he had to protest.
'Well, I like them,' he said suddenly, 'and for all the obvious reasons.
They're light and refreshing. They sparkle and make you feel good.' The man snorted derisively.
  'That's what they all say,' he said, and glowered darkly from his corner seat.
  He was a lorry driver. Arthur knew this because his opening, unprovoked remark had been, 'I'm a lorry driver. I hate driving in the rain. Ironic, isn't it? Bloody ironic.'
  If there was a sequitur hidden in this remark, Arthur had not been able to divine it and had merely given a little grunt, affable but not encouraging.
  But the man had not been deterred then, and was not deterred now. 'They all say that about bloody April showers,' he said. 'So bloody nice, so bloody refreshing, such charming bloody weather.'
  He leaned forward, screwing his face up as if he was going to say something extraordinary about the government.
'What I want to know is this,' he said, 'if it's going to be nice weather,
why,' he almost spat, 'can't it be nice without bloody raining?'
  Arthur gave up. He decided to leave his coffee, which was too hot to drink quickly and too nasty to drink cold.
'Well, there you go,' he said and instead got up himself. 'Bye.'


  He stopped off at the service-station shop, then walked back through the car park, making a point of enjoying the fine play of rain on his face. There was even, he noticed, a hint of a rainbow glistening over the Devon hills.
He enjoyed that too.
  He climbed into his battered but adored old black Golf GTi, squealed the tyres, and headed out past the islands of petrol pumps and onto the slip road back towards the motorway.
  He was wrong in thinking that the atmosphere of the Earth had closed finally and for ever above his head.
  He was wrong to think that it would ever be possible to put behind him the tangled web of irresolutions into which his Galactic travels had dragged him.
  He was wrong to think he could now forget that the big, hard, oily, dirty, rainbow-hung Earth on which he lived was a microscopic dot on a microscopic dot lost in the unimaginable infinity of the Universe.
He drove on, humming, being wrong about all these things.
  The reason he was wrong was standing by the slip road under a small umbrella.
  His jaw sagged. He sprained his ankle against the brake pedal and skidded so hard he very nearly turned the car over.
'Fenny!' he shouted.
  Having narrowly avoided hitting her with the actual car, he hit her instead with the car door as he leant across and flung it open at her.
  It caught her hand and knocked away her umbrella, which then bowled wildly away across the road.
  'Shit!' yelled Arthur as helpfully as he could, leapt out of his own door, narrowly avoided being run down by McKenna's All-Weather Haulage, and watched in horror as it ran down Fenny's umbrella instead. The lorry swept along the motorway and away.
  The umbrella lay like a recently swatted daddy-long-legs, expiring sadly on the ground. Tiny gusts of wind made it twitch a little.
He picked it up.
  'Er,' he said. There didn't seem to be a lot of point in offering the thing back to her.
'How did you know my name?' she said.
'Er, well,' he said. 'Look, I'll get you another one . . .' He looked at her and tailed off.


  She was tallish with dark hair which fell in waves around a pale and serious face. Standing still, alone, she seemed almost sombre, like a statue to some important but unpopular virtue in a formal garden. She seemed to be looking at something other than what she looked as if she was looking at.
  But when she smiled, as she did now, it was as if she suddenly arrived from somewhere. Warmth and life flooded into her face, and impossibly graceful movement into her body. The effect was very disconcerting, and it disconcerted Arthur like hell.
  She grinned, tossed her bag into the back and swivelled herself into the front seat.
  'Don't worry about the umbrella,' she said to him as she climbed in. 'It was my brother's and he can't have liked it or he wouldn't have given it to me.' She laughed and pulled on her seat-belt. 'You're not a friend of my brother's, are you?'
'No.'
Her voice was the only part of her which didn't say 'Good'.
  Her physical presence there in the car, his car, was quite extraordinary to Arthur. He felt, as he let the car pull slowly away, that he could hardly think or breathe, and hoped that neither of these functions were vital to his driving or they were in trouble.
  So what he had experienced in the other car, her brother's car, the night he had returned exhausted and bewildered from his nightmare years in the stars, had not been the unbalance of the moment, or, if it had been, he was at least twice as unbalanced now, and quite liable to fall off whatever it is that well-balanced people are supposed to be balancing on.
'So . . .' he said, hoping to kick the conversation off to an exciting start. 'He was meant to pick me up - my brother - but phoned to say he
couldn't make it. I asked about buses but the man started to look at a calendar rather than a timetable, so I decided to hitch. So.'
'So.'
  'So here I am. And what I would like to know, is how you know my name.'
  'Perhaps we ought to first sort out,' said Arthur, looking back over his shoulder as he eased his car into the motorway traffic, 'where I'm taking you.'
  Very close, he hoped, or a long way. Close would mean she lived near him, a long way would mean he could drive her there.


'I'd like to go to Taunton,' she said, 'please. If that's all right. It's not far.
You can drop me at . . .'
  'You live in Taunton?' he said, hoping that he'd managed to sound merely curious rather than ecstatic. Taunton was wonderfully close to him. He could . . .
'No, London,' she said. 'There's a train in just under an hour.'
  It was the worst thing possible. Taunton was only minutes away up the motorway. He wondered what to do, and while he was wondering with horror heard himself saying, 'Oh, I can take you to London. Let me take you to London . . .'
  Bungling idiot. Why on earth had he said 'let' in that stupid way? He was behaving like a twelve-year-old.
'Are you going to London?' she asked.
'I wasn't,' he said, 'but . . .' Bungling idiot.
  'It's very kind of you,' she said, 'but really no. I like to go by train.' And suddenly she was gone. Or rather, that part of her which brought her to life was gone. She looked rather distantly out of the window and hummed lightly to herself.
He couldn't believe it.
Thirty seconds into the conversation, and already he'd blown it.
  Grown men, he told himself, in flat contradiction to centuries of accumulated evidence about the way grown men behave, do not behave like this.
Taunton 5 miles, said the signpost.
  He gripped the steering-wheel so tightly the car wobbled. He was going to have to do something dramatic.
'Fenny,' he said.
She glanced round sharply at him. 'You still haven't told me how . . .'
'Listen,' said Arthur, 'I will tell you, though the story is rather strange.
Very strange.'
She was still looking at him, but said nothing. 'Listen . . .'
'You said that.'
  'Did I? Oh. There are things I must talk to you about, and things I must tell you . . . a story I must tell you which would . . .' He was thrashing about. He wanted something along the lines of 'Thy knotted and combined


locks to part, and each particular hair to stand on end like quills upon the fretful porpentine' but didn't think he could carry it off and didn't like the hedgehog reference.
  '. . . which would take more than five miles,' he settled for in the end, rather lamely he was afraid.
'Well . . .'
  'Just supposing,' he said, 'just supposing' - he didn't know what was coming next, so he thought he'd just sit back and listen - 'that there was some extraordinary way in which you were very important to me, and that, though you didn't know it, I was very important to you, but it all went for nothing because we only had five miles and I was a stupid idiot at knowing how to say something very important to someone I've only just met and not crash into lorries at the same time, what would you say . . .' he paused helplessly, and looked at her, 'I . . . should do?'
'Watch the road!' she yelped. 'Shit!'
  He narrowly avoided careering into the side of a hundred Italian washing machines in a German lorry.
  'I think,' she said, with a momentary sigh of relief, 'you should buy me a drink before my train goes.'


12


There is, for some reason, something especially grim about pubs near stations, a very particular kind of grubbiness, a special kind of pallor to the pork pies.
Worse than the pork pies, though, are the sandwiches.
  There is a feeling which persists in England that making a sandwich interesting, attractive, or in any way pleasant to eat is something sinful that only foreigners do.
  'Make 'em dry,' is the instruction buried somewhere in the collective national consciousness, 'make 'em rubbery. If you have to keep the buggers fresh, do it by washing 'em once a week.'
  It is by eating sandwiches in pubs on Saturday lunchtimes that the British seek to atone for whatever their national sins have been. They're not altogether clear what those sins are, and don't want to know either. Sins are


not the sort of things one wants to know about. But whatever sins they are are amply atoned for by the sandwiches they make themselves eat.
  If there is anything worse than the sandwiches, it is the sausages which sit next to them. Joyless tubes, full of gristle, floating in a sea of something hot and sad, stuck with a plastic pin in the shape of a chef's hat: a memorial, one feels, for some chef who hated the world, and died, forgotten and alone, among his cats on a back stair in Stepney.
  The sausages are for the ones who know what their sins are and wish to atone for something specific.
'There must be somewhere better,' said Arthur.
  'No time,' said Fenny, glancing at her watch. 'My train leaves in half an hour.'
  They sat at a small wobbly table. On it were some dirty glasses, and some soggy beermats with jokes printed on them. Arthur got Fenny a tomato juice, and himself a pint of yellow water with gas in it. And a couple of sausages. He didn't know why. He bought them for something to do while the gas settled in his glass.
  The barman dunked Arthur's change in a pool of beer on the bar, for which Arthur thanked him.
  'All right,' said Fenny, glancing at her watch, 'tell me what it is you have to tell me.'
  She sounded, as well she might, extremely sceptical, and Arthur's heart sank. Hardly, he felt, the most conducive setting to try to explain to her as she sat there, suddenly cool and defensive, that in a sort of out-of-body dream he had had a telepathic sense that the mental breakdown she had suffered had been connected with the fact that, appearances to the contrary notwithstanding, the Earth had been demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass, something which he alone on Earth knew anything about, having virtually witnessed it from a Vogon spaceship, and that furthermore both his body and soul ached for her unbearably and he needed to go to bed with her as soon as was humanly possible.
'Fenny,' he started.
  'I wonder if you'd like to buy some tickets for our raffle? It's just a little one.'
He glanced up sharply.
'To raise money for Anjie who's retiring.' 'What?'


'And needs a kidney machine.'
  He was being leant over by a rather stiffly slim middle-aged woman with a prim knitted suit and a prim little perm, and a prim little smile that probably got licked by prim little dogs a lot.
  She was holding out a small book of cloakroom tickets and a collecting tin.
'Only ten pence each,' she said, 'so you could probably even buy two.
Without breaking the bank!' She gave a tinkly little laugh and then a curiously long sigh. Saying 'Without breaking the bank' had obviously given her more pleasure than anything since some GIs had been billeted on her in the war.
  'Er, yes, all right,' said Arthur, hurriedly digging in his pocket and producing a couple of coins.
  With infuriating slowness, and prim theatricality, if there was such a thing, the woman tore off two tickets and handed them to Arthur.
  'I do hope you win,' she said with a smile that suddenly snapped together like a piece of advanced origami, 'the prizes are so nice.'
  'Yes, thank you,' said Arthur, pocketing the tickets rather brusquely and glancing at his watch.
He turned towards Fenny.
So did the woman with the raffle tickets.
  'And what about you, young lady?' she said. 'It's for Anjie's kidney machine. She's retiring, you see. Yes?' She hoisted the little smile even further up her face. She would have to stop and let it go soon or the skin would surely split.
  'Er, look, here you are,' said Arthur, and pushed a fifty-pence piece at her in the hope that that would see her off.
  'Oh, we are in the money, aren't we?' said the woman, with a long smiling sigh. 'Down from London, are we?'
Arthur wished she wouldn't talk so bloody slowly.
  'No, that's all right, really,' he said with a wave of his hand, and she started with an awful deliberation to peel off five tickets, one by one.
  'Oh, but you must have your tickets,' insisted the woman, 'or you won't be able to claim your prize. They're very nice prizes, you know. Very suitable.'
Arthur snatched the tickets, and said thank you as sharply as he could. The woman turned to Fenny once again.


'And now, what about . . .'
  'No!' Arthur nearly yelled. 'These are for her,' he explained, brandishing the five new tickets.
'Oh, I see! How nice!'
She smiled sickeningly at both of them. 'Well, I do hope you . . .'
'Yes,' snapped Arthur, 'thank you.'
  The woman finally departed to the table next to theirs. Arthur turned desperately to Fenny, and was relieved to see that she was rocking with silent laughter.
He sighed and smiled. 'Where were we?'
'You were calling me Fenny, and I was about to ask you not to.' 'What do you mean?'
She twirled the little wooden cocktail stick in her tomato juice.
  'It's why I asked if you were a friend of my brother's. Or half-brother, really. He's the only one who calls me Fenny, and I'm not fond of him for it.'
'So what's . . . ?' 'Fenchurch.' 'What?' 'Fenchurch.' 'Fenchurch.'
She looked at him sternly.
  'Yes,' she said, 'and I'm watching you like a lynx to see if you're going to ask the same silly question that everyone asks me till I want to scream. I shall be cross and disappointed if you do. Plus I shall scream. So watch it.'
  She smiled, shook her hair a little forward over her face and peered at him from behind it.
'Oh,' he said, 'that's a little unfair, isn't it?' 'Yes.'
'Fine.'
  'All right,' she said with a laugh, 'you can ask me. Might as well get it over with. Better than have you call me Fenny all the time.'
'Presumably . . .' said Arthur.
  'We've only got two tickets left, you see, and since you were so generous when I spoke to you before . . .'


'What?' snapped Arthur.
  The woman with the perm and the smile and the now nearly empty book of cloakroom tickets was waving the two last ones under his nose.
'I thought I'd give the opportunity to you, because the prizes are so nice.' She wrinkled up her nose a little confidentially.
  'Very tasteful. I know you'll like them. And it is for Anjie's retirement present, you see. We want to give her . . .'
'A kidney machine, yes,' said Arthur. 'Here.'
He held out two more ten-pence pieces to her, and took the tickets.
  A thought seemed to strike the woman. It struck her very slowly. You could watch it coming in like a long wave on a sandy beach.
'Oh dear,' she said, 'I'm not interrupting anything, am I?' She peered anxiously at both of them.
  'No, it's fine,' said Arthur. 'Everything that could possibly be fine,' he insisted, 'is fine.
'Thank you,' he added.
  'I say,' she said, in a delighted ecstasy of worry, 'you're not . . . in love, are you?'
'It's very hard to say,' said Arthur. 'We haven't had a chance to talk yet.' He glanced at Fenchurch. She was grinning.
The woman nodded with knowing confidentiality.
'I'll let you see the prizes in a minute,' she said, and left.
  Arthur turned, with a sigh, back to the girl that he found it hard to say whether he was in love with.
'You were about to ask me,' she said, 'a question.' 'Yes,' said Arthur.
'We can do it together if you like,' said Fenchurch. 'Was I found . . .' '. . . in a handbag . . .' joined in Arthur.
'. . . in the Left Luggage Office . . .' they said together. '. . . at Fenchurch Street Station,' they finished.
'And the answer,' said Fenchurch, 'is no.' 'Fine,' said Arthur.
'I was conceived there.' 'What?'
'I was con-'
'In the Left Luggage Office?' hooted Arthur.


  'No, of course not. Don't be silly. What would my parents be doing in the Left Luggage Office?' she said, rather taken aback by the suggestion.
'Well, I don't know,' spluttered Arthur, 'or rather . . .' 'It was in the ticket queue.'
'The . . .'
  'The ticket queue. Or so they claim. They refuse to elaborate. They only say you wouldn't believe how bored it is possible to get in the ticket queue at Fenchurch Street Station.'
She sipped demurely at her tomato juice and looked at her watch. Arthur continued to gurgle for a moment or two.
  'I'm going to have to go in a minute or two,' said Fenchurch, 'and you haven't begun to tell me whatever this terrifically extraordinary thing is that you were so keen to get off your chest.'
  'Why don't you let me drive you to London?' said Arthur. 'It's Saturday, I've got nothing particular to do, I'd . . .'
  'No,' said Fenchurch, 'thank you, it's sweet of you, but no. I need to be by myself for a couple of days.' She smiled and shrugged.
'But . . .'
'You can tell me another time. I'll give you my number.'
  Arthur's heart went boom boom churn churn as she scribbled seven figures in pencil on a scrap of paper and handed it to him.
  'Now we can relax,' she said with a slow smile which filled Arthur till he thought he would burst.
'Fenchurch,' he said, enjoying the name as he said it. 'I-'
  'A box,' said a trailing voice, 'of cherry brandy liqueurs, and also, and I know you'll like this, a gramophone record of Scottish bagpipe music . . .'
'Yes, thank you, very nice,' insisted Arthur.
  'I just thought I'd let you have a look at them,' said the permed woman, 'as you're down from London . . .'
  She was holding them out proudly for Arthur to see. He could see that they were indeed a box of cherry brandy liqueurs and a record of bagpipe music. That was what they were.
  'I'll let you have your drink in peace now,' she said, patting Arthur lightly on his seething shoulder, 'but I knew you'd like to see.'
  Arthur re-engaged his eyes with Fenchurch's once again, and suddenly was at a loss for something to say. A moment had come and gone between


the two of them, but the whole rhythm of it had been wrecked by that stupid, blasted woman.
  'Don't worry,' said Fenchurch, looking at him steadily from over the top of her glass, 'we will talk again.' She took a sip.
  'Perhaps,' she added, 'it wouldn't have gone so well if it wasn't for her.' She gave a wry smile and dropped her hair forward over her face again.
It was perfectly true.
He had to admit it was perfectly true.


13


That night, at home, as he was prancing round the house pretending to be tripping through cornfields in slow motion and continually exploding with sudden laughter, Arthur thought he could even bear to listen to the album of bagpipe music he had won. It was eight o'clock and he decided he would make himself, force himself, to listen to the whole record before he phoned her. Maybe he should even leave it till tomorrow. That would be the cool thing to do. Or next week sometime.
  No. No games. He wanted her and didn't care who knew it. He definitely and absolutely wanted her, adored her, longed for her, wanted to do more things than there were names for with her.
  He actually caught himself saying things like 'Yippee' as he pranced ridiculously round the house. Her eyes, her hair, her voice, everything . . .
He stopped.
He would put on the record of bagpipe music. Then he would call her. Would he, perhaps, call her first?
  No. What he would do was this. He would put on the record of bagpipe music. He would listen to it, every last banshee wail of it. Then he would call her. That was the correct order. That was what he would do.
  He was worried about touching things in case they blew up when he did so.
  He picked up the record. It failed to blow up. He slipped it out of its cover. He opened the record player, he turned on the amp. They both survived. He giggled foolishly as he lowered the stylus onto the disc.
He sat and listened solemnly to 'A Scottish Soldier'. He listened to 'Amazing Grace'.


He listened to something about some glen or other. He thought about his miraculous lunchtime.
  They had just been on the point of leaving, when they were distracted by an awful outbreak of 'yoo-hooing'. The appallingly permed woman was waving to them across the room like some stupid bird with a broken wing. Everyone in the pub turned to them and seemed to be expecting some sort of response.
  They hadn't listened to the bit about how pleased and happy Anjie was going to be about the £4.30p everyone had helped to raise towards the cost of her kidney machine, had been vaguely aware that someone from the next table had won a box of cherry brandy liqueurs, and took a moment or two to cotton on to the fact that the yoo-hooing lady was trying to ask them if they had ticket number 37.
Arthur discovered that he had. He glanced angrily at his watch. Fenchurch gave him a push.
  'Go on,' she said, 'go and get it. Don't be bad-tempered. Give them a nice speech about how pleased you are and you can give me a call and tell me how it went. I'll want to hear the record. Go on.'
She flicked his arm and left.
  The regulars thought his acceptance speech a little over-effusive. It was, after all, merely an album of bagpipe music.
  Arthur thought about it, and listened to the music, and kept on breaking into laughter.


14


Ring ring.
Ring ring.
Ring ring.
  'Hello, yes? Yes, that's right. Yes. You'll 'ave to speak up, there's an awful lot of noise in 'ere. What?
  'No, I only do the bar in the evenings. It's Yvonne who does lunch, and Jim, he's the landlord. No, I wasn't on. What?
'You'll have to speak up.
'What? No, don't know anything about no raffle. What? 'No, don't know nothing about it. 'Old on! I'll call Jim.'


The barmaid put her hand over the receiver and called over the noisy bar. ' 'Ere, Jim, bloke on the phone says something about he's won a raffle.
He keeps on saying it's ticket 37 and he's won.'
'No, there was a guy in the pub here won,' shouted back the barman. 'He says 'ave we got the ticket.'
'Well how can he think he's won if he hasn't even got a ticket?' 'Jim says 'ow can you think you've won if you 'aven't even got the
ticket. What?'
She put her hand over the receiver again.
  'Jim, 'e keeps effing and blinding at me. Says there's a number on the ticket.'
  'Course there was a number on the ticket, it was a bloody raffle ticket, wasn't it?'
''E says 'e means it's a telephone number on the ticket.'
'Put the phone down and serve the bloody customers, will you?'


15


Eight hours west sat a man alone on a beach mourning an inexplicable loss. He could only think of his loss in little packets of grief at a time, because the whole thing was too great to be borne.
  He watched the long slow Pacific waves come in along the sand, and waited and waited for the nothing that he knew was about to happen. As the time came for it not to happen, it duly didn't happen and so the afternoon wore itself away and the sun dropped beneath the long line of the sea, and the day was gone.
  The beach was a beach we shall not name, because his private house was there, but it was a small sandy stretch somewhere along the hundreds of miles of coastline that first runs west from Los Angeles, which is described in the new edition of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy in one entry as 'junky, wunky, lunky, stunky, and what's that other word, and all kinds of bad stuff, woo', and in another, written only hours later, as 'being like several thousand square miles of American Express junk mail, but without the same sense of moral depth. Plus the air is, for some reason, yellow.'
  The coastline runs west, and then turns north up to the misty bay of San Francisco, which the Guide describes as a 'good place to go. It's very easy


to believe that everyone you meet there is also a space traveller. Starting a new religion for you is just their way of saying "hi". Until you've settled in and got the hang of the place it is best to say "no" to three questions out of any given four that anyone may ask you, because there are some very strange things going on there, some of which an unsuspecting alien could die of.' The hundreds of curling miles of cliffs and sand, palm trees, breakers and sunsets are described in the Guide as 'Boffo. A good one.'
  And somewhere on this good boffo stretch of coastline lay the house of this inconsolable man, a man who many regarded as being insane. But this was only, as he would tell people, because he was.
  One of the many many reasons why people thought him insane was because of the peculiarity of his house which, even in a land where most people's houses were peculiar in one way or another, was quite extreme in its peculiarness.
His house was called The Outside of the Asylum.
  His name was simply John Watson, though he preferred to be called - and some of his friends had now reluctantly agreed to do this - Wonko the Sane.
  In his house were a number of strange things, including a grey glass bowl with eight words engraved upon it.
  We can talk of him much later on - this is just an interlude to watch the sun go down and to say that he was there watching it.
  He had lost everything he cared for, and was now simply waiting for the end of the world - little realizing that it had already been and gone.


16


After a disgusting Sunday spent emptying rubbish bins behind a pub in Taunton, and finding nothing, no raffle ticket, no telephone number, Arthur tried everything he could to find Fenchurch, and the more things he tried, the more weeks passed.
  He raged and railed against himself, against fate, against the world and its weather. He even, in his sorrow and his fury, went and sat in the motorway service station cafeteria where he'd been just before he met her.
'It's the drizzle that makes me particularly morose.' 'Please shut up about the drizzle,' snapped Arthur.


'I would shut up if it would shut up drizzling.' 'Look . . .'
'But I'll tell you what it will do when it shuts up drizzling, shall I?' 'No.'
'Blatter.' 'What?'
'It will blatter.'
  Arthur stared over the rim of his coffee cup at the grisly outside world. It was a completely pointless place to be, he realized, and he had been driven there by superstition rather than logic. However, as if to bait him with the knowledge that such coincidences could in fact happen, fate had chosen to reunite him with the lorry driver he had encountered there last time.
  The more he tried to ignore him, the more he found himself being dragged back into the gravitic whirlpool of the man's exasperating conversation.
  'I think,' said Arthur vaguely, cursing himself for even bothering to say this, 'that it's easing off.'
'Ha!'
  Arthur just shrugged. He should go. That's what he should do. He should just go.
  'It never stops raining!' ranted the lorry driver. He thumped the table, spilt his tea, and actually, for a moment, appeared to be steaming.
You can't just walk off without responding to a remark like that. 'Of course it stops raining,' said Arthur. It was hardly an elegant
refutation, but it had to be said.
  'It rains . . . all . . . the time,' raved the man, thumping the table again, in time to the words.
Arthur shook his head.
'Stupid to say it rains all the time . . .' he said. The man's eyebrows shot up, affronted.
  'Stupid? Why's it stupid? Why's it stupid to say it rains all the time if it rains the whole time?'
'Didn't rain yesterday.' 'Did in Darlington.' Arthur paused, warily.
'You going to ask me where I was yesterday?' asked the man. 'Eh?' 'No,' said Arthur.


'But I expect you can guess.' 'Do you?'
'Begins with a D.' 'Does it?'
'And it was pissing down there, I can tell you.'
  'You don't want to sit there, mate,' said a passing stranger in overalls to Arthur cheerily. 'That's Thundercloud Corner, that is. Reserved special for old Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head here. There's one reserved in every motorway caff between here and sunny Denmark. Steer clear, is my advice. 'S what we all do. How's it going, Rob? Keeping busy? Got your wet-weather tyres on? Har har.'
  He breezed by and went to tell a joke about Britt Ekland to someone at a nearby table.
  'See, none of them bastards take me seriously,' said Rob McKenna. 'But,' he added darkly, leaning forward and screwing up his eyes, 'they all know it's true!'
Arthur frowned.
  'Like my wife,' hissed the sole owner and driver of McKenna's All- Weather Haulage. 'She says it's nonsense and I make a fuss and complain about nothing, but,' he paused dramatically and darted out dangerous looks from his eyes, 'she always brings the washing in when I phone to say I'm on me way home!' He brandished his coffee spoon. 'What do you make of that?'
'Well . . .'
  'I have a book,' he went on, 'I have a book. A diary. Kept it for fifteen years. Shows every single place I've ever been. Every day. And also what the weather was like. And it was uniformly,' he snarled, ' 'orrible. All over England, Scotland, Wales I been. All round the Continent, Italy, Germany, back and forth to Denmark, been to Yugoslavia. It's all marked in and charted. Even when I went to visit my brother,' he added, 'in Seattle.'
  'Well,' said Arthur, getting up to leave at last, 'perhaps you'd better show it to someone.'
'I will,' said Rob McKenna. And he did.


17


Misery. Dejection. More misery and more dejection. He needed a project and he gave himself one.
He would find where his cave had been.
  On prehistoric Earth he had lived in a cave, not a nice cave, a lousy cave, but . . . There was no but. It had been a totally lousy cave and he had hated it. But he had lived in it for five years, which made it a home of some kind, and a person likes to keep track of his homes. Arthur Dent was such a person and so he went to Exeter to buy a computer.
  That was what he really wanted, of course, a computer. But he felt he ought to have some serious purpose in mind before he simply went and lashed out a lot of readies on what people might otherwise mistake as being just a thing to play with. So that was his serious purpose. To pinpoint the exact location of a cave on prehistoric Earth. He explained this to the man in the shop.
'Why?' said the man in the shop. This was a tricky one.
'OK, skip that,' said the man in the shop. 'How?' 'Well, I was hoping you could help me with that.' The man sighed and his shoulders drooped. 'Have you much experience of computers?'
  Arthur wondered whether to mention Eddie the shipboard computer on the Heart of Gold, who could have done the job in a second, or Deep Thought, or - but decided he wouldn't.
'No,' he said.
  'Looks like a fun afternoon,' said the man in the shop, but he said it only to himself.
  Arthur bought the Apple anyway. Over a few days he also acquired some astronomical software, plotted the movements of stars, drew rough little diagrams of how he seemed to remember the stars to have been in the sky when he looked up out of his cave at night, and worked away busily at it for weeks, cheerfully putting off the conclusion he knew he would inevitably have to come to, which was that the whole project was completely ludicrous.
  Rough drawings from memory were futile. He didn't even know how long it had been, beyond Ford Prefect's rough guess at the time that it was 'a couple of million years', and he simply didn't have the maths.


  Still, in the end he worked out a method which would at least produce a result. He decided not to mind the fact that with the extraordinary jumble of rules of thumb, wild approximations and arcane guesswork he was using he would be lucky to hit the right galaxy, he just went ahead and got a result.
He would call it the right result. Who would know?
  As it happened, through the myriad and unfathomable chances of fate, he got it exactly right, though he of course would never know that. He just went up to London and knocked on the appropriate door.
'Oh. I thought you were going to phone me first.' Arthur gaped in astonishment.
  'You can only come in for a few minutes,' said Fenchurch. 'I'm just going out.'


18


A summer's day in Islington, full of the mournful wail of antique-restoring machinery.
  Fenchurch was unavoidably busy for the afternoon, so Arthur wandered in a blissed-out haze and looked at all the shops which, in Islington, are quite a useful bunch, as anyone who regularly needs old woodworking tools, Boer War helmets, drag, office furniture or fish will readily confirm.
  The sun beat down over the roof gardens. It beat on architects and plumbers. It beat on barristers and burglars. It beat on pizzas. It beat on estate agents' particulars.
It beat on Arthur as he went into a restored furniture shop.
  'It's an interesting building,' said the proprietor, cheerfully. 'There's a cellar with a secret passage which connects with a nearby pub. It was built for the Prince Regent, apparently, so he could make his escape when he needed to.'
  'You mean, in case anybody might catch him buying stripped-pine furniture,' said Arthur.
'No,' said the proprietor, 'not for that reason.'
'You'll have to excuse me,' said Arthur. 'I'm terribly happy.' 'I see.'
  He wandered hazily on and found himself outside the offices of Greenpeace. He remembered the contents of his file marked 'Things to do -


urgent!', which he hadn't opened again in the meantime. He marched in with a cheery smile and said he'd come to give them some money to help free the dolphins.
'Very funny,' they told him, 'go away.'
  This wasn't quite the response he had expected, so he tried again. This time they got quite angry with him, so he just left some money anyway and went back out into the sunshine.
  Just after six he returned to Fenchurch's house in the alleyway, clutching a bottle of champagne.
  'Hold this,' she said, shoved a stout rope in his hand and disappeared inside through the large white wooden doors from which dangled a fat padlock off a black iron bar.
  The house was a small converted stable in a light-industrial alleyway behind the derelict Royal Agricultural Hall of Islington. As well as its large stable doors it also had a normal-looking front door of smartly glazed panelled wood with a black dolphin door knocker. The one odd thing about this door was its doorstep, which was nine feet high, since the door was set into the upper of the two floors and presumably had been originally used to haul in hay for hungry horses.
  An old pulley jutted out of the brickwork above the doorway and it was over this that the rope Arthur was holding was slung. The other end of the rope held a suspended cello.
The door opened above his head.
  'OK,' said Fenchurch, 'pull on the rope, steady the cello. Pass it up to me.'
He pulled on the rope, he steadied the cello.
'I can't pull on the rope again,' he said, 'without letting go of the cello.' Fenchurch leant down.
'I'm steadying the cello,' she said. 'You pull on the rope.'
  The cello eased up level with the doorway, swinging slightly, and Fenchurch manoeuvred it inside.
'Come on up yourself,' she called down.
  Arthur picked up his bag of goodies and went in through the stable doors, tingling.
  The bottom room, which he had seen briefly before, was pretty rough and full of junk. A large old cast-iron mangle stood there, a surprising number of kitchen sinks were piled in a corner. There was also, Arthur was


momentarily alarmed to see, a pram, but it was very old and uncomplicatedly full of books.
  The floor was old stained concrete, excitingly cracked. And this was the measure of Arthur's mood as he started up the rickety wooden steps in the far corner. Even a cracked concrete floor seemed to him an almost unbearably sensual thing.
  'An architect friend of mine keeps on telling me how he can do wonderful things with this place,' said Fenchurch chattily as Arthur emerged through the floor. 'He keeps on coming round, standing in stunned amazement muttering about space and objects and events and marvellous qualities of light, then says he needs a pencil and disappears for weeks.
Wonderful things have, therefore, so far failed to happen to it.'
  In fact, thought Arthur as he looked about, the upper room was at least reasonably wonderful anyway. It was simply decorated, furnished with things made out of cushions and also a stereo set with speakers which would have impressed the guys who put up Stonehenge.
There were flowers which were pale and pictures which were interesting.
  There was a sort of gallery structure in the roof space which held a bed and also a bathroom which, Fenchurch explained, you could actually swing a cat in. 'But,' she added, 'only if it was a reasonably patient cat and didn't mind a few nasty cracks about the head. So. Here you are.'
'Yes.'
They looked at each other for a moment.
  The moment became a longer moment, and suddenly it was a very long moment, so long one could hardly tell where all the time was coming from.
  For Arthur, who could usually contrive to feel self-conscious if left alone for long enough with a Swiss cheese plant, the moment was one of sustained revelation. He felt on the sudden like a cramped and zoo-born animal who awakes one morning to find the door to his cage hanging quietly open and the savannah stretching grey and pink to the distant rising sun, while all around new sounds are waking.
  He wondered what the new sounds were as he gazed at her openly wondering face and her eyes that smiled with a shared surprise.
  He hadn't realized that life speaks with a voice to you, a voice that brings you answers to the questions you continually ask of it, had never consciously detected it or recognized its tones till it now said something it had never said to him before, which was 'Yes'.


Fenchurch dropped her eyes away at last, with a tiny shake of her head. 'I know,' she said. 'I shall have to remember,' she added, 'that you are
the sort of person who cannot hold on to a simple piece of paper for two minutes without winning a raffle with it.'
She turned away.
  'Let's go for a walk,' she said quickly. 'Hyde Park. I'll change into something less suitable.'
  She was dressed in a rather severe dark dress, not a particularly shapely one, and it didn't really suit her.
  'I wear it specially for my cello teacher,' she said. 'He's a nice old boy, but I sometimes think all that bowing gets him a bit excited. I'll be down in a moment.'
  She ran lightly up the steps to the gallery above, and called down, 'Put the bottle in the fridge for later.'
  He noticed as he slipped the champagne bottle into the door that it had an identical twin to sit next to.
  He walked over to the window and looked out. He turned and started to look at her records. From above he heard the rustle of her dress fall to the ground. He talked to himself about the sort of person he was. He told himself very firmly that for this moment at least he would keep his eyes very firmly and steadfastly locked on to the spines of her records, read the titles, nod appreciatively, count the blasted things if he had to. He would keep his head down.
This he completely, utterly and abjectly failed to do.
  She was staring down at him with such intensity that she seemed hardly to notice that he was looking up at her. Then suddenly she shook her head, dropped the light sundress down over herself and disappeared quickly into the bathroom.
  She emerged a moment later, all smiles and with a sunhat and came tripping down the steps with extraordinary lightness. It was a strange kind of dancing motion she had. She saw that he noticed it and put her head slightly on one side.
'Like it?' she said.
'You look gorgeous,' he said simply, because she did. 'Hmmmm,' she said, as if he hadn't really answered her question.
  She closed the upstairs front door, which had stood open all this time, and looked around the little room to see that it was all in a fit state to be left


on its own for a while. Arthur's eyes followed hers around, and while he was looking in the other direction she slipped something out of a drawer and into the canvas bag she was carrying.
Arthur looked back at her. 'Ready?'
  'Did you know,' she said with a slightly puzzled smile, 'that there's something wrong with me?'
Her directness caught Arthur unprepared.
'Well,' he said, 'I'd heard some vague sort of . . .'
  'I wonder how much you do know about me,' she said. 'If you heard from where I think you heard then that's not it. Russell just sort of makes stuff up, because he can't deal with what it really is.'
A pang of worry went through Arthur.
'Then what is it?' he said. 'Can you tell me?'
  'Don't worry,' she said, 'it's nothing bad at all. Just unusual. Very very unusual.'
She touched his hand, and then leant forward and kissed him briefly.
  'I shall be very interested to know,' she said, 'if you manage to work out what it is this evening.'
  Arthur felt that if someone tapped him at that point he would have chimed, like the deep sustained rolling chime his grey fishbowl made when he flicked it with his thumbnail.


19


Ford Prefect was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound of gunfire.
  He slid himself out of the maintenance hatchway which he had fashioned into a bunk for himself by disabling some of the noisier machinery in its vicinity and padding it with towels. He slung himself down the access ladder and prowled the corridors moodily.
  They were claustrophobic and ill-lit, and what light there was was continually flickering and dimming as power surged this way and that through the ship, causing heavy vibrations and rasping humming noises.
That wasn't it, though.


  He paused and leaned back against the wall as something that looked like a small silver power drill flew past him down the dim corridor with a nasty searing screech.
That wasn't it, either.
  He clambered listlessly through a bulkhead door and found himself in a larger corridor, though still ill-lit.
  The ship lurched. It had been doing this a fair bit, but this was heavier. A small platoon of robots went by making a terrible clattering.
Still not it, though.
  Acrid smoke was drifting up from one end of the corridor, so he walked along it in the other direction.
  He passed a series of observation monitors let into the walls behind plates of toughened but still badly scratched Perspex.
  One of them showed some horrible green scaly reptilian figure ranting and raving about the Single Transferable Vote system. It was hard to tell whether he was for or against it, but he clearly felt very strongly about it. Ford turned the sound down.
That wasn't it, though.
  He passed another monitor. It was showing a commercial for some brand of toothpaste that would apparently make you feel free if you used it. There was nasty blaring music with it too, but that wasn't it.
  He came upon another, much larger three-dimensional screen that was monitoring the outside of the vast silver Xaxisian ship.
  As he watched, a thousand horribly beweaponed Zirzla robot starcruisers came searing round the dark shadow of a moon, silhouetted against the blinding disc of the star Xaxis, and the ship simultaneously unleashed a vicious blaze of hideously incomprehensible forces from all its orifices against them.
That was it.
  Ford shook his head irritably and rubbed his eyes. He slumped on the wrecked body of a dull silver robot which clearly had been burning earlier on, but had now cooled down enough to sit on.
  He yawned and dug his copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy out of his satchel. He activated the screen, and flicked idly through some level three entries and some level four entries. He was looking for some good insomnia cures. He found REST, which was what he reckoned he needed.
He found REST AND RECUPERATION and was about to pass on when he


suddenly had a better idea. He looked up at the monitor screen. The battle was raging more fiercely every second and the noise was appalling. The ship juddered, screamed, and lurched as each new bolt of stunning energy was delivered or received.
  He looked back down at the Guide again and flipped through a few likely locations. He suddenly laughed, and then rummaged in his satchel again.
  He pulled out a small memory dump module, wiped off the fluff and biscuit crumbs, and plugged it into an interface on the back of the Guide.
  When all the information that he could think was relevant had been dumped into the module, he unplugged it again, tossed it lightly in the palm of his hand, put the Guide away in his satchel, smirked, and went in search of the ship's computer data banks.


20


'The purpose of having the sun go low in the evenings, in the summer, especially in parks,' said the voice earnestly, 'is to make girls' breasts bob up and down more clearly to the eye. I am convinced that this is the case.'
Arthur and Fenchurch giggled about this to each other as they passed.
She hugged him more tightly for a moment.
  'And I am certain,' said the frizzy ginger-haired youth with the long thin nose who was expostulating from his deckchair by the side of the Serpentine, 'that if one worked the argument through, one would find that it flowed with perfect naturalness and logic from everything,' he insisted to his thin dark-haired companion who was slumped in the next-door deckchair feeling dejected about his spots, 'that Darwin was going on about. This is certain. This is indisputable. And,' he added, 'I love it.'
He turned sharply and squinted through his spectacles at Fenchurch.
Arthur steered her away and could feel her silently quaking.
'Next guess,' she said, when she had stopped giggling, 'come on.' 'All right,' he said, 'your elbow. Your left elbow. There's something
wrong with your left elbow.'
  'Wrong again,' she said, 'completely wrong. You're on completely the wrong track.'
The summer sun was sinking through the trees in the park, looking as if
- Let's not mince words. Hyde Park is stunning. Everything about it is


stunning except for the rubbish on Monday mornings. Even the ducks are stunning. Anyone who can go through Hyde Park on a summer's evening and not feel moved by it is probably going through in an ambulance with the sheet pulled over their face.
  It is a park in which people do more extraordinary things than they do elsewhere. Arthur and Fenchurch found a man in shorts practising the bagpipes to himself under a tree. The piper paused to chase off an American couple who had tried, timidly, to put some coins on the box his bagpipes came in.
'No!' he shouted at them. 'Go away! I'm only practising.'
  He started resolutely to reinflate his bag, but even the noise this made could not disfigure their mood.
Arthur put his arms around her and moved them slowly downwards.
  'I don't think it can be your bottom,' he said after a while, 'there doesn't seem to be anything wrong with that at all.'
'Yes,' she agreed, 'there's absolutely nothing wrong with my bottom.'
  They kissed for so long that eventually the piper went and practised on the other side of the tree.
'I'll tell you a story,' said Arthur. 'Good.'
  They found a patch of grass which was relatively free of couples actually lying on top of each other and sat and watched the stunning ducks and the low sunlight rippling on the water which ran beneath the stunning ducks.
'A story,' said Fenchurch, cuddling his arm to her.
  'Which will tell something of the sort of things that happen to me. It's absolutely true.
  'You know sometimes people tell you stories that are supposed to be something that happened to their wife's cousin's best friend, but actually probably got made up somewhere along the line.
  'Well, it's like one of those stories, except that it actually happened, and I know it actually happened, because the person it actually happened to was me.'
'Like the raffle ticket.'
  Arthur laughed. 'Yes. I had a train to catch,' he went on. 'I arrived at the station-'
  'Did I ever tell you,' interrupted Fenchurch, 'what happened to my parents in a station?'


'Yes,' said Arthur, 'you did.' 'Just checking.'
  Arthur glanced at his watch. 'I suppose we could think of getting back,' he said.
'Tell me the story,' said Fenchurch firmly. 'You arrived at the station.' 'I was about twenty minutes early. I'd got the time of the train wrong. I
suppose it is at least equally possible,' he added after a moment's reflection, 'that British Rail had got the time of the train wrong. Hadn't occurred to me before.'
'Get on with it.' Fenchurch laughed.
  'So I bought a newspaper, to do the crossword, and went to the buffet to get a cup of coffee.'
'You do the crossword?' 'Yes.'
'Which one?'
'The Guardian usually.'
'I think it tries to be too cute. I prefer The Times. Did you solve it?' 'What?'
'The crossword in the Guardian.'
  'I haven't had a chance to look at it yet,' said Arthur, 'I'm still trying to buy the coffee.'
'All right, then. Buy the coffee.'
'I'm buying it. I am also,' said Arthur, 'buying some biscuits.' 'What sort?'
'Rich Tea.' 'Good choice.'
  'I like them. Laden with all these new possessions, I go and sit at a table. And don't ask me what the table was like because this was some time ago and I can't remember. It was probably round.'
'All right.'
  'So let me give you the layout. Me sitting at the table. On my left, the newspaper. On my right, the cup of coffee. In the middle of the table, the packet of biscuits.'
'I see it perfectly.'
  'What you don't see,' said Arthur, 'because I haven't mentioned him yet, is the guy sitting at the table already. He is sitting there opposite me.'
'What's he like?'


  'Perfectly ordinary. Briefcase. Business suit. He didn't look,' said Arthur, 'as if he was about to do anything weird.'
'Ah. I know the type. What did he do?'
  'He did this. He leaned across the table, picked up the packet of biscuits, tore it open, took one out, and . . .'
'What?'
'Ate it.'
'What?' 'He ate it.'
Fenchurch looked at him in astonishment. 'What on earth did you do?' 'Well, in the circumstances I did what any red-blooded Englishman
would do. I was compelled,' said Arthur, 'to ignore it.' 'What? Why?'
  'Well, it's not the sort of thing you're trained for, is it? I searched my soul, and discovered that there was nothing anywhere in my upbringing, experience or even primal instincts to tell me how to react to someone who has quite simply, calmly, sitting right there in front of me, stolen one of my biscuits.'
  'Well, you could . . .' Fenchurch thought about it. 'I must say I'm not sure what I would have done either. So what happened?'
  'I stared furiously at the crossword,' said Arthur. 'Couldn't do a single clue, took a sip of coffee, it was too hot to drink, so there was nothing for it. I braced myself. I took a biscuit, trying very hard not to notice,' he added, 'that the packet was already mysteriously open . . .'
'But you're fighting back, taking a tough line.'
  'After my fashion, yes. I ate the biscuit. I ate it very deliberately and visibly, so that he would have no doubt as to what it was I was doing. When I eat a biscuit,' Arthur said, 'it stays eaten.'
'So what did he do?'
  'Took another one. Honestly,' insisted Arthur, 'this is exactly what happened. He took another biscuit, he ate it. Clear as daylight. Certain as we are sitting on the ground.'
Fenchurch stirred uncomfortably.
  'And the problem was,' said Arthur, 'that having not said anything the first time, it was somehow even more difficult to broach the subject the second time around. What do you say? "Excuse me . . . I couldn't help


noticing, er . . ." Doesn't work. No, I ignored it with, if anything, even more vigour than previously.'
'My man . . .'
  'Stared at the crossword, again, still couldn't budge a bit of it, so showing some of the spirit that Henry V did on St Crispin's Day . . .'
'What?'
  'I went into the breach again. I took,' said Arthur, 'another biscuit. And for an instant our eyes met.'
'Like this?'
  'Yes, well, no, not quite like that. But they met. Just for an instant. And we both looked away. But I am here to tell you,' said Arthur, 'that there was a little electricity in the air. There was a little tension building up over the table. At about this time.'
'I can imagine.'
'We went through the whole packet like this. Him, me, him, me . . .' 'The whole packet?'
  'Well, it was only eight biscuits but it seemed like a lifetime of biscuits we were getting through at this point. Gladiators could hardly have had a tougher time.'
  'Gladiators,' said Fenchurch, 'would have had to do it in the sun. More physically gruelling.'
  'There is that. So. When the empty packet was lying dead between us the man at last got up, having done his worst, and left. I heaved a sigh of relief, of course. As it happened, my train was announced a moment or two later, so I finished my coffee, stood up, picked up the newspaper, and underneath the newspaper . . .'
'Yes?'
'Were my biscuits.'
'What?' said Fenchurch. 'What?' 'True.'
'No!' She gasped and tossed herself back on the grass laughing. She sat up again.
  'You complete nitwit,' she hooted, 'you almost completely and utterly foolish person.'
  She pushed him backwards, rolled over him, kissed him and rolled off again. He was surprised at how light she was.
'Now you tell me a story.'


  'I thought,' she said putting on a low husky voice, 'that you were very keen to get back.'
'No hurry,' he said airily, 'I want you to tell me a story.' She looked out over the lake and pondered.
'All right,' she said, 'it's only a short one. And not funny like yours, but .
. . Anyway.'
  She looked down. Arthur could feel that it was one of those sorts of moments. The air seemed to stand still around them, waiting. Arthur wished that the air would go away and mind its own business.
  'When I was a kid,' she said. 'These sort of stories always start like this, don't they, "When I was a kid . . . " Anyway. This is the bit where the girl suddenly says, "When I was a kid," and starts to unburden herself. We have got to that bit. When I was a kid I had this picture hanging over the foot of my bed . . . What do you think of it so far?'
  'I like it. I think it's moving well. You're getting the bedroom interest in nice and early. We could probably do with some development with the picture.'
  'It was one of those pictures that children are supposed to like,' she said, 'but don't. Full of endearing little animals doing endearing things, you know?'
'I know. I was plagued with them too. Rabbits in waistcoats.' 'Exactly. These rabbits were in fact on a raft, as were assorted rats and
owls. There may even have been a reindeer.' 'On the raft.'
'On the raft. And a boy was sitting on the raft.'
'Among the rabbits in waistcoats and the owls and the reindeer.' 'Precisely there. A boy of the cheery gypsy ragamuffin variety.' 'Ugh.'
  'The picture worried me, I must say. There was an otter swimming in front of the raft, and I used to lie awake at night worrying about this otter having to pull the raft, with all these wretched animals on it who shouldn't even be on a raft, and the otter had such a thin tail to pull it with I thought it must hurt pulling it all the time. Worried me. Not badly, but just vaguely, all the time.
  'Then one day - and remember I'd been looking at this picture every night for years - I suddenly noticed that the raft had a sail. Never seen it before. The otter was fine, he was just swimming along.'


She shrugged.
'Good story?' she said.
  'Ends weakly,' said Arthur, 'leaves the audience crying "Yes, but what of it?" Fine up till there, but needs a final sting before the credits.'
Fenchurch laughed and hugged her legs.
  'It was just such a sudden revelation, years of almost unnoticed worry just dropping away, like taking off heavy weights, like black and white becoming colour, like a dry stick suddenly being watered. The sudden shift of perspective that says, "Put away your worries, the world is a good and perfect place. It is in fact very easy." You probably think I'm saying that because I'm going to say that I felt like that this afternoon or something, don't you?'
'Well, I . . .' said Arthur, his composure suddenly shattered.
  'Well, it's all right,' she said, 'I did. That's exactly what I felt. But you see, I've felt that before, even stronger. Incredibly strongly. I'm afraid I'm a bit of a one,' she said, gazing off into the distance, 'for sudden startling revelations.'
  Arthur was at sea, could hardly speak, and felt it wiser, therefore, for the moment not to try.
  'It was very odd,' she said, much as one of the pursuing Egyptians might have said that the behaviour of the Red Sea when Moses waved his rod at it was a little on the strange side.
  'Very odd,' she repeated, 'for days before, the strangest feeling had been building in me, as if I was going to give birth. No, it wasn't like that in fact, it was more as if I was being connected into something, bit by bit. No, not even that; it was as if the whole of the Earth, through me, was going to . . .'
  'Does the number,' said Arthur gently, 'forty-two mean anything to you at all?'
'What? No, what are you talking about?' exclaimed Fenchurch. 'Just a thought,' murmured Arthur.
'Arthur, I mean this, this is very real to me, this is serious.'
  'I was being perfectly serious,' said Arthur. 'It's just the Universe I'm never quite sure about.'
'What do you mean by that?'
  'Tell me the rest of it,' he said. 'Don't worry if it sounds odd. Believe me, you are talking to someone who has seen a lot of stuff,' he added, 'that is odd. And I don't mean biscuits.'


She nodded, and seemed to believe him. Suddenly, she gripped his arm. 'It was so simple,' she said, 'so wonderfully and extraordinarily simple,
when it came.'
'What was it?' said Arthur quietly.
  'Arthur, you see,' she said, 'that's what I no longer know. And the loss is unbearable. If I try to think back to it, it all goes flickery and jumpy, and if I try too hard, I get as far as the teacup and I just black out.'
'What?'
  'Well, like your story,' she said, 'the best bit happened in a cafe. I was sitting there, having a cup of tea. This was after days of this build up, the feeling of becoming connected up. I think I was buzzing gently. And there was some work going on at a building site opposite the cafe, and I was watching it through the window, over the rim of my teacup, which I always find is the nicest way of watching other people working. And suddenly, there it was in my mind, this message from somewhere. And it was so simple. It made such sense of everything. I just sat up and thought, "Oh!
Oh, well that's all right, then." I was so startled I almost dropped my teacup, in fact I think I did drop it. Yes,' she added thoughtfully, 'I'm sure I did. How much sense am I making?'
'It was fine up to the bit about the teacup.'
  She shook her head, and shook it again, as if trying to clear it, which is what she was trying to do.
  'Well, that's it,' she said. 'Fine up to the bit about the teacup. That was the point at which it seemed to me quite literally as if the world exploded.'
'What . . .?'
  'I know it sounds crazy, and everybody says it was hallucinations, but if that was hallucinations then I have hallucinations in big-screen 3D with 16- track Dolby Stereo and should probably hire myself out to people who are bored with shark movies. It was as if the ground was literally ripped from under my feet, and . . . and . . .'
  She patted the grass lightly, as if for reassurance, and then seemed to change her mind about what she was going to say.
  'And I woke up in hospital. I suppose I've been in and out ever since. And that's why I have an instinctive nervousness,' she said, 'of sudden startling revelations that everything's going to be all right.' She looked up at him.


  Arthur had simply ceased to worry himself about the strange anomalies surrounding his return to his home world, or rather had consigned them to that part of his mind marked 'Things to think about - Urgent'. 'Here is the world,' he had told himself. 'Here, for whatever reason, is the world, and here it stays. With me on it.' But now it seemed to go swimmy around him, as it had that night in the car when Fenchurch's brother had told him the silly stories of the CIA agent in the reservoir. The French Embassy went swimmy. The trees went swimmy. The lake went swimmy, but this was perfectly natural and nothing to be alarmed by because a grey goose had just landed on it. The geese were having a great relaxed time and had no major answers they wished to know the questions to.
  'Anyway,' said Fenchurch, suddenly and brightly and with a wide-eyed smile, 'there is something wrong with part of me, and you've got to find out what it is. We'll go home.'
Arthur shook his head. 'What's the matter?' she said.
  Arthur had shaken his head, not to disagree with her suggestion which he thought was a truly excellent one, one of the world's great suggestions, but because he was just for a moment trying to free himself of the recurring impression he had that just when he was least expecting it the Universe would suddenly leap out from behind a door and go boo at him.
  'I'm just trying to get this entirely clear in my mind,' said Arthur, 'you say you felt as if the Earth actually . . . exploded . . .'
'Yes. More than felt.'
  'Which is what everybody else says,' he said hesitantly, 'is hallucinations?'
  'Yes, but Arthur, that's ridiculous. People think that if you just say "hallucinations" it explains anything you want it to explain and eventually whatever it is you can't understand will just go away. It's just a word, it doesn't explain anything. It doesn't explain why the dolphins disappeared.'
  'No,' said Arthur. 'No,' he added thoughtfully. 'No,' he added again, even more thoughtfully. 'What?' he said at last.
'Doesn't explain the dolphins disappearing.'
'No,' said Arthur, 'I see that. Which dolphins do you mean?'
  'What do you mean, which dolphins? I'm talking about when all the dolphins disappeared.'


  She put her hand on his knee, which made him realize that the tingling going up and down his spine was not her gently stroking his back, and must instead be one of the nasty creepy feelings he so often got when people were trying to explain things to him.
'The dolphins?' 'Yes.'
'All the dolphins,' said Arthur, 'disappeared?' 'Yes.'
  'The dolphins? You're saying the dolphins all disappeared? Is this,' said Arthur, trying to be absolutely clear on this point, 'what you're saying?'
  'Arthur, where have you been, for Heaven's sake? The dolphins all disappeared on the same day I . . .'
She stared at him intently in his startled eyes. 'What . . . ?'
'No dolphins. All gone. Vanished.' She searched his face.
'Did you really not know that?'
It was clear from his startled expression that he did not. 'Where did they go?' he asked.
  'No one knows. That's what vanished means.' She paused. 'Well, there is one man who says he knows about it, but everyone says he lives in California,' she said, 'and is mad. I was thinking of going to see him because it seems the only lead I've got on what happened to me.'
  She shrugged, and then looked at him long and quietly. She laid her hand on the side of his face.
  'I really would like to know where you've been,' she said. 'I think something terrible happened to you then as well. And that's why we recognized each other.'
  She glanced around the park, which was now being gathered into the clutches of dusk.
'Well,' she said, 'now you've got someone you can tell.' Arthur slowly let out a long year of a sigh.
'It is,' he said, 'a very long story.'
Fenchurch leaned across him and drew over her canvas bag.
  'Is it anything to do with this?' she said. The thing she took out of her bag was battered and travel-worn, as it had been hurled into prehistoric rivers, baked under the sun that shines so redly on the deserts of Kakrafoon,


half-buried in the marbled sands that fringe the heady vapoured oceans of Santraginus V, frozen on the glaciers of the moon of Jaglan Beta, sat on, kicked around spaceships, scuffed and generally abused, and since its makers had thought that these were exactly the sorts of things that might happen to it, they had thoughtfully encased it in a sturdy plastic cover and written on it, in large friendly letters, the words DON'T PANIC.
'Where did you get this?' said Arthur, startled, taking it from her. 'Ah,' she said, 'I thought it was yours. In Russell's car that night. You
dropped it. Have you been to many of these places?'
  Arthur drew The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy from its cover. It was like a small, thin, flexible lap-computer. He tapped some buttons till the screen flared with text.
'A few,' he said. 'Can we go to them?'
  'What? No,' said Arthur abruptly, then relented, but relented warily. 'Do you want to?' he said, hoping for the answer no. It was an act of great generosity on his part not to say, 'You don't want to, do you?' which expects it.
  'Yes,' she said. 'I want to know what the message was that I lost, and where it came from. Because I don't think,' she added, standing up and looking round the increasing gloom of the park, 'that it came from here.
  'I'm not even sure,' she further added, slipping her arm around Arthur's waist, 'that I know where here is.'


21


The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is, as has been remarked before often and accurately, a pretty startling kind of a thing. It is, essentially, as the title implies, a guide book. The problem is, or rather one of the problems, for there are many, a sizeable proportion of which are continually clogging up the civil, commercial and criminal courts in all areas of the Galaxy, and especially, where possible, the more corrupt ones, this.
The previous sentence makes sense. That is not the problem. This is:
Change.
Read it through again and you'll get it.


  The Galaxy is a rapidly changing place. There is, frankly, so much of it, every bit of which is continually on the move, continually changing. A bit of a nightmare, you might think, for a scrupulous and conscientious editor diligently striving to keep this massively detailed and complex electronic tome abreast of all the changing circumstances and conditions that the Galaxy throws up every minute of every hour of every day, and you would be wrong. Where you would be wrong would be in failing to realize that the editor, like all the editors the Guide has ever had, has no real grasp of the meanings of the words 'scrupulous', 'conscientious' or 'diligent', and tends to get his nightmares through a straw.
  Entries tend to get updated or not across the Sub-Etha Net according to if they read good.
  Take for example the case of Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars, famed in myth, legend and stultifyingly dull tri-D mini-serieses as home of the magnificent and magical Fuolornis Fire Dragon.
  In Ancient days, before the Advent of the Sorth of Bragadox, when Fragilis sang and Saxaquine of the Quenelux held sway, when the air was sweet and the nights fragrant, but everyone somehow managed to be, or so they claimed, though how on earth they could have thought that anyone was even remotely likely to believe such a preposterous claim what with all the sweet air and fragrant nights and whatnot is anyone's guess, virgins, it was not possible to heave a brick on Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars without hitting at least half a dozen Fuolornis Fire Dragons.
Whether you would want to do that is another matter.
  Not that Fire Dragons weren't an essentially peace-loving species, because they were. They adored it to bits, and this wholesale adoring of things to bits was often in itself the problem: one so often hurts the one one loves, especially if one is a Fuolornis Fire Dragon with breath like a rocket booster and teeth like a park fence. Another problem was that once they were in the mood they often went on to hurt quite a lot of the ones that other people loved as well. Add to all that the relatively small number of madmen who actually went around the place heaving bricks, and you end up with a lot of people on Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars getting seriously hurt by dragons.
But did they mind? They did not.
Were they heard to bemoan their fate? No.


  The Fuolornis Fire Dragons were revered throughout the lands of Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars for their savage beauty, their noble ways and their habit of biting people who didn't revere them.
Why was this?
The answer was simple. Sex.
  There is, for some unfathomed reason, something almost unbearably sexy about having huge fire-breathing magical dragons flying low about the sky on moonlit nights which were already dangerously on the sweet and fragrant side.
  Why this should be so, the romance-besotted people of Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars could not have told you, and would not have stopped to discuss the matter once the effect was up and going, for no sooner would a flock of half a dozen silk-winged leather-bodied Fuolornis Fire Dragons heave into sight across the evening horizon than half the people of Brequinda were scurrying off into the woods with the other half, there to spend a busy breathless night together and emerge with the first rays of dawn all smiling and happy and still claiming, rather endearingly, to be virgins, if rather flushed and sticky virgins.
Pheromones, some researchers said. Something sonic, others claimed.
  The place was always stiff with researchers trying to get to the bottom of it all and taking a very long time about it.
  Not surprisingly, the Guide's graphically enticing description of the general state of affairs on this planet has proved to be astonishingly popular amongst hitchhikers who allow themselves to be guided by it, and so it has simply never been taken out, and it is therefore left to latter-day travellers to find out for themselves that today's modern Brequinda in the City State of Avalars is now little more than concrete, strip joints and Dragon Burger Bars.


22


The night in Islington was sweet and fragrant.
  There were, of course, no Fuolornis Fire Dragons about in the alley, but if any had chanced by they might just as well have sloped off across the


road for a pizza, for they were not going to be needed.
  Had an emergency cropped up while they were still in the middle of their American Hots with extra anchovy they could always have sent across a message to put Dire Straits on the stereo, which is now known to have much the same effect.
'No,' said Fenchurch, 'not yet.'
  Arthur put Dire Straits on the stereo. Fenchurch pushed ajar the upstairs front door to let in a little more of the sweet fragrant night air. They both sat on some of the furniture made out of cushions, very close to the open bottle of champagne.
  'No,' said Fenchurch, 'not till you've found out what's wrong with me, which bit. But I suppose,' she added, very, very, very quietly, 'that we may as well start with where your hand is now.'
Arthur said, 'So which way do I go?' 'Down,' said Fenchurch, 'on this occasion.' He moved his hand.
'Down,' she said, 'is in fact the other way.' 'Oh yes.'
  Mark Knopfler has an extraordinary ability to make a Schecter Custom Stratocaster hoot and sing like angels on a Saturday night, exhausted from being good all week and needing a stiff beer - which is not strictly relevant at this point since the record hadn't yet got to that bit, but there will be too much else going on when it does, and furthermore the chronicler does not intend to sit here with a track list and a stopwatch, so it seems best to mention it now while things are still moving slowly.
  'And so we come,' said Arthur, 'to your knee. There is something terribly and tragically wrong with your left knee.'
'My left knee,' said Fenchurch, 'is absolutely fine.' 'So it is.'
'Did you know that . . .' 'What?'
'Ahm, it's all right, I can tell you do. No, keep going.' 'So it has to be something to do with your feet . . .'
  She smiled in the dim light, and wriggled her shoulders noncommittally against the cushions. Since there are cushions in the Universe, on Squornshellous Beta to be exact, two worlds in from the swampland of the mattresses, that actively enjoy being wriggled against, particularly if it's


noncommittally because of the syncopated way in which the shoulders move, it's a pity they weren't there. They weren't, but such is life.
  Arthur held her left foot in his lap and looked it over carefully. All kinds of stuff about the way her dress fell away from her legs was making it difficult for him to think particularly clearly at this point.
'I have to admit,' he said, 'that I really don't know what I'm looking for.' 'You'll know when you find it,' she said. 'Really you will.' There was a
slight catch in her voice. 'It's not that one.'
  Feeling increasingly puzzled, Arthur let her left foot down on to the floor and moved himself around so that he could take her right foot. She moved forward, put her arms round and kissed him, because the record had got to that bit which, if you knew the record, you would know made it impossible not to do this.
Then she gave him her right foot.
  He stroked it, ran his fingers round her ankle, under her toes, along her instep, could find nothing wrong with it.
She watched him with great amusement, laughed and shook her head. 'No, don't stop,' she said, 'but it's not that one now.'
Arthur stopped, and frowned at her left foot on the floor. 'Don't stop.'
  He stroked her right foot, ran his fingers around her ankle, under her toes, along her instep and said, 'You mean it's something to do with which leg I'm holding . . . ?'
  She did another of the shrugs which would have brought such joy into the life of a simple cushion from Squornshellous Beta.
He frowned.
'Pick me up,' she said quietly.
  He let her right foot down to the floor and stood up. So did she. He picked her up in his arms and they kissed again. This went on for a while, then she said, 'Now put me down again.'
Still puzzled, he did so. 'Well?'
She looked at him almost challengingly. 'So what's wrong with my feet?' she said.
  Arthur still did not understand. He sat on the floor, then got down on his hands and knees to look at her feet, in situ, as it were, in their normal habitat. And as he looked closely, something odd struck him. He put his


head right down to the ground and peered. There was a long pause. He sat back heavily.
  'Yes,' he said, 'I see what's wrong with your feet. They don't touch the ground.'
'So . . . so what do you think . . . ?'
  Arthur looked up at her quickly and saw the deep apprehension making her eyes suddenly dark. She bit her lip and was trembling.
  'What do . . .' she stammered. 'Are you . . .?' She shook the hair forwards over her eyes that were filling with dark fearful tears.
He stood up quickly, put his arms around her and gave her a single kiss. 'Perhaps you can do what I can do,' he said, and walked straight out of
her upstairs front door.
The record got to the good bit.


23


The battle raged on about the star of Xaxis. Hundreds of the fierce and horribly beweaponed Zirzla ships had now been smashed and wrenched to atoms by the withering forces the huge silver Xaxisian ship was able to deploy.
  Part of the moon had gone too, blasted away by those same blazing forceguns that ripped the very fabric of space as they passed through it.
  The Zirzla ships that remained, horribly beweaponed though they were, were now hopelessly outclassed by the devastating power of the Xaxisian ship, and were fleeing for cover behind the rapidly disintegrating moon, when the Xaxisian ship, in hurtling pursuit behind them, suddenly announced that it needed a holiday and left the field of battle.
  All was redoubled fear and consternation for a moment, but the ship was gone.
  With the stupendous powers at its command it flitted across vast tracts of irrationally shaped space quickly, effortlessly, and above all, quietly.
  Deep in his greasy, smelly bunk, fashioned out of a maintenance hatchway, Ford Prefect slept among his towels, dreaming of old haunts. He dreamed at one point in his slumbers of New York.
  In his dream he was walking late at night along the East Side, beside the river which had become so extravagantly polluted that new life forms were


now emerging from it spontaneously, demanding welfare and voting rights.
One of these now floated past, waving. Ford waved back. The thing thrashed to the shore and struggled up the bank.
  'Hi,' it said, 'I've just been created. I'm completely new to the Universe in all respects. Is there anything you can tell me?'
  'Phew,' said Ford, a little nonplussed, 'I can tell you where some bars are, I guess.'
  'What about love and happiness. I sense deep needs for things like that,' it said, waving its tentacles. 'Got any leads there?'
  'You can get something like what you require,' said Ford, 'on Seventh Avenue.'
  'I instinctively feel,' said the creature, urgently, 'that I need to be beautiful. Am I?'
'You're pretty direct, aren't you?' 'No point in mucking about. Am I?'
The thing was oozing all over the place now, squelching and blubbering.
A nearby wino was getting interested.
  'To me?' said Ford. 'No. But listen,' he added after a moment, 'most people make out, you know. Are there any like you down there?'
  'Search me, buster,' said the creature, 'as I said, I'm new here. Life is entirely strange to me. What's it like?'
Here was something that Ford felt he could speak about with authority. 'Life,' he said, 'is like a grapefruit.'
'Er, how so?'
  'Well, it's sort of orangey-yellow and dimpled on the outside, wet and squidgy in the middle. It's got pips inside too. Oh, and some people have half a one for breakfast.'
'Is there anyone else out there I can talk to?' 'I expect so,' said Ford. 'Ask a policeman.'
  Deep in his bunk, Ford Prefect wriggled and turned onto his other side. It wasn't his favourite type of dream because it didn't have Eccentrica Gallumbits, the Triple-Breasted Whore of Eroticon Six, in it, whom many of his dreams did feature. But at least it was a dream. At least he was asleep.


24


Luckily there was a strong updraught in the alley because Arthur hadn't done this sort of thing for a while, at least, not deliberately, and deliberately is exactly the way you are not meant to do it.
  He swung down sharply, nearly catching himself a nasty crack on the jaw with the doorstep and tumbled through the air, so suddenly stunned with what a profoundly stupid thing he had just done that he completely forgot the bit about hitting the ground and didn't.
A nice trick, he thought to himself, if you can do it. The ground was hanging menacingly above his head.
  He tried not to think about the ground, what an extraordinarily big thing it was and how much it would hurt him if it decided to stop hanging there and suddenly fell on him. He tried to think nice thoughts about lemurs instead, which was exactly the right thing to do because he couldn't at that moment remember precisely what a lemur was, if it was one of those things that sweep in great majestic herds across the plains of wherever it was or if that was wildebeests, so it was a tricky kind of thing to think nice thoughts about without simply resorting to an icky sort of general well-disposedness towards things, and all this kept his mind well occupied while his body tried to adjust to the fact that it wasn't touching anything.
A Mars bar wrapper fluttered down the alleyway.
  After a seeming moment of doubt and indecision it eventually allowed the wind to ease it, fluttering, between him and the ground.
'Arthur . . .'
  The ground was still hanging menacingly above his head, and he thought it was probably time to do something about that, such as fall away from it, which is what he did. Slowly. Very very slowly.
  As he fell slowly, very very slowly, he closed his eyes - carefully, so as not to jolt anything.
  The feel of his eyes closing ran down his whole body. Once it had reached his feet, and the whole of his body was alerted to the fact that his eyes were now closed and was not panicked by it, he slowly, very very slowly, revolved his body one way and his mind the other.
That should sort the ground out.
  He could feel the air clear about him now, breezing around him quite cheerfully, untroubled by his being there, and slowly, very very slowly, as from a deep and distant sleep, he opened his eyes.


  He had flown before, of course, flown many times on Krikkit until all the birdtalk had driven him scatty, but this was different.
  Here he was on his own world, quietly, and without fuss, beyond a slight trembling which could have been attributable to a number of things, being in the air.
  Ten or fifteen feet below him was the hard tarmac and a few yards off to the right the yellow street lights of Upper Street.
  Luckily the alleyway was dark since the light which was supposed to see it through the night was on an ingenious timeswitch which meant it came on just before lunchtime and went off again as the evening was beginning to draw in. He was, therefore, safely shrouded in a blanket of dark obscurity.
  He slowly, very very slowly, lifted his head to Fenchurch, who was standing in silent breathless amazement, silhouetted in her upstairs doorway.
Her face was inches from his.
  'I was about to ask you,' she said in a low trembly voice, 'what you were doing. But then I realized that I could see what you were doing. You were flying. So it seemed,' she went on after a slight wondering pause, 'like a bit of a silly question.'
Arthur said, 'Can you do it?' 'No.'
'Would you like to try?'
  She bit her lip and shook her head, not so much to say no, but just in sheer bewilderment. She was shaking like a leaf.
  'It's quite easy,' urged Arthur, 'if you don't know how. That's the important bit. Be not at all sure how you're doing it.'
  Just to demonstrate how easy it was he floated away down the alley, fell upwards quite dramatically and bobbed back down to her like a banknote on a breath of wind.
'Ask me how I did that.' 'How . . . did you do that?' 'No idea. Not a clue.'
She shrugged in bewilderment. 'So how can I . . . ?' Arthur bobbed down a little lower and held out his hand.
'I want you to try,' he said, 'to step onto my hand. Just one foot.' 'What?'
'Try it.'


  Nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if she was trying to step onto the hand of someone who was floating in front of her in mid-air, she stepped onto his hand.
'Now the other.' 'What?'
'Take the weight off your back foot.' 'I can't.'
'Try it.' 'Like this?' 'Like that.'
  Nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if- She stopped telling herself what what she was doing was like because she had a feeling she didn't altogether want to know.
  She fixed her eyes very very firmly on the guttering of the roof of the decrepit warehouse opposite which had been annoying her for weeks because it was clearly going to fall off and she wondered if anyone was going to do anything about it or whether she ought to say something to somebody, and didn't think for a moment about the fact that she was standing on the hands of someone who wasn't standing on anything at all.
'Now,' said Arthur, 'take your weight off your left foot.'
  She thought that the warehouse belonged to the carpet company who had their offices round the corner, and took her weight off her left foot, so she should probably go and see them about the gutter.
'Now,' said Arthur, 'take the weight off your right foot.' 'I can't.'
'Try.'
  She hadn't seen the guttering from quite this angle before, and it looked to her now as if, as well as the mud and gunge up there, there might also be a bird's nest. If she leaned forward just a little and took her weight off her right foot, she could probably see it more clearly.
  Arthur was alarmed to see that someone down in the alley was trying to steal her bicycle. He particularly didn't want to get involved in an argument at the moment and hoped that the guy would do it quietly and not look up.
  He had the quiet shifty look of someone who habitually stole bicycles in alleys and habitually didn't expect to find their owners hovering several feet above them. He was relaxed by both these habits, and went about his job with purpose and concentration, and when he found that the bike was


unarguably bound by hoops of tungsten carbide to an iron bar embedded in concrete, he peacefully bent both its wheels and went on his way.
Arthur let out a long-held breath.
  'See what a piece of eggshell I have found you,' said Fenchurch in his ear.


25


Those who are regular followers of the doings of Arthur Dent may have received an impression of his character and habits which, while it includes the truth and, of course, nothing but the truth, falls somewhat short, in its composition, of the whole truth in all its glorious aspects.
  And the reasons for this are obvious. Editing, selection, the need to balance that which is interesting with that which is relevant and cut out all the tedious happenstance.
  Like this, for instance. 'Arthur Dent went to bed. He went up the stairs, all fifteen of them, opened the door, went into his room, took off his shoes and socks and then all the rest of his clothes one by one and left them in a neatly crumpled heap on the floor. He put on his pyjamas, the blue ones with the stripe. He washed his face and hands, cleaned his teeth, went to the lavatory, realized that he had once again got this all in the wrong order, had to wash his hands again and went to bed. He read for fifteen minutes, spending the first ten minutes of that trying to work out where in the book he had got to the previous night, then he turned out the light and within a minute or so more was asleep.
'It was dark. He lay on his left side for a good hour.
  'After that he moved restlessly in his sleep for a moment and then turned over to sleep on his right side. Another hour after this his eyes flickered briefly and he slightly scratched his nose, though there was still a good twenty minutes to go before he turned back on to his left side. And so he whiled the night away, sleeping.
  'At four he got up and went to the lavatory again. He opened the door to the lavatory . . .' and so on.
  It's guff. It doesn't advance the action. It makes for nice fat books such as the American market thrives on, but it doesn't actually get you anywhere.
You don't, in short, want to know.


  But there are other omissions as well, beside the teeth cleaning and trying to find fresh socks variety, and in some of these people have often seemed inordinately interested.
  What, they want to know, about all that stuff off in the wings with Arthur and Trillian, did that ever get anywhere?
To which the answer is, of course, mind your own business.
  And what, they say, was he up to all those nights on the planet Krikkit? Just because the planet didn't have Fuolornis Fire Dragons or Dire Straits doesn't mean that everyone just sat up every night reading.
  Or to take a more specific example, what about the night after the committee meeting party on prehistoric Earth, when Arthur found himself sitting on a hillside watching the moon rise over the softly burning trees in company with a beautiful young girl called Mella, recently escaped from a lifetime of staring every morning at a hundred nearly identical photographs of moodily lit tubes of toothpaste in the art department of an advertising agency on the planet Golgafrincham? What then? What happened next?
And the answer is, of course, that the book ended.
  The next one didn't resume the story till five years later, and you can, claim some, take discretion too far. 'This Arthur Dent,' comes the cry from the furthest reaches of the Galaxy, and has even now been found inscribed on a mysterious deep-space probe thought to originate from an alien galaxy at a distance too hideous to contemplate, 'what is he, man or mouse? Is he interested in nothing more than tea and the wider issues of life? Has he no spirit? Has he no passion? Does he not, to put it in a nutshell, fuck?'
  Those who wish to know should read on. Others may wish to skip on to the last chapter which is a good bit and has Marvin in it.


26


Arthur Dent allowed himself for an unworthy moment to think, as they drifted up, that he very much hoped that his friends who had always found him pleasant but dull, or more latterly, odd but dull, were having a good time in the pub, but that was the last time, for a while, that he thought of them.
  They drifted up, spiralling slowly around each other, like sycamore seeds falling from sycamore trees in the autumn, except going the other way.


  And as they drifted up their minds sang with the ecstatic knowledge that either what they were doing was completely and utterly and totally impossible or that physics had a lot of catching up to do.
  Physics shook its head and, looking the other way, concentrated on keeping the cars going along the Euston Road and out towards the Westway flyover, on keeping the street lights lit and on making sure that when somebody on Baker Street dropped a cheeseburger it went splat upon the ground.
  Dwindling headily beneath them, the beaded strings of lights of London - London, Arthur had to keep reminding himself, not the strangely coloured fields of Krikkit on the remote fringes of the Galaxy, lighted freckles of which faintly spanned the opening sky above them, but London - swayed, swaying and turning, turned.
'Try a swoop,' he called to Fenchurch. 'What?'
  Her voice seemed strangely clear but distant in all the vast empty air. It was breathy and faint with disbelief - all those things, clear, faint, distant, breathy, all at the same time.
'We're flying . . .' she said.
'A trifle,' called Arthur, 'think nothing of it. Try a swoop.' 'A sw-'
  Her hand caught his, and in a second her weight caught it too, and stunningly, she was gone, tumbling beneath him, clawing wildly at nothing.
  Physics glanced at Arthur, and clotted with horror he was gone too, sick with giddy dropping, every part of him screaming but his voice.
  They plummeted because this was London and you really couldn't do this sort of thing here.
  He couldn't catch her because this was London, and not a million miles from here, seven hundred and fifty-six, to be exact, in Pisa, Galileo had clearly demonstrated that two falling bodies fall at exactly the same rate of acceleration irrespective of their relative weights.
They fell.
  Arthur realized as he fell, giddily and sickeningly, that if he was going to hang around in the sky believing everything that the Italians had to say about physics when they couldn't even keep a simple tower straight, that they were in dead trouble, and damn well did fall faster than Fenchurch.


  He grappled her from above, and fumbled for a tight grip on her shoulders. He got it.
  Fine. They were now falling together, which was all very sweet and romantic, but didn't solve the basic problem, which was that they were falling, and the ground wasn't waiting around to see if he had any more clever tricks up his sleeve, but was coming up to meet them like an express train.
  He couldn't support her weight, he hadn't anything he could support it with or against. The only thing he could think was that they were obviously going to die, and if he wanted anything other than the obvious to happen he was going to have to do something other than the obvious. Here he felt he was on familiar territory.
  He let go of her, pushed her away, and when she turned her face to him in a gasp of stunned horror, caught her little finger with his little finger and swung her back upwards, tumbling clumsily up after her.
  'Shit,' she said, as she sat panting and breathless on absolutely nothing at all, and when she had recovered herself they fled on up into the night.
  Just below cloud level they paused and scanned where they had impossibly come. The ground was something not to regard with any too firm or steady an eye, but merely to glance at, as it were, in passing.
  Fenchurch tried some little swoops, daringly, and found that if she judged herself just right against a body of wind she could pull off some really quite dazzling ones with a little pirouette at the end, followed by a little drop which made her dress billow around her, and this is where readers who are keen to know what Marvin and Ford Prefect have been up to all this while should look ahead to later chapters, because Arthur now could wait no longer and helped her take it off.
  It drifted down and away, whipped by the wind until it was a speck which finally vanished, and for various complicated reasons revolutionized the life of a family in Hounslow, over whose washing line it was discovered draped in the morning.
  In a mute embrace, they drifted up till they were swimming amongst the misty wraiths of moisture that you can see feathering around the wings of an aeroplane but never feel because you are sitting warm inside the stuffy aeroplane and looking through the little scratchy Perspex window while somebody else's son tries patiently to pour warm milk into your shirt.


  Arthur and Fenchurch could feel them, wispy cold and thin, wreathing round their bodies, very cold, very thin. They felt, even Fenchurch, now protected from the elements by only a couple of fragments from Marks and Spencer, that if they were not going to let the force of gravity bother them, then mere cold or paucity of atmosphere could go and whistle.
  The two fragments from Marks and Spencer which, as Fenchurch rose now into the misty body of the clouds, Arthur removed very very slowly, which is the only way it's possible to do it when you're flying and also not using your hands, went on to create considerable havoc in the morning in, respectively, counting from top to bottom, Isleworth and Richmond.
  They were in the cloud for a long time, because it was stacked very high, and when finally they emerged wetly above it, Fenchurch slowly spinning like a starfish lapped by a rising tidepool, they found that above the clouds is where the night gets seriously moonlit.
  The light is darkly brilliant. There are different mountains up there, but they are mountains, with their own white arctic snows.
  They had emerged at the top of the high-stacked cumulonimbus, and now began lazily to drift down its contours, as Fenchurch eased Arthur in turn from his clothes, prised him free of them till all were gone, winding their surprised way down into the enveloping whiteness.
  She kissed him, kissed his neck, his chest, and soon they were drifting on, turning slowly, in a kind of speechless T-shape, which might have caused even a Fuolornis Fire Dragon, had one flown past, replete with pizza, to flap its wings and cough a little.
  There were, however, no Fuolornis Fire Dragons in the clouds nor could there be for, like the dinosaurs, the dodos, and the Greater Drubbered Wintwock of Stegbartle Major in the constellation Fraz, and unlike the Boeing 747 which is in plentiful supply, they are sadly extinct, and the Universe shall never know their like again.
  The reason that a Boeing 747 crops up rather unexpectedly in the above list is not unconnected with the fact that something very similar happened in the lives of Arthur and Fenchurch a moment or two later.
  They are big things, terrifyingly big. You know when one is in the air with you. There is a thunderous attack of air, a moving wall of screaming wind, and you get tossed aside, if you are foolish enough to be doing anything remotely like what Arthur and Fenchurch were doing in its close vicinity, like butterflies in the Blitz.


  This time, however, there was no heart-sickening fall or loss of nerve, a re-grouping moments later and a wonderful new idea enthusiastically signalled through the buffeting noise.
  Mrs E. Kapelsen of Boston, Massachusetts was an elderly lady, indeed, she felt her life was nearly at an end. She had seen a lot of it, been puzzled by some, but, she was a little uneasy to feel at this late stage, bored by too much. It had all been very pleasant, but perhaps a little too explicable, a little too routine.
  With a sigh she flipped up the little plastic window shutter and looked out over the wing.
  At first she thought she ought to call the stewardess, but then she thought no, damn it, definitely not, this was for her, and her alone.
  By the time her two inexplicable people finally slipped back off the wing and tumbled into the slipstream she had cheered up an awful lot.
  She was mostly immensely relieved to think that virtually everything that anybody had ever told her was wrong.


* * *


The following morning Arthur and Fenchurch slept very late in the alley despite the continual wail of furniture being restored.
  The following night they did it all over again, only this time with Sony Walkmen.


27


'This is all very wonderful,' said Fenchurch a few days later. 'But I do need to know what has happened to me. You see, there's this difference between us. That you lost something and found it again, and I found something and lost it. I need to find it again.'
  She had to go out for the day, so Arthur settled down for a day of telephoning.
  Murray Bost Henson was a journalist on one of the papers with small pages and big print. It would be pleasant to be able to say that he was none the worse for this, but sadly, this was not the case. He happened to be the only journalist that Arthur knew, so Arthur phoned him anyway.


  'Arthur, my old soup spoon, my old silver tureen, how particularly stunning to hear from you. Someone told me you'd gone off into space or something.'
  Murray had his own special kind of conversation language which he had invented for his own use, and which no one else was able to speak or even to follow. Hardly any of it meant anything at all. The bits which did mean anything were often so wonderfully buried that no one could ever spot them slipping past in the avalanche of nonsense. The time when you did find out, later, which bits he did mean was often a bad time for all concerned.
'What?' said Arthur.
  'Just a rumour, my old elephant tusk, my little green-baize card table, just a rumour. Probably means nothing at all, but I may need a quote from you.'
'Nothing to say, just pub talk.'
  'We thrive on it, my old prosthetic limb, we thrive on it. Plus it would fit like a whatsit in one of those other things with the other stories of the week, so it could be just to have you denying it. Excuse me, something has just fallen out of my ear.'
  There was a slight pause, at the end of which Murray Bost Henson came back on the line sounding genuinely shaken.
'Just remembered,' he said, 'what an odd evening I had last night.
Anyway my old, I won't say what, how do you feel about having ridden on Halley's Comet?'
  'I haven't,' said Arthur with a suppressed sigh, 'ridden on Halley's Comet.'
'OK. How do you feel about not having ridden on Halley's Comet?' 'Pretty relaxed, Murray.'
There was a pause while Murray wrote this down.
  'Good enough for me, Arthur, good enough for Ethel and me and the chickens. Fits in with the general weirdness of the week. Week of the Weirdos, we're thinking of calling it. Good, eh?'
'Very good.'
'Got a ring to it. First we have this man it always rains on.' 'What?'
  'It's the absolute stocking-top truth. All documented in his little black book, it all checks out at every single fun-loving level. The Met Office is going ice-cold thick banana whips, and funny little men in white coats are flying in from all over the world with their little rulers and boxes and drip


feeds. This man is the bee's knees, Arthur, he is the wasp's nipples. He is, I would go so far as to say, the entire set of erogenous zones of every major flying insect of the Western world. We're calling him the Rain God. Nice, eh?'
'I think I've met him.'
'Good ring to it. What did you say?'
'I may have met him. Complains all the time, yes?' 'Incredible! You met the Rain God?'
  'If it's the same guy. I told him to stop complaining and show someone his book.'
  There was an impressed pause from Murray Bost Henson's end of the phone.
  'Well, you did a bundle. An absolute bundle has absolutely been done by you. Listen, do you know how much a tour operator is paying that guy not to go to Malaga this year? I mean forget irrigating the Sahara and boring stuff like that, this guy has a whole new career ahead of him, just avoiding places for money. The man's turning into a monster, Arthur, we might even have to make him win the bingo.
  'Listen, we may want to do a feature on you, Arthur, the Man Who Made the Rain God Rain. Got a ring to it, eh?'
'A nice one, but . . .'
  'We may need to photograph you under a garden shower, but that'll be OK. Where are you?'
'Er, I'm in Islington. Listen, Murray . . .' 'Islington!'
'Yes . . .'
  'Well, what about the real weirdness of the week, the real seriously loopy stuff. You know anything about these flying people?'
'No.'
  'You must have. This is the real seethingly crazy one. This is the real meatballs in the batter. Locals are phoning in all the time to say there's this couple who go flying nights. We've got guys down in our photo labs working through the night to put together a genuine photograph. You must have heard.'
'No.'
  'Arthur, where have you been? Oh, space, right, I got your quote. But that was months ago. Listen, it's night after night this week, my old


cheesegrater, right on your patch. This couple just fly around the sky and start doing all kinds of stuff. And I don't mean looking through walls or pretending to be box-girder bridges. You don't know anything?'
'No.'
  'Arthur, it's been almost inexpressibly delicious conversing with you, chumbum, but I have to go. I'll send the guy with the camera and the hose. Give me the address, I'm ready and writing.'
'Listen, Murray, I called to ask you something.' 'I have a lot to do.'
'I just wanted to find out something about the dolphins.' 'No story. Last year's news. Forget 'em. They're gone.' 'It's important.'
  'Listen, no one will touch it. You can't sustain a story, you know, when the only news is the continuing absence of whatever it is the story's about. Not our territory anyway, try the Sundays. Maybe they'll run a little "Whatever Happened to 'Whatever Happened to the Dolphins'" story in a couple of years, around August. But what's anybody going to do now? "Dolphins Still Gone"? "Continuing Dolphin Absence"? "Dolphins - Further Days Without Them"? The story dies, Arthur. It lies down and kicks its little feet in the air and presently goes to the great golden spike in the sky, my old fruitbat.'
  'Murray, I'm not interested in whether it's a story. I just want to find out how I can get in touch with that guy in California who claims to know something about it. I thought you might know.'


28


'People are beginning to talk,' said Fenchurch that evening, after they had hauled her cello in.
  'Not only talk,' said Arthur, 'but print, in big bold letters under the bingo prizes. Which is why I thought I'd better get these.'
He showed her the long narrow booklets of airline tickets.
  'Arthur!' she said, hugging him. 'Does that mean you managed to talk to him?'
  'I have had a day,' said Arthur, 'of extreme telephonic exhaustion. I have spoken to virtually every department of virtually every paper in Fleet Street,


and I finally tracked his number down.'
  'You've obviously been working hard, you're drenched with sweat, poor darling.'
  'Not with sweat,' said Arthur wearily. 'A photographer's just been. I tried to argue, but - never mind, the point is, yes.'
'You spoke to him.'
  'I spoke to his wife. She said he was too weird to come to the phone right now and could I call back.'
  He sat down heavily, realized he was missing something and went to the fridge to find it.
'Want a drink?'
  'Would commit murder to get one. I always know I'm in for a tough time when my cello teacher looks me up and down and says, "Ah yes, my dear, I think a little Tchaikovsky today."'
  'I called again,' said Arthur, 'and she said that he was 3.2 light years from the phone and I should call back.'
'Ah.'
'I called again. She said the situation had improved. He was now a mere
2.6 light years from the phone but it was still a long way to shout.'
  'You don't suppose,' said Fenchurch, doubtfully, 'that there's anyone else we can talk to?'
  'It gets worse,' said Arthur. 'I spoke to someone on a science magazine who actually knows him, and he said that John Watson will not only believe, but will actually have absolute proof, often dictated to him by angels with golden beards and green wings and Dr Scholl footwear, that the month's most fashionable silly theory is true. For people who question the validity of these visions he will triumphantly produce the clogs in question, and that's as far as you get.'
  'I didn't realize it was that bad,' said Fenchurch quietly. She fiddled listlessly with the tickets.
  'I phoned Mrs Watson again,' said Arthur. 'Her name, by the way, and you may wish to know this, is Arcane Jill.'
'I see.'
  'I'm glad you see. I thought you mightn't believe any of this, so when I called her this time I used the telephone answering machine to record the call.'


  He went across to the telephone machine and fiddled and fumed with all its buttons for a while, because it was the one which was particularly recommended by Which? magazine and is almost impossible to use without going mad.
'Here it is,' he said at last, wiping the sweat from his brow.
  The voice was thin and crackly with its journey to a geostationary satellite and back, but was also hauntingly calm.
  'Perhaps I should explain,' Arcane Jill Watson's voice said, 'that the phone is in fact in a room that he never comes into. It's in the Asylum, you see. Wonko the Sane does not like to enter the Asylum and so he does not. I feel you should know this because it may save you phoning. If you would like to meet him, this is very easily arranged. All you have to do is walk in. He will only meet people outside the Asylum.'
Arthur's voice, at its most mystified: 'I'm sorry, I don't understand.
Where is the asylum?'
  'Where is the Asylum?' Arcane Jill Watson again. 'Have you ever read the instructions on a packet of toothpicks?'
On the tape, Arthur's voice had to admit that he had not.
  'You may want to do that. You may find that it clarifies things for you a little. You may find that it indicates to you where the Asylum is. Thank you.'
The sound of the phone line went dead. Arthur turned the machine off. 'Well, I suppose we can regard that as an invitation,' he said with a
shrug. 'I actually managed to get the address from the guy on the science magazine.'
  Fenchurch looked up at him again with a thoughtful frown, and looked at the tickets again.
'Do you think it's worth it?' she said.
  'Well,' said Arthur, 'the one thing that everyone I spoke to agreed on, apart from the fact that they all thought he was barking mad, is that he does know more than any man living about dolphins.'


29


'This is an important announcement. This is flight 121 to Los Angeles. If your travel plans today do not include Los Angeles, now would be the


perfect time to disembark.'


30


They rented a car in Los Angeles from one of the places that rents out cars that other people have thrown away.
  'Getting it to go round corners is a bit of a problem,' said the guy behind the sunglasses as he handed them the keys, 'sometimes it's simpler just to get out and find a car that's going in that direction.'
  They stayed for one night in a hotel on Sunset Boulevard which someone had told them they would enjoy being puzzled by.
  'Everyone there is either English or odd or both. They've got a swimming pool where you can go and watch English rock stars reading Language, Truth and Logic for the photographers.'
It was true. There was one and that was exactly what he was doing.
  The garage attendant didn't think much of their car, but that was fine because they didn't either.
  Late in the evening they drove through the Hollywood hills along Mulholland Drive and stopped to look out first over the dazzling sea of floating light that is Los Angeles, and later stopped to look across the dazzling sea of floating light that is the San Fernando Valley. They agreed that the sense of dazzle stopped immediately at the back of their eyes and didn't touch any other part of them and came away strangely unsatisfied by the spectacle. As dramatic seas of light went, it was fine, but light is meant to illuminate something, and having driven through what this particularly dramatic sea of light was illuminating they didn't think much of it.
  They slept late and restlessly and awoke at lunchtime when it was stupidly hot.
  They drove out along the freeway to Santa Monica for their first look at the Pacific Ocean, the ocean which Wonko the Sane spent all his days and a good deal of his nights looking at.
  'Someone told me,' said Fenchurch, 'that they once overheard two old ladies on this beach, doing what we're doing, looking at the Pacific Ocean for the first time in their lives. And apparently, after a long pause, one of them said to the other, "You know, it's not as big as I expected." '


  Their mood gradually lifted as they walked along the beach in Malibu and watched all the millionaires in their chic shanty huts carefully keeping an eye on each other to check how rich they were each getting.
  Their mood lifted further as the sun began to move down the western half of the sky, and by the time they were back in their rattling car and driving towards a sunset that no one of any sensibility would dream of building a city like Los Angeles in front of, they were suddenly feeling astonishingly and irrationally happy and didn't even mind that the terrible old car radio would only play two stations, and those simultaneously. So what, they were both playing good rock and roll.
  'I know that he will be able to help us,' said Fenchurch determinedly. 'I know he will. What's his name again, that he likes to be called?'
'Wonko the Sane.'
'I know that he will be able to help us.'
  Arthur wondered if he would and hoped that he would, and hoped that what Fenchurch had lost could be found here, on this Earth, whatever this Earth might prove to be.
  He hoped, as he had hoped continually and fervently since the time they had talked together on the banks of the Serpentine, that he would not be called upon to try and remember something that he had very firmly and deliberately buried in the furthest recesses of his memory, where he hoped it would cease to nag at him.


* * *


In Santa Barbara they stopped at a fish restaurant in what seemed to be a converted warehouse.
Fenchurch had red mullet and said it was delicious. Arthur had a swordfish steak and said it made him angry. He grabbed a passing waitress by the arm and berated her. 'Why's this fish so bloody good?' he demanded, angrily.
  'Please excuse my friend,' said Fenchurch to the startled waitress. 'I think he's having a nice day at last.'


31


If you took a couple of David Bowies and stuck one of the David Bowies on the top of the other David Bowie, then attached another David Bowie to the end of each of the arms of the upper of the first two David Bowies and wrapped the whole business up in a dirty beach robe you would then have something which didn't exactly look like John Watson, but which those who knew him would find hauntingly familiar.
He was tall and he gangled.
  When he sat in his deckchair gazing at the Pacific, not so much with any kind of wild surmise any longer as with a peaceful deep dejection, it was a little difficult to tell exactly where the deckchair ended and he began, and you would hesitate to put your hand on, say, his forearm in case the whole structure suddenly collapsed with a snap and took your thumb off.
  But his smile when he turned it on you was quite remarkable. It seemed to be composed of all the worst things that life can do to you, but which, when he briefly reassembled them in that particular order on his face, made you suddenly feel, 'Oh. Well, that's all right, then.'
  When he spoke, you were glad that he used the smile that made you feel like that pretty often.
  'Oh yes,' he said, 'they come and see me. They sit right here. They sit right where you're sitting.' He was talking of the angels with the golden beards and green wings and Dr Scholl sandals.
'They eat nachos, which they say they can't get where they come from.
They do a lot of coke and are very wonderful about a whole range of things.'
  'Do they?' said Arthur. 'Are they? So, er . . . when is this, then? When do they come?'
  He gazed out at the Pacific as well. There were little sandpipers running along the margin of the shore, which seemed to have this problem: they needed to find their food in the sand which a wave had just washed over, but they couldn't bear to get their feet wet. To deal with this problem they ran with an odd kind of movement as if they'd been constructed by somebody very clever in Switzerland.
  Fenchurch was sitting on the sand, idly drawing patterns in it with her fingers.
  'Weekends, mostly,' said Wonko the Sane, 'on little scooters. They are great machines.' He smiled.
'I see,' said Arthur. 'I see.'


  A tiny cough from Fenchurch attracted his attention and he looked round at her. She had scratched a little stick figure drawing in the sand of the two of them in the clouds. For a moment he thought she was trying to get him excited, then he realized that she was rebuking him. 'Who are we,' she was saying, 'to say he's mad?'
  His house was certainly peculiar, and since this was the first thing that Fenchurch and Arthur had encountered it would help to know what it was like.
What it was like was this:
It was inside out.
Actually inside out, to the extent that they had to park on the carpet.
  All along what one would normally call the outer wall, which was decorated in a tasteful interior-designed pink, were bookshelves, also a couple of those odd three-legged tables with semi-circular tops which stand in such a way as to suggest that someone just dropped the wall straight through them, and pictures which were clearly designed to soothe.
Where it got really odd was the roof.
  It folded back on itself like something that Maurits C. Escher, had he been given to hard nights on the town, which it is no part of this narrative's purpose to suggest was the case, though it is sometimes hard, looking at his pictures, particularly the one with all the awkward steps, not to wonder, might have dreamed up after having been on one, for the little chandeliers which should have been hanging inside were on the outside pointing up.
Confusing.
  The sign above the front door said, 'Come Outside', and so, nervously, they had.
  Inside, of course, was where the Outside was. Rough brickwork, nicely done pointing, guttering in good repair, a garden path, a couple of small trees, some rooms leading off.
  And the inner walls stretched down, folded curiously, and opened at the end as if, by an optical illusion which would have had Maurits C. Escher frowning and wondering how it was done, to enclose the Pacific Ocean itself.
'Hello,' said John Watson, Wonko the Sane.
  Good, they thought to themselves, 'Hello' is something we can cope with.
'Hello,' they said, and all surprisingly was smiles.


  For quite a while he seemed curiously reluctant to talk about the dolphins, looking oddly distracted and saying, 'I forget . . .' whenever they were mentioned, and had shown them quite proudly round the eccentricities of his house.
  'It gives me pleasure,' he said, 'in a curious kind of way, and does nobody any harm,' he continued, 'that a competent optician couldn't correct.'
  They liked him. He had an open, engaging quality and seemed able to mock himself before anybody else did.
  'Your wife,' said Arthur, looking around, 'mentioned some toothpicks.' He said it with a hunted look, as if he was worried that she might suddenly leap out from behind the door and mention them again.
  Wonko the Sane laughed. It was a light easy laugh, and sounded like one he had used a lot before and was happy with.
  'Ah yes,' he said, 'that's to do with the day I finally realized that the world had gone totally mad and built the Asylum to put it in, poor thing, and hoped it would get better.'
  This was the point at which Arthur began to feel a little nervous again. 'Here,' said Wonko the Sane, 'we are outside the Asylum.' He pointed again at the rough brickwork, the pointing and the guttering. 'Go through
that door,' he pointed at the first door through which they had originally entered, 'and you go into the Asylum. I've tried to decorate it nicely to keep the inmates happy, but there's very little one can do. I never go in there now myself. If ever I am tempted, which these days I rarely am, I simply look at the sign written over the door and I shy away.'
  'That one?' said Fenchurch, pointing, rather puzzled, at a blue plaque with some instructions written on it.
  'Yes. They are the words that finally turned me into the hermit I have now become. It was quite sudden. I saw them, and I knew what I had to do.'
The sign said:


Hold stick near centre of its length. Moisten pointed end in mouth. Insert in tooth space, blunt end next to gum. Use gentle in-out motion.


  'It seemed to me,' said Wonko the Sane, 'that any civilization that had so far lost its head as to need to include a set of detailed instructions for use in


a packet of toothpicks was no longer a civilization in which I could live and stay sane.'
  He gazed out at the Pacific again, as if daring it to rave and gibber at him, but it lay there calmly and played with the sandpipers.
  'And in case it crossed your mind to wonder, as I can see how it possibly might, I am completely sane. Which is why I call myself Wonko the Sane, just to reassure people on this point. Wonko is what my mother called me when I was a kid and clumsy and knocked things over, and sane is what I am, and how,' he added, with one of his smiles that made you feel, 'Oh.
Well, that's all right, then', 'I intend to remain. Shall we go onto the beach and see what we have to talk about?'
  They went out onto the beach, which was where he started talking about angels with golden beards and green wings and Dr Scholl sandals.
'About the dolphins . . .' said Fenchurch gently, hopefully. 'I can show you the sandals,' said Wonko the Sane.
'I wonder, do you know . . .'
  'Would you like me to show you,' said Wonko the Sane, 'the sandals? I have them. I'll get them. They are made by the Dr Scholl company, and the angels say that they particularly suit the terrain they have to work in. They say they run a concession stand by the message. When I say I don't know what that means they say, "No, you don't," and laugh. Well, I'll get them anyway.'
  As he walked back towards the inside, or the outside depending on how you looked at it, Arthur and Fenchurch looked at each other in a wondering and slightly desperate sort of way, then each shrugged and idly drew figures in the sand.
'How are the feet today?' said Arthur quietly.
  'OK. It doesn't feel so odd in the sand. Or in the water. The water touches them perfectly. I just think this isn't our world.'
She shrugged.
'What do you think he meant,' she said, 'by the message?'
  'I don't know,' said Arthur, though the memory of a man called Prak who laughed at him continuously kept nagging at him.
  When Wonko returned he was carrying something that stunned Arthur. Not the sandals, they were perfectly ordinary wooden-bottomed sandals.
'I just thought you'd like to see,' he said, 'what angels wear on their feet.
Just out of curiosity. I'm not trying to prove anything, by the way. I'm a


scientist and I know what constitutes proof. But the reason I call myself by my childhood name is to remind myself that a scientist must also be absolutely like a child. If he sees a thing, he must say that he sees it, whether it was what he thought he was going to see or not. See first, think later, then test. But always see first. Otherwise you will only see what you were expecting. Most scientists forget that. I'll show you something to demonstrate that later. So, the other reason I call myself Wonko the Sane is so that people will think I am a fool. That allows me to say what I see when I see it. You can't possibly be a scientist if you mind people thinking that you're a fool. Anyway, I also thought you might like to see this.'
  This was the thing that Arthur had been stunned to see him carrying, for it was a wonderful silver-grey glass fish bowl, seemingly identical to the one in Arthur's bedroom.
  Arthur had been trying for some thirty seconds now, without success, to say, 'Where did you get that?' sharply, and with a gasp in his voice.
Finally his time had come, but he missed it by a millisecond.
  'Where did you get that?' said Fenchurch, sharply and with a gasp in her voice.
  Arthur glanced at Fenchurch sharply and with a gasp in his voice said, 'What? Have you seen one of these before?'
  'Yes,' she said, 'I've got one. Or at least did have. Russell nicked it to put his golf balls in. I don't know where it came from, just that I was angry with Russell for nicking it. Why, have you got one?'
'Yes, it was . . .'
  They both became aware that Wonko the Sane was glancing sharply backwards and forwards between them, and trying to get a gasp in edgeways.
'You have one of these too?' he said to both of them. 'Yes.' They both said it.
  He looked long and calmly at each of them, then he held up the bowl to catch the light of the Californian sun.
  The bowl seemed almost to sing with the sun, to chime with the intensity of its light, and cast darkly brilliant rainbows around the sand and upon them. He turned it, and turned it. They could see quite clearly in the fine tracery of its etchwork the words 'So Long, and Thanks For All The Fish.'
'Do you know,' asked Wonko quietly, 'what it is?'


  They each shook their heads slowly, and with wonder, almost hypnotized by the flashing of the lightning shadows in the grey glass.
  'It is a farewell gift from the dolphins,' said Wonko in a low quiet voice, 'the dolphins whom I loved and studied, and swam with, and fed with fish, and even tried to learn their language, a task which they seemed to make impossibly difficult, considering the fact that I now realize they were perfectly capable of communicating in ours if they decided they wanted to.'
  He shook his head with a slow, slow smile, and then looked again at Fenchurch, and then at Arthur.
  'Have you . . .' he said to Arthur, 'what have you done with yours? May I ask you that?'
  'Er, I keep a fish in it,' said Arthur, slightly embarrassed. 'I happened to have this fish I was wondering what to do with, and er, there was this bowl.' He tailed off.
  'You've done nothing else? No,' he said, 'if you had, you would know.' He shook his head again.
  'My wife kept wheatgerm in ours,' resumed Wonko, with some new tone in his voice, 'until last night . . .'
'What,' said Arthur slowly and hushedly, 'happened last night?'
  'We ran out of wheatgerm,' said Wonko, evenly. 'My wife,' he added, 'has gone to get some more.' He seemed lost with his own thoughts for a moment.
'And what happened then?' said Fenchurch, in the same breathless tone. 'I washed it,' said Wonko. 'I washed it very carefully, very carefully,
removing every last speck of wheatgerm, then I dried it slowly with a lint- free cloth, slowly, carefully, turning it over and over. Then I held it to my ear. Have you . . . have you held one to your ear?'
They both shook their heads, again slowly, again dumbly. 'Perhaps,' he said, 'you should.'


32


The deep roar of the ocean.
The break of waves on shores further than thought can find. The silent thunders of the deep.


  And from among it, voices calling, and yet not voices, humming trillings, wordlings, the half-articulated songs of thought.
  Greetings, waves of greetings, sliding back down into the inarticulate, words breaking together.
A crash of sorrow on the shores of Earth.
  Waves of joy on - where? A world indescribably found, indescribably arrived at, indescribably wet, a song of water.
  A fugue of voices now, clamouring for explanations, of a disaster unavertable, a world to be destroyed, a surge of helplessness, a spasm of despair, a dying fall, again the break of words.
  And then the fling of hope, the finding of a shadow Earth in the implications of enfolded time, submerged dimensions, the pull of parallels, the deep pull, the spin of will, the hurl and split of it, the flight. A new Earth pulled into replacement, the dolphins gone.
Then stunningly a single voice, quite clear.
  'This bowl was brought to you by the Campaign to Save the Humans. We bid you farewell.'
  And then the sound of long, heavy, perfectly grey bodies rolling away into an unknown fathomless deep, quietly giggling.


33


That night they stayed Outside the Asylum and watched TV from inside it. 'This is what I wanted you to see,' said Wonko the Sane when the news
came around again, 'an old colleague of mine. He's over in your country running an investigation. Just watch.'
It was a press conference.
  'I'm afraid I can't comment on the name Rain God at this present time, and we are calling him an example of a Spontaneous Para-Causal Meteorological Phenomenon.'
'Can you tell us what that means?'
  'I'm not altogether sure. Let's be straight here. If we find something we can't understand, we like to call it something you can't understand, or indeed pronounce. I mean if we just let you go around calling him a Rain God, then that suggests that you know something we don't, and I'm afraid we couldn't have that.


  'No, first we have to call it something which says it's ours, not yours, then we set about finding some way of proving it's not what you said it is, but something we say it is.
  'And if it turns out that you're right, you'll still be wrong, because we will simply call him a . . . er, "Supernormal . . ." - not paranormal or supernatural because you think you know what those mean now, no, a "Supernormal Incremental Precipitation Inducer". We'll probably want to shove a "Quasi" in there somewhere to protect ourselves. Rain God! Huh, never heard such nonsense in my life. Admittedly, you wouldn't catch me going on holiday with him. Thanks, that'll be all for now, other than to say "Hi!" to Wonko if he's watching.'


34


On the way home there was a woman sitting next to them on the plane who was looking at them rather oddly.
They talked quietly to themselves.
  'I still have to know,' said Fenchurch, 'and I strongly feel that you know something that you're not telling me.'
Arthur sighed and took out a piece of paper.
'Do you have a pencil?' he said. She dug around and found one. 'What are you doing, sweetheart?' she said, after he had spent twenty
minutes frowning, chewing the pencil, scribbling on the paper, crossing things out, scribbling again, chewing the pencil again and grunting irritably to himself.
'Trying to remember an address someone once gave me.'
  'Your life would be an awful lot simpler,' she said, 'if you bought yourself an address book.'
Finally he passed the paper to her. 'You look after it,' he said.
  She looked at it. Among all the scratchings and crossings out were the words 'Quentulus Quazgar Mountains. Sevorbeupstry. Planet of Preliumtarn. Sun Zarss. Galactic Sector QQ7 Active J Gamma.'
'And what's there?'
'Apparently,' said Arthur, 'it's God's Final Message to His Creation.' 'That sounds a bit more like it,' said Fenchurch. 'How do we get there?'


'You really . . . ?'
'Yes,' said Fenchurch firmly, 'I really want to know.'
  Arthur looked out of the scratchy little Perspex window at the open sky outside.
  'Excuse me,' said the woman, who had been looking at them rather oddly, suddenly, 'I hope you don't think I'm rude. I get so bored on these long flights, it's nice to talk to somebody. My name's Enid Kapelsen, I'm from Boston. Tell me, do you fly a lot?'


35


They went to Arthur's house in the West Country, shoved a couple of towels and stuff in a bag, and then sat down to do what every Galactic hitchhiker ends up spending most of his time doing.
They waited for a flying saucer to come by.
  'Friend of mine did this for fifteen years,' said Arthur one night as they sat forlornly watching the sky.
'Who was that?' 'Called Ford Prefect.'
  He caught himself doing something he had never really expected to do again.
He wondered where Ford Prefect was.
  By an extraordinary coincidence, the following day there were two reports in the paper, one concerning the most astonishing incident with a flying saucer, and the other about a series of unseemly riots in pubs.
  Ford Prefect turned up the day after that looking hung over and complaining that Arthur never answered the phone.
  In fact, he looked extremely ill, not merely as if he'd been pulled through a hedge backwards, but as if the hedge was being simultaneously pulled backwards through a combine harvester. He staggered into Arthur's sitting room, waving aside all offers of support, which was an error, because the effort of waving caused him to lose his balance altogether and Arthur had eventually to drag him to the sofa.
  'Thank you,' said Ford, 'thank you very much. Have you . . .' he said, and fell asleep for three hours.


  '. . . the faintest idea,' he continued suddenly, when he revived, 'how hard it is to tap into the British phone system from the Pleiades? I can see that you haven't, so I'll tell you,' he said, 'over the very large mug of black coffee that you are about to make me.'
He followed Arthur wobbily into the kitchen.
  'Stupid operators keep asking you where you're calling from and you try and tell them Letchworth and they say you couldn't be if you're coming in on that circuit. What are you doing?'
'Making you some black coffee.'
  'Oh.' Ford seemed oddly disappointed. He looked about the place forlornly.
'What's this?' he said. 'Rice Krispies.'
'And this?' 'Paprika.'
  'I see,' said Ford, solemnly, and put the two items back down, one on top of the other, but that didn't seem to balance properly, so he put the other on top of the one and that seemed to work.
'A little space-lagged,' he said. 'What was I saying?' 'About not phoning from Letchworth.'
  'I wasn't. I explained this to the lady. "Bugger Letchworth," I said, "if that's your attitude. I am in fact calling from a sales scoutship of the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation, currently on the sub-light-speed leg of a journey between the stars known to your world, though not necessarily to you, dear lady" - I said "dear lady",' explained Ford Prefect, 'because I didn't want her to be offended by my implication that she was an ignorant cretin . . .'
'Tactful,' said Arthur Dent. 'Exactly,' said Ford, 'tactful.' He frowned.
  'Space-lag,' he said, 'is very bad for subclauses. You'll have to assist me again,' he continued, 'by reminding me what I was talking about.'
  '"Between the stars,"' said Arthur, '"known to your world, though not necessarily to you, dear lady, as . . ."'
  '"Pleiades Epsilon and Pleiades Zeta,"' concluded Ford triumphantly. 'This conversation lark is quite a gas, isn't it?'
'Have some coffee.'


  'Thank you, no. "And the reason," I said, "why I am bothering you with it rather than just dialling direct as I could, because we have some pretty sophisticated telecommunications equipment out here in the Pleiades, I can tell you, is that the penny-pinching son of a starbeast piloting this son of a starbeast starship insists that I call collect. Can you believe that?" '
'And could she?'
  'I don't know. She had hung up,' said Ford, 'by this time. So! What do you suppose,' he asked fiercely, 'I did next?'
'I've no idea, Ford,' said Arthur.
  'Pity,' said Ford, 'I was hoping you could remind me. I really hate those guys, you know. They really are the creeps of the cosmos, buzzing around the celestial infinite with their junky little machines that never work properly or, when they do, perform functions that no sane man would require of them and,' he added savagely, 'go beep to tell you when they've done it!'
  This was perfectly true, and a very respectable view widely held by right- thinking people, who are largely recognizable as being right-thinking people by the mere fact that they hold this view.
  The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, in a moment of reasoned lucidity which is almost unique among its current tally of five million, nine hundred and seventy-five thousand, five hundred and nine pages, says of the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation products that 'it is very easy to be blinded to the essential uselessness of them by the sense of achievement you get from getting them to work at all.
  'In other words - and this is the rock-solid principle on which the whole of the Corporation's Galaxy-wide success is founded - their fundamental design flaws are completely hidden by their superficial design flaws.
  'And this guy,' ranted Ford, 'was on a drive to sell more of them! His five-year mission to seek out and explore strange new worlds, and sell Advanced Music Substitute Systems to their restaurants, elevators and wine bars! Or if they didn't have restaurants, elevators and wine bars yet, to artificially accelerate their civilization growth until they bloody well did have! Where's that coffee!'
'I threw it away.'
  'Make some more. I have now remembered what I did next. I saved civilization as we know it. I knew it was something like that.'


  He stumbled determinedly back into the sitting room, where he seemed to carry on talking to himself, tripping over the furniture and making beep beep noises.
  A couple of minutes later, wearing his very placid face, Arthur followed him.
Ford looked stunned.
'Where have you been?' he demanded.
  'Making some coffee,' said Arthur, still wearing his very placid face. He had long ago realized that the only way of being in Ford's company successfully was to keep a large stock of very placid faces and wear them at all times.
  'You missed the best bit!' raged Ford. 'You missed the bit where I jumped the guy! Now,' he said, 'I shall have to jump him, all over again!'
He hurled himself recklessly at a chair and broke it.
  'It was better,' he said sullenly, 'last time,' and waved vaguely in the direction of another broken chair which he had already got trussed up on the dining table.
  'I see,' said Arthur, casting a placid eye over the trussed-up wreckage, 'and, er, what are all the ice cubes for?'
  'What?' screamed Ford. 'What? You missed that bit too? That's the suspended animation facility! I put the guy in the suspended animation facility. Well, I had to, didn't I?'
'So it would seem,' said Arthur, in his placid voice. 'Don't touch that!!!' yelled Ford.
  Arthur, who was about to replace the phone, which was for some mysterious reason lying on the table, off the hook, paused, placidly.
'OK,' said Ford, calming down, 'listen to it.' Arthur put the phone to his ear.
'It's the speaking clock,' he said.
  'Beep, beep, beep,' said Ford, 'is exactly what is being heard all over that guy's ship, while he sleeps, in the ice, going slowly round a little-known moon of Sesefras Magna. The London Speaking Clock!'
  'I see,' said Arthur again, and decided that now was the time to ask the big one.
'Why?' he said, placidly.
'With a bit of luck,' said Ford, 'the phone bill will bankrupt the buggers.' He threw himself, sweating, onto the sofa.


'Anyway,' he said, 'dramatic arrival, don't you think?'


36


The flying saucer in which Ford Prefect had stowed away had stunned the world.
  Finally there was no doubt, no possibility of mistake, no hallucinations, no mysterious CIA agents found floating in reservoirs.
This time it was real, it was definite. It was quite definitely definite.
  It had come down with a wonderful disregard for anything beneath it and crushed a large area of some of the most expensive real estate in the world, including much of Harrods.
  The thing was massive, nearly a mile across, some said, dull silver in colour, pitted, scorched and disfigured with the scars of unnumbered vicious space battles fought with savage forces by the light of suns unknown to man.
  A hatchway opened, crashed down through the Harrods Food Halls, demolished Harvey Nichols, and with a final grinding scream of tortured architecture toppled the Sheraton Park Tower.
  After a long, heart-stopping moment of internal crashes and grumbles of rending machinery, there marched from it, down the ramp, an immense silver robot, a hundred feet tall.
It held up a hand.
  'I come in peace,' it said, adding after a long moment of further grinding, 'Take me to your Lizard.'
  Ford Prefect, of course, had an explanation for this, as he sat with Arthur and watched the nonstop frenetic news reports on the television, none of which had anything to say other than to record that the thing had done this amount of damage which was valued at that amount of billions of pounds and had killed this totally other number of people, and then say it again, because the robot was doing nothing more than standing there, swaying very slightly, and emitting short incomprehensible error messages.
'It comes from a very ancient democracy, you see . . .' 'You mean, it comes from a world of lizards?'
  'No,' said Ford, who by this time was a little more rational and coherent than he had been, having finally had the coffee forced down him, 'nothing


so simple. Nothing anything like so straightforward. On its world, the people are people. The leaders are lizards. The people hate the lizards and the lizards rule the people.'
'Odd,' said Arthur, 'I thought you said it was a democracy.' 'I did,' said Ford. 'It is.'
  'So,' said Arthur, hoping he wasn't sounding ridiculously obtuse, 'why don't people get rid of the lizards?'
  'It honestly doesn't occur to them,' said Ford. 'They've all got the vote, so they all pretty much assume that the government they've voted in more or less approximates to the government they want.'
'You mean they actually vote for the lizards?' 'Oh yes,' said Ford with a shrug, 'of course.'
'But,' said Arthur, going for the big one again, 'why?'
  'Because if they didn't vote for a lizard,' said Ford, 'the wrong lizard might get in. Got any gin?'
'What?'
  'I said,' said Ford, with an increasing air of urgency creeping into his voice, 'have you got any gin?'
'I'll look. Tell me about the lizards.' Ford shrugged again.
  'Some people say that the lizards are the best thing that ever happened to them,' he said. 'They're completely wrong of course, completely and utterly wrong, but someone's got to say it.'
'But that's terrible,' said Arthur.
  'Listen, bud,' said Ford, 'if I had one Altairian dollar for every time I heard one bit of the Universe look at another bit of the Universe and say "That's terrible" I wouldn't be sitting here like a lemon looking for a gin. But I haven't and I am. Anyway, what are you looking so placid and moon- eyed for? Are you in love?'
Arthur said yes, he was, and said it placidly.
  'With someone who knows where the gin bottle is? Do I get to meet her?'
  He did because Fenchurch came in at that moment with a pile of newspapers she'd been into the village to buy. She stopped in astonishment at the wreckage on the table and the wreckage from Betelgeuse on the sofa.
  'Where's the gin?' said Ford to Fenchurch. And to Arthur, 'What happened to Trillian, by the way?'


  'Er, this is Fenchurch,' said Arthur, awkwardly. 'There was nothing with Trillian, you must have seen her last.'
  'Oh, yeah,' said Ford, 'she went off with Zaphod somewhere. They had some kids or something. At least,' he added, 'I think that's what they were. Zaphod's calmed down a lot, you know.'
  'Really?' said Arthur, clustering hurriedly round Fenchurch to relieve her of the shopping.
  'Yeah,' said Ford, 'at least one of his heads is now saner than an emu on acid.'
'Arthur, who is this?' said Fenchurch.
'Ford Prefect,' said Arthur. 'I may have mentioned him in passing.'


37


For a total of three days and nights the giant silver robot stood in stunned amazement straddling the remains of Knightsbridge, swaying slightly and trying to work out a number of things.
  Government deputations came to see it, ranting journalists by the truckload asked each other questions on the air about what they thought of it, flights of fighter bombers tried pathetically to attack it - but no lizards appeared. It scanned the horizon slowly.
  At night it was at its most spectacular, floodlit by the teams of television crews who covered it continuously as it continuously did nothing.
It thought and thought and eventually reached a conclusion. It would have to send out its service robots.
  It should have thought of that before, but it was having a number of problems.
  The tiny flying robots came screeching out of the hatchway one afternoon in a terrifying cloud of metal. They roamed the surrounding terrain, frantically attacking some things and defending others.
  One of them at last found a pet shop with some lizards, but it instantly defended the pet shop for democracy so savagely that little in the area survived.
  A turning point came when a crack team of flying screechers discovered the Zoo in Regent's Park, and most particularly the Reptile House.


  Learning a little caution from their previous mistakes in the pet shop, the flying drills and fretsaws brought some of the larger and fatter iguanas to the giant silver robot, who tried to conduct high-level talks with them.
  Eventually the robot announced to the world that despite the full, frank and wide-ranging exchange of views the high-level talks had broken down, the lizards had been retired, and that it, the robot, would take a short holiday somewhere, and for some reason selected Bournemouth.
Ford Prefect, watching it on TV, nodded, laughed, and had another beer. Immediate preparations were made for its departure.
  The flying toolkits screeched and sawed and drilled and fried things with light throughout that day and all through the nighttime, and in the morning, stunningly, a giant mobile gantry started to roll westwards on several roads simultaneously with the robot standing on it, supported within the gantry.
  Westward it crawled, like a strange carnival, buzzed around by its servants and helicopters and news coaches, scything through the land until at last it came to Bournemouth, where the robot slowly freed itself of its transport system's embraces and went and lay for ten days on the beach.
  It was, of course, by far the most exciting thing that had ever happened to Bournemouth.
  Crowds gathered daily along the perimeter which was staked out and guarded as the robot's recreation area, and tried to see what it was doing.
  It was doing nothing. It was lying on the beach. It was lying a little awkwardly on its face.
  It was a journalist from a local paper who, late one night, managed to do what no one else in the world had so far managed, which was to strike up a brief intelligible conversation with one of the service robots guarding the perimeter.
It was an extraordinary breakthrough.
  'I think there's a story in it,' confided the journalist over a cigarette shared through the steel-link fence, 'but it needs a good local angle. I've got a little list of questions here,' he went on, rummaging awkwardly in an inner pocket, 'perhaps you could get him, it, whatever you call him, to run through them quickly.'
  The little flying ratchet screwdriver said it would see what it could do and screeched off.
A reply was never forthcoming.


  Curiously, however, the questions on the piece of paper more or less exactly matched the questions that were going through the massive battle- scarred industrial-quality circuits of the robot's mind. They were these:
'How do you feel about being a robot?'
'How does it feel to be from outer space?' and 'How do you like Bournemouth?'
  Early the following day things started to be packed up and within a few days it became apparent that the robot was preparing to leave for good.
'The point is,' said Fenchurch to Ford, 'can you get us on board?' Ford looked wildly at his watch.
'I have some serious unfinished business to attend to,' he exclaimed.


38


Crowds thronged as close as they could to the giant silver craft, which wasn't very. The immediate perimeter was fenced off and patrolled by the tiny flying service robots. Staked out around that was the army, who had been completely unable to breach that inner perimeter, but were damned if anybody was going to breach them. They in turn were surrounded by a cordon of police, though whether they were there to protect the public from the army or the army from the public, or to guarantee the giant ship's diplomatic immunity and prevent it getting parking tickets was entirely unclear and the subject of much debate.
  The inner perimeter fence was now being dismantled. The army stirred uncomfortably, uncertain of how to react to the fact that the reason for their being there seemed as if it was simply going to get up and go.
  The giant robot had lurched back aboard the ship at lunchtime, and now it was five o'clock in the afternoon and no further sign had been seen of it. Much had been heard - more grindings and rumblings from deep within the craft, the music of a million hideous malfunctions; but the sense of tense expectation among the crowd was born of the fact that they tensely expected to be disappointed. This wonderful extraordinary thing had come into their lives, and now it was simply going to go without them.
  Two people were particularly aware of this sensation. Arthur and Fenchurch scanned the crowd anxiously, unable to find Ford Prefect in it anywhere, or any sign that he had the slightest intention of being there.


'How reliable is he?' asked Fenchurch in a sinking voice.
  'How reliable?' said Arthur. He gave a hollow laugh. 'How shallow is the ocean?' he said. 'How cold is the sun?'
  The last parts of the robot's gantry transport were being carried on board, and the few remaining sections of the perimeter fence were now stacked at the bottom of the ramp waiting to follow them. The soldiers on guard round the ramp bristled meaningfully, orders were barked back and forth, hurried conferences were held, but nothing, of course, could be done about any of it.
  Hopelessly, and with no clear plan now, Arthur and Fenchurch pushed forward through the crowd, but since the whole crowd was also trying to push forward through the crowd, this got them nowhere.
  And within a few minutes more nothing remained outside the ship, every last link of the fence was aboard. A couple of flying fretsaws and a spirit level seemed to do one last check around the site, and then screamed in through the giant hatchway themselves.
A few seconds passed.
  The sounds of mechanical disarray from within changed in intensity, and slowly, heavily, the huge steel ramp began to lift itself back out of the Harrods Food Halls. The sound that accompanied it was the sound of thousands of tense, excited people being completely ignored.
'Hold it!'
  A megaphone barked from a taxi which screeched to a halt on the edge of the milling crowd.
'There has been,' barked the megaphone, 'a major scientific break-in!
Through. Breakthrough,' it corrected itself. The door flew open and a small man from somewhere in the vicinity of Betelgeuse leapt out wearing a white coat.
  'Hold it!' he shouted again, and this time brandished a short squat black rod with lights on it. The lights winked briefly, the ramp paused in its ascent, and then in obedience to the signals from the Thumb (which half the electronic engineers in the Galaxy are constantly trying to find fresh ways of jamming, while the other half are constantly trying to find fresh ways of jamming the jamming signals), slowly ground its way downwards again.
  Ford Prefect grabbed his megaphone from out of the taxi and started bawling at the crowd through it.


  'Make way,' he shouted, 'make way, please, this is a major scientific breakthrough. You and you, get the equipment from the taxi.'
  Completely at random he pointed at Arthur and Fenchurch, who wrestled their way back out of the crowd and clustered urgently round the taxi.
  'All right, I want you to clear a passage, please, for some important pieces of scientific equipment,' boomed Ford. 'Just everybody keep calm. It's all under control, there's nothing to see. It is merely a major scientific breakthrough. Keep calm now. Important scientific equipment. Clear the way.'
  Hungry for new excitement, delighted at this sudden reprieve from disappointment, the crowd enthusiastically fell back and started to open up.
  Arthur was a little surprised to see what was printed on the boxes of important scientific equipment in the back of the taxi.
  'Hang your coat over them,' he muttered to Fenchurch as he heaved them out to her. Hurriedly he manoeuvred out the large supermarket trolley that was also jammed against the back seat. It clattered to the ground, and together they loaded the boxes into it.
  'Clear a path, please,' shouted Ford again. 'Everything's under proper scientific control.'
  'He said you'd pay,' said the taxi driver to Arthur, who dug out some notes and paid him. There was the distant sound of police sirens.
'Move along there,' shouted Ford, 'and no one will get hurt.'
  The crowd surged and closed behind them again, as frantically they pushed and hauled the rattling supermarket trolley through the rubble towards the ramp.
  'It's all right,' Ford continued to bellow. 'There's nothing to see, it's all over. None of this is actually happening.'
  'Clear the way, please,' boomed a police megaphone from the back of the crowd. 'There's been a break-in, clear the way.'
'Breakthrough,' yelled Ford in competition. 'A scientific breakthrough!' 'This is the police! Clear the way!'
'Scientific equipment! Clear the way!' 'Police! Let us through!'
  'Walkmen!' yelled Ford, and pulled half a dozen miniature tape players from his pockets and tossed them into the crowd. The resulting seconds of utter confusion allowed them to get the supermarket trolley to the edge of the ramp, and to haul it up onto the lip of it.


  'Hold tight,' muttered Ford, and released a button on his electronic Thumb. Beneath them, the huge ramp juddered and began slowly to heave its way upwards.
  'OK, kids,' he said as the milling crowd dropped away beneath them and they started to lurch their way along the tilting ramp into the bowels of the ship, 'looks like we're on our way.'


39


Arthur Dent was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound of gunfire.
  Being careful not to wake Fenchurch, who was still managing to sleep fitfully, he slid his way out of the maintenance hatchway which they had fashioned into a kind of bunk for themselves, slung himself down the access ladder and prowled the corridors moodily.
  They were claustrophobic and ill-lit. The lighting circuits buzzed annoyingly.
That wasn't it, though.
  He paused and leaned backwards as a flying power drill flew past him down the dim corridor with a nasty screech, occasionally clanging against the walls like a confused bee as it did so.
That wasn't it either.
  He clambered through a bulkhead door and found himself in a larger corridor. Acrid smoke was drifting up from one end so he walked towards the other.
  He came to an observation monitor let into the wall behind a plate of toughened but still badly scratched Perspex.
  'Would you turn it down, please?' he said to Ford Prefect, who was crouching in front of it in the middle of a pile of bits of video equipment he'd taken from a shop window in Tottenham Court Road, having first hurled a small brick through it, and also a nasty heap of empty beer cans.
'Shhhh!' hissed Ford, and peered with manic concentration at the screen.
He was watching The Magnificent Seven. 'Just a bit,' said Arthur.
  'No!' shouted Ford. 'We're just getting to the good bit! Listen, I finally got it all sorted out, voltage levels, line conversion, everything, and this is


the good bit!'
  With a sigh and a headache, Arthur sat down beside him and watched the good bit. He listened to Ford's whoops and yells and 'yeeehay!'s as placidly as he could.
  'Ford,' he said eventually, when it was all over, and Ford was hunting through a stack of cassettes for the tape of Casablanca, 'how come, if . . .'
  'This is the big one,' said Ford. 'This is the one I came back for. Do you realize I never saw it all through? Always I missed the end. I saw half of it again the night before the Vogons came. When they blew the place up I thought I'd never get to see it. Hey, what happened with all that, anyway?'
'Just life,' said Arthur, and plucked a beer from a six-pack.
  'Oh, that again,' said Ford. 'I thought it might be something like that. I prefer this stuff,' he said as Rick's Bar flickered onto the screen. 'How come if what?'
'What?'
'You started to say, "How come if . . ."'
  'How come if you're so rude about the Earth, that you . . . oh never mind, let's just watch the movie.'
'Exactly,' said Ford.


40


There remains little still to tell.
  Beyond what used to be known as the Limitless Lightfields of Flanux until the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine were discovered lying behind them, lie the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine.
  Within the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine lies the star named Zarss, around which orbits the planet Preliumtarn on which is the land of Sevorbeupstry, and it was to the land of Sevorbeupstry that Arthur and Fenchurch came at last, a little tired by the journey.
  And in the land of Sevorbeupstry, they came to the Great Red Plain of Rars, which was bounded on the south side by the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains, on the further side of which, according to the dying words of Prak, they would find in thirty-foot-high letters of fire God's Final Message to His Creation.


  According to Prak, if Arthur's memory served him right, the place was guarded by the Lajestic Vantrashell of Lob, and so, after a manner, it proved to be. He was a little man in a strange hat and he sold them a ticket.
  'Keep to the left, please,' he said, 'keep to the left,' and hurried on past them on a little scooter.
  They realized they were not the first to pass that way, for the path that led around the left of the Great Plain was well worn and dotted with booths. At one they bought a box of fudge, which had been baked in an oven in a cave in the mountain which was heated by the fire of the letters that formed God's Final Message to His Creation. At another they bought some postcards. The letters had been blurred with an airbrush, 'So as not to spoil the Big Surprise!' it said on the reverse.
  'Do you know what the message is?' they asked the wizened little lady in the booth.
'Oh yes,' she piped cheerily, 'oh yes!' She waved them on.
  Every twenty miles or so there was a little stone hut with showers and sanitary facilities, but the going was tough, and the high sun baked down on the Great Red Plain, and the Great Red Plain rippled in the heat.
  'Is it possible,' asked Arthur at one of the larger booths, 'to rent one of those little scooters? Like the one Lajestic Ventrawhatsit had?'
  'The scooters,' said the little lady who was serving at the ice-cream bar, 'are not for the devout.'
  'Oh well, that's easy, then,' said Fenchurch, 'we're not particularly devout. We're just interested.'
  'Then you must turn back now,' said the little lady severely, and when they demurred, sold them a couple of Final Message sunhats and a photograph of themselves with their arms tight around each other on the Great Red Plain of Rars.
  They drank a couple of sodas in the shade of the booth and then trudged out into the sun again.
  'We're running out of barrier cream,' said Fenchurch after a few more miles. 'We can go to the next booth, or we can return to the previous one which is nearer, but means we have to retrace our steps.'
  They stared ahead at the distant black speck winking in the heat haze; they looked behind themselves. They elected to go on.


  They then discovered that they were not only not the first to make this journey, but that they were not the only ones making it now.
  Some way ahead of them an awkward low shape was heaving itself wretchedly along the ground, stumbling painfully slowly, half-limping, half-crawling.
  It was moving so slowly that before too long they caught the creature up and could see that it was made of worn, scarred and twisted metal.
It groaned at them as they approached it, collapsing in the hot dry dust. 'So much time,' it groaned, 'oh so much time. And pain as well, so much
of that, and so much time to suffer it in too. One or the other on its own I could probably manage. It's the two together that really get me down. Oh hello, you again.'
'Marvin?' said Arthur sharply, crouching down beside it. 'Is that you?' 'You were always one,' groaned the aged husk of the robot, 'for the
super-intelligent question, weren't you?'
  'What is it?' whispered Fenchurch in alarm, crouching behind Arthur, and grasping on to his arm.
'He's sort of an old friend,' said Arthur. 'I . . .'
  'Friend!' croaked the robot pathetically. The word died away in a kind of crackle and flakes of rust fell out of his mouth. 'You'll have to excuse me while I try and remember what the word means. My memory banks are not what they were, you know, and any word which falls into disuse for a few zillion years has to get shifted down into auxiliary memory back-up. Ah, here it comes.'
  The robot's battered head snapped up a bit as if in thought. 'Hmm,' he said, 'what a curious concept.'
He thought a little longer.
  'No,' he said at last, 'don't think I ever came across one of those. Sorry, can't help you there.'
  He scraped a knee along pathetically in the dust, and then tried to twist himself up onto his misshapen elbows.
  'Is there any last service you would like me to perform for you, perhaps?' he asked in a kind of hollow rattle. 'A piece of paper that perhaps you would like me to pick up for you? Or maybe you would like me,' he continued, 'to open a door?'
  His head scratched round in its rusty neck bearings and seemed to scan the distant horizon.


  'Don't seem to be any doors around at present,' he said, 'but I'm sure that if we waited long enough, someone would build one. And then,' he said slowly twisting his head around to see Arthur again, 'I could open it for you. I'm quite used to waiting, you know.'
'Arthur,' hissed Fenchurch in his ear sharply, 'you never told me of this.
What have you done to this poor creature?'
'Nothing,' insisted Arthur sadly, 'he's always like this . . .'
  'Ha!' snapped Marvin. 'Ha!' he repeated. 'What do you know of always? You say "always" to me, who, because of the silly little errands you organic life forms keep on sending me through time on, am now thirty-seven times older than the Universe itself? Pick your words with a little more care,' he coughed, 'and tact.'
He rasped his way through a coughing fit and resumed.
  'Leave me,' he said, 'go on ahead, leave me to struggle painfully on my way. My time at last is nearly come. My race is nearly run. I fully expect,' he said, feebly waving them on with a broken finger, 'to come in last. It would be fitting. Here I am, brain the size . . .'
Between them they picked him up despite his feeble protests and insults.
The metal was so hot it nearly blistered their fingers, but he weighed surprisingly little, and hung limply between their arms.
  They carried him with them along the path that ran along the left of the Great Red Plain of Rars towards the encircling mountains of Quentulus Quazgar.
  Arthur attempted to explain to Fenchurch, but was too often interrupted by Marvin's dolorous cybernetic ravings.
  They tried to see if they could get him some spare parts at one of the booths, and some soothing oil, but Marvin would have none of it.
'I'm all spare parts,' he droned. 'Let me be!' he groaned.
  'Every part of me,' he moaned, 'has been replaced at least fifty times . . . except . . .' He seemed almost imperceptibly to brighten for a moment. His head bobbed between them with the effort of memory. 'Do you remember, the first time you ever met me,' he said at last to Arthur, 'I had been given the intellect-stretching task of taking you up to the bridge? I mentioned to you that I had this terrible pain in all the diodes down my left side? That I had asked for them to be replaced but they never were?'


  He left a longish pause before he continued. They carried him on between them, under the baking sun that hardly ever seemed to move, let alone set.
  'See if you can guess,' said Marvin, when he judged that the pause had become embarrassing enough, 'which parts of me were never replaced? Go on, see if you can guess.
'Ouch,' he added, 'ouch, ouch, ouch, ouch, ouch.'


At last they reached the last of the little booths, set down Marvin between them and rested in the shade. Fenchurch bought some cufflinks for Russell, cufflinks that had set in them little polished pebbles which had been picked up from the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains, directly underneath the letters of fire in which was written God's Final Message to His Creation.
  Arthur flipped through a little rack of devotional tracts on the counter, little meditations on the meaning of the Message.
'Ready?' he said to Fenchurch, who nodded. They heaved Marvin up between them.
  They rounded the foot of the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains, and there was the Message written in blazing letters along the crest of the Mountain. There was a little observation vantage point with a rail built along the top of a large rock facing it, from which you could get a good view. It had a little pay-telescope for looking at the letters in detail, but no one would ever use it because the letters burned with the divine brilliance of the heavens and would, if seen through a telescope, have severely damaged the retina and optic nerve.
  They gazed at God's Final Message in wonderment, and were slowly and ineffably filled with a great sense of peace, and of final and complete understanding.
Fenchurch sighed. 'Yes,' she said, 'that was it.'
  They had been staring at it for fully ten minutes before they became aware that Marvin, hanging between their shoulders, was in difficulties. The robot could no longer lift his head, had not read the message. They lifted his head, but he complained that his vision circuits had almost gone.
  They found a coin and helped him to the telescope. He complained and insulted them, but they helped him look at each individual letter in turn. The first letter was a 'w', the second an 'e'. Then there was a gap. An 'a' followed, then a 'p', an 'o' and an 'l'.


Marvin paused for a rest.
  After a few moments they resumed and let him see the 'o', the 'g', the 'i', the 's' and the 'e'.
  The next two words were 'for' and 'the'. The last one was a long one, and Marvin needed another rest before he could tackle it.
  It started with 'i', then 'n' then a 'c'. Next came an 'o' and an 'n', followed by a 'v', an 'e', another 'n' and an 'i'.
After a final pause, Marvin gathered his strength for the last stretch.
  He read the 'e', the 'n', the 'c' and at last the final 'e', and staggered back into their arms.
  'I think,' he murmured at last, from deep within his corroding rattling thorax, 'I feel good about it.'
The lights went out in his eyes for absolutely the very last time ever.
  Luckily, there was a stall nearby where you could rent scooters from guys with green wings.
OceanofPDF.com






Epilogue
One of the greatest benefactors of all lifekind was a man who couldn't keep his mind on the job in hand.
Brilliant?
Certainly.
  One of the foremost genetic engineers of his or any other generation, including a number he had designed himself?
Without a doubt.
  The problem was that he was far too interested in things which he shouldn't be interested in, at least, as people would tell him, not now.
He was also, partly because of this, of a rather irritable disposition.
  So when his world was threatened by terrible invaders from a distant star, who were still a fair way off but travelling fast, he, Blart Versenwald III (his name was Blart Versenwald III, which is not strictly relevant, but quite interesting because - never mind, that was his name and we can talk about why it's interesting later), was sent into guarded seclusion by the masters of his race with instructions to design a breed of fanatical superwarriors to resist and vanquish the feared invaders, do it quickly and, they told him, 'Concentrate!'
  So he sat by a window and looked out at a summer lawn and designed and designed and designed, but inevitably got a little distracted by things, and by the time the invaders were practically in orbit round them, had come up with a remarkable new breed of super-fly that could, unaided, figure out how to fly through the open half of a half-open window, and also an off switch for children. Celebrations of these remarkable achievements seemed doomed to be short-lived because disaster was imminent as the alien ships were landing. But astoundingly, the fearsome invaders who, like most warlike races, were only on the rampage because they couldn't cope with things at home, were stunned by Versenwald's extraordinary breakthroughs, joined in the celebrations and were instantly prevailed upon to sign a wide- ranging series of trading agreements and set up a programme of cultural exchanges. And, in an astonishing reversal of normal practice in the conduct of such matters, everybody concerned lived happily ever after.


  There was a point to this story, but it has temporarily escaped the chronicler's mind.
OceanofPDF.com


















MOSTLY HARMLESS






OceanofPDF.com


















For Ron
With grateful thanks to
Sue Freestone and Michael Bywater
for their support, help and constructive abuse.
OceanofPDF.com






Foreword
by Dirk Maggs




This is a wonderful, terrible book. Wonderful in that it contains more of Douglas's unique humour and driving obsessions than many of his other works of fiction. Terrible in its grand and utter finality.
  Many other writers would have happily reunited the inhabitants of the Hitchhiker's universe in such a way as to leave comfortable room for the next sequel. To send Arthur, Ford and company off on a series of diverting adventures and then return them safely home (wherever that might be) in time for tea (probably not dispensed by a Nutrimat appliance).
  Douglas was only too aware of the expectations surrounding a new Hitchhiker's book, so much so that the business of writing it was almost as dramatic as its content. Yet he could not turn out work to fit a template, even one he might have devised himself. Of course he would recycle good ideas from defunct (or nearly defunct) projects - his unused Doctor Who and the Krikkitmen forming the core of Life, the Universe and Everything, for example, or Shada morphing into the labyrinthine world of Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency.
  Mostly Harmless is a brave departure. Douglas was determined to challenge his characters and the reader in a maze of parallel plots. This was going to be a rollercoaster ride into the unknown, a tour of his passions and fears. No wonder he found it difcult to settle himself to writing it.
  The tales of Douglas being locked in a hotel room in order to meet his deadline aren't all apocryphal, but there's a serious point in amongst the dinner party anecdotes. To innovate non-stop is an exhausting process, and this Hitchhiker's novel represents his predictive imagination at its most extraordinary. The Guide Mark II is a chilling and prescient warning about mixing Artificial Intelligence with Corporate Venality. We are only just waking up to the box-ticking, goal-driven, share-and-enjoy surveillance society Douglas anticipated.


  The book is also a snapshot of a creative mind struck by two complementary and equally chilling themes - Mortality and Extinction.
  In the years leading up to the writing of this book Douglas's general interest in the collision of science and the arts had hardened into a deep and abiding interest in the fate of life upon his home planet. His Last Chance To See project - tracking down and observing the Earth's most threatened species - wasn't a casual diversion, but an issue that gripped his conscience and fired his imagination.
  In Mostly Harmless these themes are played out by characters we have grown to love. There is more than one threatened species in this book; as in the universe we experience every day of our lives, unconscious forces work blindly to react in entirely logical, unsentimental ways. Whether a butterfly flaps its wings or a meteorite strikes a lost intergalactic battleship, the first domino topples to create random - excuse me, Random - patterns. They intersect in a chillingly rational way.
  Douglas works well outside the comfort zone of his reader and yet we laugh at the interplay of characters, the unique observational style with which he turns the mundane into the surreal, and the outright slapstick of scenes involving boghogs and security robots.
  Then we arrive at the climax of this story and its sudden, shuddering halt. It's hard not to feel a little bruised. But then we must remember that Conan Doyle tipped Sherlock Holmes over the Reichenbach Falls, but eventually gave in to sentiment and his bank manager.
  When Douglas first proposed that we bring Hitchhiker's full circle and complete the saga on radio - where it all began - I was thrilled to be his choice to finish the job, and intensely curious as to what his ideas were for its ending. With three novels to plan, starting with the epic sweep of Life, the Universe and Everything - which he christened 'The Tertiary Phase' - we did not discuss Mostly Harmless in much detail but he admitted that he would like to write another Hitchhiker book 'with a happier ending'.
  In fact, the brave twist in the tail of this story can be seen as ironic, not cataclysmic. Douglas is quietly waiting for us to work out for ourselves that something bigger is going on than the intrigues of Men, Mice and Vogons. Because the premise governing the operation of the Guide Mark II leaves him considerable wiggle room for a further book about Arthur, Ford and Co. The fact that he did not find time to write it is the tragic part.


  Because Douglas hinted that he might have yet more adventures for Arthur, and to provide closure in his absence, the final episode of our radio version of Mostly Harmless - 'The Quintessential Phase' - concluded with a coda consisting of several possible happier endings, some of which looped back to previous iterations of Arthur's life. This provided a less disturbing resolution if listeners chose to listen on; but the end of the tale as Douglas left it was still there to stop at if they'd rather not.
  But here's the thing: regardless of any thoughts upon a future for the Hitchhiker's characters by the rest of us, the ending of this book is Douglas's final published word on the subject and, taken on its own terms, is as brave an act by an author with his own creation as can be imagined.


DIRK MAGGS
                             Director, Dramatizer & Co-Producer BBC Radio 4's The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Tertiary, Quandary
and Quintessential Phases
OceanofPDF.com


















Anything that happens, happens.


OceanofPDF.com


















Anything that, in happening, causes something else to happen, causes something else to happen.


OceanofPDF.com


















Anything that, in happening, causes itself to happen again, happens again.


OceanofPDF.com


















It doesn't necessarily do it in chronological order, though.


OceanofPDF.com






1
The history of the Galaxy has got a little muddled, for a number of reasons: partly because those who are trying to keep track of it have got a little muddled, but also because some very muddling things have been happening anyway.
  One of the problems has to do with the speed of light and the difficulties involved in trying to exceed it. You can't. Nothing travels faster than the speed of light with the possible exception of bad news, which obeys its own special laws. The Hingefreel people of Arkintoofle Minor did try to build spaceships that were powered by bad news but they didn't work particularly well and were so extremely unwelcome whenever they arrived anywhere that there wasn't really any point in being there.
  So, by and large, the peoples of the Galaxy tended to languish in their own local muddles and the history of the Galaxy itself was, for a long time, largely cosmological.
  Which is not to say that people weren't trying. They tried sending off fleets of spaceships to do battle or business in distant parts, but these usually took thousands of years to get anywhere. By the time they eventually arrived, other forms of travel had been discovered which made use of hyperspace to circumvent the speed of light, so that whatever battles it was that the slower-than-light fleets had been sent to fight had already been taken care of centuries earlier by the time they actually got there.
  This didn't, of course, deter their crews from wanting to fight the battles anyway. They were trained, they were ready, they'd had a couple of thousand years' sleep, they'd come a long way to do a tough job and by Zarquon they were going to do it.
  This was when the first major muddles of Galactic history set in, with battles continually re-erupting centuries after the issues they had been fought over had supposedly been settled. However, these muddles were as nothing to the ones which historians had to try and unravel once time-travel was discovered and battles started pre-erupting hundreds of years before the issues even arose. When the Infinite Improbability Drive arrived and whole planets started turning unexpectedly into banana fruitcake, the great history


faculty of the University of Maximegalon finally gave up, closed itself down and surrendered its buildings to the rapidly growing joint faculty of Divinity and Water Polo, which had been after them for years.
  Which is all very well, of course, but it almost certainly means that no one will ever know for sure where, for instance, the Grebulons came from, or exactly what it was they wanted. And this is a pity, because if anybody had known anything about them, it is just possible that a most terrible catastrophe would have been averted - or at least would have had to find a different way to happen.


Click, hum.
  The huge grey Grebulon reconnaissance ship moved silently through the black void. It was travelling at fabulous, breathtaking speed, yet appeared, against the glimmering background of a billion distant stars, to be moving not at all. It was just one dark speck frozen against an infinite granularity of brilliant night.
  On board the ship, everything was as it had been for millennia, deeply dark and silent.
Click, hum.
At least, almost everything. Click, click, hum.
Click, hum, click, hum, click, hum. Click, click, click, click, click, hum. Hmmm.
  A low-level supervising program woke up a slightly higher level supervising program deep in the ship's semi-somnolent cyberbrain and reported to it that whenever it went click all it got was a hum.
  The higher level supervising program asked it what it was supposed to get, and the low-level supervising program said that it couldn't remember exactly, but thought it was probably more of a sort of distant satisfied sigh, wasn't it? It didn't know what this hum was. Click, hum, click, hum. That was all it was getting.
  The higher level supervising program considered this and didn't like it. It asked the low-level supervising program what exactly it was supervising and the low-level supervising program said it couldn't remember that either, just that it was something that was meant to go click, sigh every ten years or so, which usually happened without fail. It had tried to consult its error


look-up table but couldn't find it, which was why it had alerted the higher level supervising program to the problem.
  The higher level supervising program went to consult one of its own look-up tables to find out what the low-level supervising program was meant to be supervising.
It couldn't find the look-up table. Odd.
  It looked again. All it got was an error message. It tried to look up the error message in its error message look-up table and couldn't find that either. It allowed a couple of nanoseconds to go by while it went through all this again. Then it woke up its sector function supervisor.
  The sector function supervisor hit immediate problems. It called its supervising agent, which hit problems too. Within a few millionths of a second virtual circuits that had lain dormant, some for years, some for centuries, were flaring into life throughout the ship. Something, somewhere, had gone terribly wrong, but none of the supervising programs could tell what it was. At every level, vital instructions were missing, and the instructions about what to do in the event of discovering that vital instructions were missing, were also missing.
  Small modules of software - agents - surged through the logical pathways, grouping, consulting, re-grouping. They quickly established that the ship's memory, all the way back to its central mission module, was in tatters. No amount of interrogation could determine what it was that had happened. Even the central mission module itself seemed to be damaged.
  This made the whole problem very simple to deal with. Replace the central mission module. There was another one, a back-up, an exact duplicate of the original. It had to be physically replaced because, for safety reasons, there was no link whatsoever between the original and its back-up. Once the central mission module was replaced it could itself supervise the reconstruction of the rest of the system in every detail, and all would be well.
  Robots were instructed to bring the back-up central mission module from the shielded strong room, where they guarded it, to the ship's logic chamber for installation.
  This involved the lengthy exchange of emergency codes and protocols as the robots interrogated the agents as to the authenticity of the instructions. At last the robots were satisfied that all procedures were correct. They


unpacked the back-up central mission module from its storage housing, carried it out of the storage chamber, fell out of the ship and went spinning off into the void.
This provided the first major clue as to what it was that was wrong. Further investigation quickly established what it was that had happened.
A meteorite had knocked a large hole in the ship. The ship had not previously detected this because the meteorite had neatly knocked out that part of the ship's processing equipment which was supposed to detect if the ship had been hit by a meteorite.


The first thing to do was to try to seal up the hole. This turned out to be impossible, because the ship's sensors couldn't see that there was a hole, and the supervisors which should have said that the sensors weren't working properly weren't working properly and kept saying that the sensors were fine. The ship could only deduce the existence of the hole from the fact that the robots had clearly fallen out of it, taking its spare brain, which would have enabled it to see the hole, with them.
  The ship tried to think intelligently about this, failed, and then blanked out completely for a bit. It didn't realize it had blanked out, of course, because it had blanked out. It was merely surprised to see the stars jump. After the third time the stars jumped the ship finally realized that it must be blanking out, and that it was time to take some serious decisions.
It relaxed.
  Then it realized it hadn't actually taken the serious decisions yet and panicked. It blanked out again for a bit. When it awoke again it sealed all the bulkheads around where it knew the unseen hole must be.
  It clearly hadn't got to its destination yet, it thought, fitfully, but since it no longer had the faintest idea where its destination was or how to reach it, there seemed to be little point in continuing. It consulted what tiny scraps of instructions it could reconstruct from the tatters of its central mission module.
'Your !!!!! !!!!! !!!!! year mission is to !!!!! !!!!! !!!!!, !!!!!, !!!!! !!!!! !!!!!
!!!!!, land !!!!! !!!!! !!!!! a safe distance !!!!! !!!!! monitor it. !!!!! !!!!! !!!!! .
. .'
All of the rest was complete garbage.
  Before it blanked out for good the ship would have to pass on those instructions, such as they were, to its more primitive subsidiary systems.


It must also revive all of its crew.
  There was another problem. While the crew was in hibernation, the minds of all of its members, their memories, their identities and their understanding of what they had come to do, had all been transferred into the ship's central mission module for safe-keeping. The crew would not have the faintest idea of who they were or what they were doing there. Oh well.
  Just before it blanked out for the final time, the ship realized that its engines were beginning to give out too.
  The ship and its revived and confused crew coasted on under the control of its subsidiary automatic systems, which simply looked to land wherever they could find to land and monitor whatever they could find to monitor.
  As far as finding something to land on was concerned, they didn't do very well. The planet they found was desolately cold and lonely, so achingly far from the sun that should warm it, that it took all of the Envir- O-Form machinery and LifeSupport-O-Systems they carried with them to render it, or at least enough parts of it, habitable. There were better planets nearer in, but the ship's Strateej-O-Mat was obviously locked into Lurk mode and chose the most distant and unobtrusive planet and, furthermore, would not be gainsaid by anybody other than the ship's Chief Strategic Officer. Since everybody on the ship had lost their minds no one knew who the Chief Strategic Officer was or, even if he could have been identified, how he was supposed to go about gainsaying the ship's Strateej-O-Mat.
  As far as finding something to monitor was concerned, though, they hit solid gold.


2


One of the extraordinary things about life is the sort of places it's prepared to put up with living. Anywhere it can get some kind of a grip, whether it's the intoxicating seas of Santraginus V, where the fish never seem to care whatever the heck kind of direction they swim in, the fire storms of Frastra, where, they say, life begins at 40,000 degrees, or just burrowing around in the lower intestine of a rat for the sheer unadulterated hell of it, life will always find a way of hanging on in somewhere.
  It will even live in New York, though it's hard to know why. In the winter time the temperature falls well below the legal minimum, or rather it would


do if anybody had the common sense to set a legal minimum. The last time anybody made a list of the top hundred character attributes of New Yorkers, common sense snuck in at number 79.
  In the summer it's too darn hot. It's one thing to be the sort of life form that thrives on heat and finds, as the Frastrans do, that the temperature range between 40,000 and 40,004 is very equable, but it's quite another to be the sort of animal that has to wrap itself up in lots of other animals at one point in your planet's orbit, and then find, half an orbit later, that your skin's bubbling.
  Spring is over-rated. A lot of the inhabitants of New York will honk on mightily about the pleasures of spring, but if they actually knew the first thing about the pleasures of spring they would know of at least five thousand nine hundred and eighty-three better places to spend it than New York, and that's just on the same latitude.
  Fall, though, is the worst. Few things are worse than fall in New York. Some of the things that live in the lower intestines of rats would disagree, but most of the things that live in the lower intestines of rats are highly disagreeable anyway, so their opinion can and should be discounted. When it's fall in New York, the air smells as if someone's been frying goats in it, and if you are keen to breathe, the best plan is to open a window and stick your head in a building.
  Tricia McMillan loved New York. She kept on telling herself this over and over again. The Upper West Side. Yeah. Mid Town. Hey, great retail. SoHo. The East Village. Clothes. Books. Sushi. Italian. Delis. Yo.
  Movies. Yo also. Tricia had just been to see Woody Allen's new movie, which was all about the angst of being neurotic in New York. He had made one or two other movies that had explored the same theme, and Tricia wondered if he had ever considered moving, but heard that he had set his face against the idea. So: more movies, she guessed.
  Tricia loved New York because loving New York was a good career move. It was a good retail move, a good cuisine move, not a good taxi move or a great quality of pavement move, but definitely a career move that ranked amongst the highest and the best. Tricia was a TV anchor person, and New York was where most of the world's TV was anchored. Tricia's TV anchoring had been done exclusively in Britain up to that point: regional news, then breakfast news, early evening news. She would have been called, if the lang uage allowed, a rapidly rising anchor, but . . . hey,


this is television, what does it matter? She was a rapidly rising anchor. She had what it took: great hair, a profound understanding of strategic lip gloss, the intelligence to understand the world and a tiny secret interior deadness which meant she didn't care. Everybody has their moment of great opportunity in life. If you happen to miss the one you care about, then everything else in life becomes eerily easy.
  Tricia had only ever missed one opportunity. These days it didn't even make her tremble quite so much as it used to to think about it. She guessed it was that bit of her that had gone dead.
  NBS needed a new anchor. Mo Minetti was leaving the US/AM breakfast show to have a baby. She had been offered a mind-bubbling amount of money to have it on the show, but she had declined, unexpectedly, on grounds of personal privacy and taste. Teams of NBS lawyers had sieved through her contract to see if these constituted legitimate grounds, but in the end, reluctantly, they had to let her go. This was, for them, particularly galling because normally 'reluctantly letting someone go' was an expression that had its boot on quite another foot.
  The word was out that maybe, just maybe, a British accent would fit. The hair, the skin tone and the bridgework would have to be up to American network standards, but there had been a lot of British accents up there thanking their mothers for their Oscars, a lot of British accents singing on Broadway, and some unusually big audiences tuning in to British accents in wigs on Masterpiece Theatre. British accents were telling jokes on David Letterman and Jay Leno. Nobody understood the jokes but they were really responding to the accents, so maybe it was time, just maybe. A British accent on US/AM. Well, hell.
  That was why Tricia was here. This was why loving New York was a great career move.
  It wasn't, of course, the stated reason. Her TV company back in the UK would hardly have stumped up the air fare and hotel bill for her to go job- hunting in Manhattan. Since she was chasing something like ten times her present salary, they might have felt that she could have forked out her own expenses, but she'd found a story, found a pretext, kept very quiet about anything ulterior, and they'd stumped up for the trip. A business-class ticket, of course, but her face was known and she'd smiled herself an upgrade. The right moves had got her a nice room at the Brentwood and here she was, wondering what to do next.


  The word on the street was one thing, making contact was another. She had a couple of names, a couple of numbers, but all it took was being put on indeterminate hold a couple of times and she was back at square one. She'd put out feelers, left messages, but so far none had been returned. The actual job she had come to do she had done in a morning; the imagined job she was after was only shimmering tantalizingly on an unreachable horizon.
Shit.
  She caught a cab from the movie theatre back to the Brentwood. The cab couldn't get close to the kerb because a big stretch limo was hogging all the available space and she had to squeeze her way past it. She walked out of the fetid, goat-frying air and into the blessed cool of the lobby. The fine cotton of her blouse was sticking like grime to her skin. Her hair felt as if she'd bought it at a fairground on a stick. At the front desk she asked if there were any messages, grimly expecting none. There was one.
Oh . . .
Good.
  It had worked. She had gone out to the movie specifically in order to make the phone ring. She couldn't bear sitting in a hotel room waiting.
  She wondered. Should she open the message down here? Her clothes were itching and she longed to take them all off and just lie on the bed. She had turned the air conditioning way down to its bottom temperature setting, way up to its top fan setting. What she wanted more than anything else in the world at the moment was goose pimples. Then a hot shower, then a cool one, then lying on a towel, on the bed again, drying in the air conditioning. Then reading the message. Maybe more goose pimples. Maybe all sorts of things.
  No. What she wanted more than anything else in the world was a job in American television at ten times her current salary. More than anything else in the world. In the world. What she wanted more than anything else at all was no longer a live issue.
  She sat on a chair in the lobby, under a kentia palm, and opened the little cellophane-windowed envelope.
  'Please call,' it said. 'Not happy,' and gave a number. The name was Gail Andrews.
Gail Andrews.
  It wasn't a name she was expecting. It caught her unawares. She recognized it, but couldn't immediately say why. Was she Andy Martin's


secretary? Hilary Bass's assistant? Martin and Bass were the two major contact calls she had made, or tried to make, at NBS. And what did 'Not happy' mean?
'Not happy?'
  She was completely bewildered. Was this Woody Allen trying to contact her under an assumed name? It was a 212 area code number. So it was someone in New York. Who was not happy. Well, that narrowed it down a bit, didn't it?
She went back to the receptionist at the desk.
  'I have a problem with this message you just gave me,' she said. 'Someone I don't know has tried to call me and says she's not happy.'
The receptionist peered at the note with a frown. 'Do you know this person?' he said.
'No,' Tricia said.
  'Hmmm,' said the receptionist. 'Sounds like she's not happy about something.'
'Yes,' said Tricia.
'Looks like there's a name here,' said the receptionist. 'Gail Andrews.
Do you know anybody of that name?' 'No,' said Tricia.
'Any idea what she's unhappy about?' 'No,' said Tricia.
'Have you called the number? There's a number here.'
  'No,' said Tricia, 'you only just gave me the note. I'm just trying to get some more information before I ring back. Perhaps I could talk to the person who took the call?'
  'Hmmm,' said the receptionist, scrutinizing the note carefully. 'I don't think we have anybody called Gail Andrews here.'
'No, I realize that,' said Tricia. 'I just-' 'I'm Gail Andrews.'
The voice came from behind Tricia. She turned round. 'I'm sorry?'
'I'm Gail Andrews. You interviewed me this morning.' 'Oh. Oh good heavens yes,' said Tricia, slightly flustered.
  'I left the message for you a few hours ago. I hadn't heard so I came by. I didn't want to miss you.'
'Oh. No. Of course,' said Tricia, trying hard to get up to speed.


  'I don't know about this,' said the receptionist, for whom speed was not an issue. 'Would you like me to try this number for you now?'
'No, that'll be fine, thanks,' said Tricia. 'I can handle it now.'
  'I can call this room number here for you if that'll help,' said the receptionist, peering at the note again.
  'No, that won't be necessary, thanks,' said Tricia. 'That's my own room number. I'm the one the message was for. I think we've sorted this out now.'
'You have a nice day now,' said the receptionist.
Tricia didn't particularly want to have a nice day. She was busy.
  She also didn't want to talk to Gail Andrews. She had a very strict cut-off point as far as fraternizing with the Christians was concerned. Her colleagues called her interview subjects Christians and would often cross themselves when they saw one walking innocently into the studio to face Tricia, particularly if Tricia was smiling warmly and showing her teeth.
She turned and smiled frostily, wondering what to do.
  Gail Andrews was a well-groomed woman in her mid-forties. Her clothes fell within the boundaries defined by expensive good taste, but were definitely huddled up at the floatier end of those boundaries. She was an astrologer - a famous and, if rumour were true, influential astrologer, having allegedly influenced a number of decisions made by the late President Hudson, including everything from which flavour of cream whip to have on which day of the week, to whether or not to bomb Damascus.
  Tricia had savaged her more than somewhat. Not on the grounds of whether or not the stories about the President were true, that was old hat now. At the time Ms Andrews had emphatically denied advising President Hudson on anything other than personal, spiritual or dietary matters, which did not, apparently, include the bombing of Damascus. ('NOTHING PERSONAL, DAMASCUS!' the tabloids had hooted at the time.)
  No, this was a neat topical little angle that Tricia had come up with about the whole issue of astrology itself. Ms Andrews had not been entirely ready for it. Tricia, on the other hand, was not entirely ready for a re-match in the hotel lobby. What to do?
  'I can wait for you in the bar, if you need a few minutes,' said Gail Andrews. 'But I would like to talk to you, and I'm leaving the city tonight.'
  She seemed to be slightly anxious about something rather than aggrieved or irate.


'OK,' said Tricia. 'Give me ten minutes.'
  She went up to her room. Apart from anything else, she had so little faith in the ability of the guy on the message desk at reception to deal with anything as complicated as a message that she wanted to be doubly certain that there wasn't a note under the door. It wouldn't be the first time that messages at the desk and messages under the door had been completely at odds with each other.
There wasn't one.
The message light on the phone was flashing, though. She hit the message button and got the hotel operator.
'You have a message from Gary Andress,' said the operator. 'Yes?' said Tricia. An unfamiliar name. 'What does it say?' 'Not hippy,' said the operator.
'Not what?' said Tricia.
  'Hippy. What it says. Guy says he's not a hippy. I guess he wanted you to know that. You want the number?'
  As she started to dictate the number Tricia suddenly realized that this was just a garbled version of the message she had already had.
'OK, OK,' she said. 'Are there any other messages for me?' 'Room number?'
  Tricia couldn't work out why the operator should suddenly ask for her number this late in the conversation, but gave it to her anyway.
'Name?'
'McMillan, Tricia McMillan.' Tricia spelt it, patiently. 'Not Mr MacManus?'
'No.'
'No more messages for you.' Click.
  Tricia sighed and dialled again. This time she gave her name and room number all over again, up front. The operator showed not the slightest glimmer of recognition that they had been speaking less than ten seconds ago.
  'I'm going to be in the bar,' Tricia explained. 'In the bar. If a phone call comes through for me, please would you put it through to me in the bar?'
'Name?'
  They went through it all a couple more times till Tricia was certain that everything that possibly could be clear was as clear as it possibly could be.


  She showered, put on fresh clothes and retouched her make-up with the speed of a professional, and, looking at her bed with a sigh, left the room again.
She had half a mind just to sneak off and hide. No. Not really.
  She had a look at herself in the mirror in the elevator lobby while she was waiting. She looked cool and in charge, and if she could fool herself she could fool anybody.
  She was just going to have to tough it out with Gail Andrews. OK, she had given her a hard time. Sorry but that's the game we're all in - that sort of thing. Ms Andrews had agreed to do the interview because she had a new book out and TV exposure was free publicity. But there's no such thing as a free launch. No, she edited that line out again.
What had happened was this:
  Last week astronomers had announced that they had at last discovered a tenth planet, out beyond the orbit of Pluto. They had been searching for it for years, guided by certain orbital anomalies in the outer planets, and now they'd found it and they were all terribly pleased, and everyone was terribly happy for them and so on. The planet was named Persephone, but rapidly nicknamed Rupert after some astronomer's parrot - there was some tediously heart-warming story attached to this - and that was all very wonderful and lovely.
  Tricia had followed the story with, for various reasons, considerable interest.
  Then, while she had been casting around for a good excuse to go to New York at her TV company's expense she had happened to notice a press release about Gail Andrews, and her new book, You and Your Planets.
  Gail Andrews was not exactly a household name, but the moment you mentioned President Hudson, cream whips and the amputation of Damascus (the world had moved on from surgical strikes. The official term had in fact been 'Damascectomy', meaning the 'taking out' of Damascus), everyone remembered who you meant.
Tricia saw an angle here which she quickly sold to her producer.
  Surely the notion that great lumps of rock whirling in space knew something about your day that you didn't must take a bit of a knock from the fact that there was suddenly a new lump of rock out there that nobody had known about before.


That must throw a few calculations out, mustn't it?
  What about all those star charts and planetary motions and so on? We all knew (apparently) what happened when Neptune was in Virgo, and so on, but what about when Rupert was rising? Wouldn't the whole of astrology have to be rethought? Wouldn't now perhaps be a good time to own up that it was all just a load of hogwash and instead take up pig-farming, the principles of which were founded on some kind of rational basis? If we'd known about Rupert three years ago, might President Hudson have been eating the boysenberry flavour on Thursday rather than Friday? Might Damascus still be standing? That sort of thing.
  Gail Andrews had taken it all reasonably well. She was just starting to recover from the initial onslaught when she made the rather serious mistake of trying to shake Tricia off by talking smoothly about diurnal arcs, right ascensions and some of the more abstruse areas of three-dimensional trigonometry.
  To her shock she discovered that everything she delivered to Tricia came right back at her with more spin on it than she could cope with. Nobody had warned Gail that being a TV bimbo was, for Tricia, her second stab at a role in life. Behind her Chanel lip gloss, her coupe sauvage and her crystal-blue contact lenses lay a brain that had acquired for itself, in an earlier, abandoned phase of her life, a first-class degree in mathematics and a doctorate in astrophysics.


As she was getting into the elevator, Tricia, slightly preoccupied, realized she had left her bag in her room and wondered whether to duck back out and get it. No. It was probably safer where it was and there wasn't anything she particularly needed in it. She let the door close behind her.
  Besides, she told herself, taking a deep breath, if life had taught her anything it was this:
Never go back for your bag.
  As the elevator went down she stared up at the ceiling in a rather intent way. Anyone who didn't know Tricia McMillan better would have said that that was exactly the way people sometimes stared upwards when they were trying to hold back tears. She must have been staring at the tiny security video camera mounted up in the corner.


She marched rather briskly out of the elevator a minute later, and went up to the reception desk again.
  'Now, I'm going to write this out,' she said, 'because I don't want anything to go wrong.'
  She wrote her name in large letters on a piece of paper, then her room number, then 'IN THE BAR' and gave it to the receptionist, who looked at it.
'That's in case there's a message for me. OK?' The receptionist continued to look at it.
'You want me to see if she's in her room?' he said.


Two minutes later, Tricia swivelled into the bar seat next to Gail Andrews, who was sitting in front of a glass of white wine.
  'You struck me as the sort of person who preferred to sit up at the bar rather than demurely at a table,' she said.
This was true, and caught Tricia a little by surprise. 'Vodka?' said Gail.
  'Yes,' said Tricia, suspiciously. She just stopped herself asking, 'How did you know?' but Gail answered anyway.
'I asked the barman,' she said, with a kindly smile.
  The barman had her vodka ready for her and slid it charmingly across the glossy mahogany.
'Thank you,' said Tricia, stirring it sharply.
  She didn't know quite what to make out of all this sudden niceness and was determined not to be wrong-footed by it. People in New York were not nice to each other without reason.
  'Ms Andrews,' she said, firmly, 'I'm sorry that you're not happy. I know you probably feel I was a bit rough with you this morning, but astrology is, after all, just popular entertainment, which is fine. It's part of showbiz and it's a part that you have done well out of and good luck to you. It's fun. It's not a science, though, and it shouldn't be mistaken for one. I think that's something we both managed to demonstrate very successfully together this morning, while at the same time generating some popular entertainment, which is what we both do for a living. I'm sorry if you have a problem with that.'
'I'm perfectly happy,' said Gail Andrews.


  'Oh,' said Tricia, not quite certain what to make of this. 'It said in your message that you were not happy.'
  'No,' said Gail Andrews. 'I said in my message that I thought you were not happy, and I was just wondering why.'
Tricia felt as if she had been kicked in the back of the head. She blinked. 'What?' she said quietly.
  'To do with the stars. You seemed very angry and unhappy about something to do with stars and planets when we were having our discussion, and it's been bothering me, which is why I came to see if you were all right.'
  Tricia stared at her. 'Ms Andrews-' she started, and then realized that the way she had said it sounded exactly angry and unhappy and rather undermined the protest she had been trying to make.
'Please call me Gail, if that's OK.' Tricia just looked bewildered.
  'I know that astrology isn't a science,' said Gail. 'Of course it isn't. It's just an arbitrary set of rules like chess or tennis or, what's that strange thing you British play?'
'Er, cricket? Self-loathing?'
  'Parliamentary democracy. The rules just kind of got there. They don't make any kind of sense except in terms of themselves. But when you start to exercise those rules, all sorts of processes start to happen and you start to find out all sorts of stuff about people. In astrology the rules happen to be about stars and planets, but they could be about ducks and drakes for all the difference it would make. It's just a way of thinking about a problem which lets the shape of that problem begin to emerge. The more rules, the tinier the rules, the more arbitrary they are, the better. It's like throwing a handful of fine graphite dust on a piece of paper to see where the hidden indentations are. It lets you see the words that were written on the piece of paper above it that's now been taken away and hidden. The graphite's not important. It's just the means of revealing their indentations. So you see, astrology's nothing to do with astronomy. It's just to do with people thinking about people.
  'So when you got so, I don't know, so emotionally focused on stars and planets this morning, I began to think, she's not angry about astrology, she really is angry and unhappy about actual stars and planets. People usually only get that unhappy and angry when they've lost something. That's all I


could think and I couldn't make any more sense of it than that. So I came to see if you were OK.'
Tricia was stunned.
  One part of her brain had already got started on all sorts of stuff. It was busy constructing all sorts of rebuttals to do with how ridiculous newspaper horoscopes were and the sort of statistical tricks they played on people. But gradually it petered out because it realized that the rest of her brain wasn't listening. She had been completely stunned.
  She had just been told, by a total stranger, something she'd kept completely secret for seventeen years.
She turned to look at Gail. 'I . . .'
She stopped.
  A tiny security camera up behind the bar had turned to follow her movement. This completely flummoxed her. Most people would not have noticed it. It was not designed to be noticed. It was not designed to suggest that nowadays even an expensive and elegant hotel in New York couldn't be sure that its clientele wasn't suddenly going to pull a gun or not wear a tie. But carefully hidden though it was behind the vodka, it couldn't deceive the finely honed instinct of a TV anchor person, which was to know exactly when a camera was turning to look at her.
'Is something wrong?' asked Gail.
'No, I . . . I have to say that you've rather astonished me,' said Tricia.
She decided to ignore the security camera. It was just her imagination playing tricks with her because she had television so much on her mind today. It wasn't the first time it had happened. A traffic-monitoring camera, she was convinced, had swung round to follow her as she walked past it, and a security camera in Bloomingdales had seemed to make a particular point of watching her trying on hats. She was obviously going dotty. She had even imagined that a bird in Central Park had been peering at her rather intently.
  She decided to put it out of her mind and took a sip of her vodka. Someone was walking round the bar asking people if they were Mr MacManus.
  'OK,' she said, suddenly blurting it out. 'I don't know how you worked it out, but . . .'


  'I didn't work it out, as you put it. I just listened to what you were saying.'
'What I lost, I think, was a whole other life.'
  'Everybody does that. Every moment of every day. Every single decision we make, every breath we draw, opens some doors and closes many others. Most of them we don't notice. Some we do. Sounds like you noticed one.'
'Oh yes, I noticed,' said Tricia. 'All right. Here it is. It's very simple.
Many years ago I met a guy at a party. He said he was from another planet and did I want to go along with him. I said, yes, OK. It was that kind of party. I said to him to wait while I went to get my bag and then I'd be happy to go off to another planet with him. He said I wouldn't need my bag. I said he obviously came from a very backward planet or he'd know that a woman always needed to take her bag with her. He got a bit impatient, but I wasn't going to be a complete pushover just because he said he was from another planet.
  'I went upstairs. Took me a while to find my bag, and then there was someone else in the bathroom. Came down and he was gone.'
Tricia paused.
'And . . . ?' said Gail.
  'The garden door was open. I went outside. There were lights. Some kind of gleaming thing. I was just in time to see it rise up into the sky, shoot silently up through the clouds and disappear. That was it. End of story. End of one life, beginning of another. But hardly a moment of this life goes by that I don't wonder about some other me. A me that didn't go back for her bag. I feel like she's out there somewhere and I'm walking in her shadow.'
  A member of the hotel staff was now going round the bar asking people if they were Mr Miller. Nobody was.
'You really think this . . . person was from another planet?' asked Gail. 'Oh, certainly. There was the spacecraft. Oh, and also he had two heads.' 'Two? Didn't anybody else notice?'
'It was a fancy-dress party.' 'I see . . .'
  'And he had a bird cage over it, of course. With a cloth over the cage. Pretended he had a parrot. He tapped on the cage and it did a lot of stupid "Pretty Polly" stuff and squawking and so on. Then he pulled the cloth back for a moment and roared with laughter. There was another head in there, laughing along with him. It was a worrying moment, I can tell you.'


'I think you probably did the right thing, dear, don't you?' said Gail. 'No,' said Tricia. 'No, I don't. And I couldn't carry on doing what I was
doing either. I was an astrophysicist, you see. You can't be an astrophysicist properly if you've actually met someone from another planet who's got a second head that pretends to be a parrot. You just can't do it. I couldn't, at least.'
  'I can see it would be hard. And that's probably why you tend to be a little hard on other people who talk what sounds like complete nonsense.'
'Yes,' said Tricia. 'I expect you're right. I'm sorry.' 'That's OK.'
'You're the first person I've ever told this, by the way.' 'I wondered. You married?'
  'Er, no. So hard to tell these days, isn't it? But you're right to ask because that was probably the reason. I came very close a few times, mostly because I wanted to have a kid. But every guy ended up asking why I was constantly looking over his shoulder. What do you tell someone? At one point I even thought I might just go to a sperm bank and take pot luck. Have somebody's child at random.'
'You can't seriously do that, can you?'
  Tricia laughed. 'Probably not. I never quite went and found out for real. Never quite did it. Story of my life. Never quite did the real thing. That's why I'm in television, I guess. Nothing is real.'
'Excuse me, lady, your name Tricia McMillan?'
  Tricia looked round in surprise. There was a man standing there in a chauffeur's hat.
'Yes,' she said, instantly pulling herself back together again.
  'Lady, I been looking for you for about an hour. Hotel said they didn't have anybody of that name, but I checked back with Mr Martin's office and they said that this was definitely where you were staying. So I ask again, they still say they never heard of you, so I get them to page you anyway and they can't find you. In the end I get the office to fax a picture of you through to the car and have a look myself.'
He looked at his watch.
'May be a bit late now, but do you want to go anyway?' Tricia was stunned.
'Mr Martin? You mean Andy Martin at NBS?' 'That's correct, lady. Screen test for US/AM.'


  Tricia shot up out of her seat. She couldn't even bear to think of all the messages she'd heard for Mr MacManus and Mr Miller.
  'Only we have to hurry,' said the chauffeur. 'As I heard it, Mr Martin thinks it might be worth trying a British accent. His boss at the network is dead against the idea. That's Mr Zwingler, and I happen to know he's flying out to the coast this evening because I'm the one has to pick him up and take him to the airport.'
'OK,' said Tricia, 'I'm ready. Let's go.' 'OK, lady. It's the big limo out the front.'
Tricia turned back to Gail. 'I'm sorry,' she said.
'Go! Go!' said Gail. 'And good luck. I've enjoyed meeting you.' Tricia made to reach for her bag for some cash.
'Damn,' she said. She'd left it upstairs.
'Drinks are on me,' insisted Gail. 'Really. It's been very interesting.' Tricia sighed.
'Look, I'm really sorry about this morning and . . .'
  'Don't say another word. I'm fine. It's only astrology. It's harmless. It's not the end of the world.'
'Thanks.' On an impulse Tricia gave her a hug.
  'You got everything?' said the chauffeur. 'You don't want to pick up your bag or anything?'
  'If there's one thing that life's taught me,' said Tricia, 'it's never go back for your bag.'


Just a little over an hour later, Tricia sat on one of the pair of beds in her hotel room. For a few minutes she didn't move. She just stared at her bag, which was sitting innocently on top of the other bed.
  In her hand was a note from Gail Andrews, saying, 'Don't be too disappointed. Do ring if you want to talk about it. If I were you I'd stay in at home tomorrow night. Get some rest. But don't mind me, and don't worry. It's only astrology. It's not the end of the world. Gail.'
  The chauffeur had been dead right. In fact the chauffeur seemed to know more about what was going on inside NBS than any other single person she had encountered in the organization. Martin had been keen, Zwingler had not. She had had her one shot at proving Martin right and she had blown it.
Oh well. Oh well, oh well, oh well.


  Time to go home. Time to phone the airline and see if she could still get the red-eye back to Heathrow tonight. She reached for the big phone directory.
Oh. First things first.
  She put down the directory again, picked up her handbag, and took it through to the bathroom. She put it down and took out the small plastic case which held her contact lenses, without which she had been unable properly to read either the script or the autocue.
  As she dabbed each tiny plastic cup into her eyes she reflected that if there was one thing life had taught her it was that there are times when you do not go back for your bag and other times when you do. It had yet to teach her to distinguish between the two types of occasion.


3


The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has, in what we laughingly call the past, had a great deal to say on the subject of parallel universes. Very little of this is, however, at all comprehensible to anyone below the level of Advanced God, and since it is now well established that all known gods came into existence a good three-millionths of a second after the Universe began rather than, as they usually claimed, the previous week, they already have a great deal of explaining to do as it is, and are therefore not available for comment on matters of deep physics at this time.
  One encouraging thing the Guide does have to say on the subject of parallel universes is that you don't stand the remotest chance of understanding it. You can therefore say 'What?' and 'Eh?' and even go cross-eyed and start to blither if you like without any fear of making a fool of yourself.
  The first thing to realize about parallel universes, the Guide says, is that they are not parallel.
  It is also important to realize that they are not, strictly speaking, universes either, but it is easiest if you try and realize that a little later, after you've realized that everything you've realized up to that moment is not true.
  The reason they are not universes is that any given universe is not actually a thing as such, but is just a way of looking at what is technically


known as the WSOGMM, or Whole Sort of General Mish Mash. The Whole Sort of General Mish Mash doesn't actually exist either, but is just the sum total of all the different ways there would be of looking at it if it did.
  The reason they are not parallel is the same reason that the sea is not parallel. It doesn't mean anything. You can slice the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash any way you like and you will generally come up with something that someone will call home.
Please feel free to blither now.


The Earth with which we are here concerned, because of its particular orientation in the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash, was hit by a neutrino that other Earths were not.
A neutrino is not a big thing to be hit by.
  In fact it's hard to think of anything much smaller by which one could reasonably hope to be hit. And it's not as if being hit by neutrinos was in itself a particularly unusual event for something the size of the Earth. Far from it. It would be an unusual nanosecond in which the Earth was not hit by several billion passing neutrinos.
  It all depends on what you mean by 'hit', of course, seeing as matter consists almost entirely of nothing at all. The chances of a neutrino actually hitting something as it travels through all this howling emptiness are roughly comparable to that of dropping a ball bearing at random from a cruising 747 and hitting, say, an egg sandwich.
  Anyway, this neutrino hit something. Nothing terribly important in the scale of things, you might say. But the problem with saying something like that is that you would be talking cross-eyed badger spit. Once something actually happens somewhere in something as wildly complicated as the Universe, Kevin knows where it will all end up - where 'Kevin' is any random entity that doesn't know nothin' about nothin'.
This neutrino struck an atom.
  The atom was part of a molecule. The molecule was part of a nucleic acid. The nucleic acid was part of a gene. The gene was part of a genetic recipe for growing . . . and so on. The upshot was that a plant ended up growing an extra leaf. In Essex. Or what would, after a lot of palaver and local difficulties of a geological nature, become Essex.


  The plant was a clover. It threw its weight, or rather its seed, around extremely effectively and rapidly became the world's dominant type of clover. The precise causal connection between this tiny biological happenstance and a few other minor variations that exist in that slice of the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash - such as Tricia McMillan failing to leave with Zaphod Beeblebrox, abnormally low sales of pecan-flavoured ice cream and the fact that the Earth on which all this occurred did not get demolished by the Vogons to make way for a new hyperspace bypass - is currently sitting at number 4,763,984,132 on the research project priority list at what was once the History Department of the University of Maximegalon, and no one currently at the prayer meeting by the poolside appears to feel any sense of urgency about the problem.


4


Tricia began to feel that the world was conspiring against her. She knew that this was a perfectly normal way to feel after an overnight flight going east, when you suddenly have a whole other mysteriously threatening day to deal with for which you are not the least bit prepared. But still.
There were marks on her lawn.
  She didn't really care about marks on her lawn very much. Marks on her lawn could go and take a running jump as far as she was concerned. It was Saturday morning. She had just got home from New York feeling tired, crabby and paranoid, and all she wanted to do was go to bed with the radio on quietly and gradually fall asleep to the sound of Ned Sherrin being terribly clever about something.
  But Eric Bartlett was not going to let her get away with not making a thorough inspection of the marks. Eric was the old gardener who came in from the village on Saturday mornings to poke around at her garden with a stick. He didn't believe in people coming in from New York first thing in the morning. Didn't hold with it. Went against nature. He believed in virtually everything else, though.
  'Probably them space aliens,' he said, bending over and prodding at the edges of the small indentations with his stick. 'Hear a lot about space aliens these days. I expect it's them.'


  'Do you?' said Tricia, looking furtively at her watch. Ten minutes, she reckoned. Ten minutes she'd be able to stay standing up. Then she would simply keel over, whether she was in her bedroom or still out here in the garden. That was if she just had to stand. If she also had to nod intelligently and say 'Do you?' from time to time, it might cut it down to five.
  'Oh yes,' said Eric. 'They come down here, land on your lawn, and then buzz off again, sometimes with your cat. Mrs Williams at the Post Office, her cat - you know, the ginger one? - it got abducted by space aliens.
Course, they brought it back the next day but it were in a very odd mood. Kept prowling around all morning, and then falling asleep in the afternoon. Used to be the other way round, is the point. Sleep in the morning, prowl in the afternoon. Jet lag, you see, from being in an interplanetary craft.'
'I see,' said Tricia.
  'They dyed it tabby, too, she says. These marks are exactly the sort of marks that their landing pods would probably make.'
'You don't think it's the lawn mower?' asked Tricia.
  'If the marks were more round, I'd say, but these are just off-round, you see. Altogether more alien in shape.'
  'It's just that you mentioned the lawn mower was playing up and needed fixing or it might start gouging holes in the lawn.'
  'I did say that, Miss Tricia, and I stand by what I said. I'm not saying it's not the lawn mower for definite, I'm just saying what seems to me more likely given the shapes of the holes. They come in over these trees, you see, in their landing pods . . .'
'Eric . . .' said Tricia, patiently.
  'Tell you what, though, Miss Tricia,' said Eric, 'I will take a look at the mower, like I meant to last week, and leave you to get on with whatever you're wanting to.'
  'Thank you, Eric,' said Tricia. 'I'm going to bed now, in fact. Help yourself to anything you want in the kitchen.'
  'Thank you, Miss Tricia, and good luck to you,' said Eric. He bent over and picked something from the lawn.
'There,' he said. 'Three-leaf clover. Good luck, you see.'
  He peered at it closely to check that it was a real three-leaf clover and not just a regular four-leaf one that one of the leaves had fallen off. 'If I were you, though, I'd watch for signs of alien activity in the area.' He scanned the horizon keenly. 'Particularly from over there in the Henley direction.'


'Thank you, Eric,' said Tricia again. 'I will.'
  She went to bed and dreamt fitfully of parrots and other birds. In the afternoon she got up and prowled around restlessly, not certain what to do with the rest of the day, or indeed the rest of her life. She spent at least an hour dithering, trying to make up her mind whether to head up into town and go to Stavro's for the evening. This was the currently fashionable spot for high-flying media people, and seeing a few friends there might help her ease herself back into the swing of things. She decided at last she would go. It was good. It was fun there. She was very fond of Stavro himself, who was a Greek with a German father - a fairly odd combination. Tricia had been to the Alpha a couple of nights earlier, which was Stavro's original club in New York, now run by his brother Karl, who thought of himself as a German with a Greek mother. Stavro would be very happy to be told that Karl was making a bit of a pig's ear of running the New York club, so Tricia would go and make him happy. There was little love lost between Stavro and Karl Mueller.
OK. That's what she would do.
  She then spent another hour dithering about what to wear. At last she settled on a smart little black dress she'd got in New York. She phoned a friend to see who was likely to be at the club that evening, and was told that it was closed this evening for a private wedding party.
  She thought that trying to live life according to any plan you actually work out is like trying to buy ingredients for a recipe from the supermarket. You get one of those trolleys which simply will not go in the direction you push it and end up just having to buy completely different stuff. What do you do with it? What do you do with the recipe? She didn't know.
Anyway, that night an alien spacecraft landed on her lawn.


5


She watched it coming in from the Henley direction with mild curiosity at first, wondering what those lights were. Living, as she did, not a million miles from Heathrow, she was used to seeing lights in the sky. Not usually so late in the evening, or so low, though, which was why she was mildly curious.


  When whatever it was began to come closer and closer her curiosity began to turn to bemusement.
  Hmmm, she thought, which was about as far as she could get with thinking. She was still feeling dopey and jet-lagged and the messages that one part of her brain was busy sending to another were not necessarily arriving on time or the right way up. She left the kitchen where she'd been fixing herself a coffee and went to open the back door which led out to the garden. She took a deep breath of cool evening air, stepped outside and looked up.
  There was something roughly the size of a large camper van parked about a hundred feet above her lawn.
It was really there. Hanging there. Almost silent. Something moved deep inside her.
  Her arms dropped slowly down to her side. She didn't notice the scalding coffee slopping over her foot. She was hardly breathing as slowly, inch by inch, foot by foot, the craft came downwards. Its lights were playing softly over the ground as if probing and feeling it. They played over her.
It seemed beyond all hope that she should be given her chance again.
Had he found her? Had he come back?
  The craft dropped down and down until at last it had settled quietly on her lawn. It didn't look exactly like the one she had seen departing all those years ago, she thought, but flashing lights in the night sky are hard to resolve into clear shapes.
Silence.
Then a click and a hum.
Then another click and another hum. Click hum, click hum.
A doorway slid open, spilling light towards her across the lawn. She waited, tingling.
A figure stood silhouetted in the light, then another, and another.
Wide eyes blinked slowly at her. Hands were slowly raised in greeting. 'McMillan?' a voice said at last, a strange, thin voice that managed the
syllables with difficulty. 'Tricia McMillan. Ms Tricia McMillan?' 'Yes,' said Tricia, almost soundlessly.
'We have been monitoring you.' 'M . . . monitoring? Me?'
'Yes.'


  They looked at her for a while, their large eyes moving up and down her very slowly.
'You look smaller in real life,' one said at last. 'What?' said Tricia.
'Yes.'
  'I . . . I don't understand,' said Tricia. She hadn't expected any of this, of course, but even for something she hadn't expected to begin with it wasn't going the way she expected. At last she said, 'Are you . . . are you from . . . Zaphod?'
  This question seemed to cause a little consternation among the three figures. They conferred with each other in some skittering language of their own and then turned back to her.
'We don't think so. Not as far as we know,' said one.
'Where is Zaphod?' said another, looking up into the night sky. 'I . . . I don't know,' said Tricia, helplessly.
'Is it far from here? Which direction? We don't know.'
  Tricia realized with a sinking heart that they had no idea who she was talking about. Or even what she was talking about. And she had no idea what they were talking about. She put her hopes tightly away again and snapped her brain back into gear. There was no point in being disappointed. She had to wake up to the fact that she had here the journalistic scoop of the century. What should she do? Go back into the house for a video camera?
Wouldn't they just be gone when she got back? She was thoroughly confused as to strategy. Keep 'em talking, she thought. Figure it out later.
'You've been monitoring . . . me?'
'All of you. Everything on your planet. TV. Radio. Telecommunications.
Computers. Video circuitry. Warehouses.' 'What?'
'Car parks. Everything. We monitor everything.' Tricia stared at them.
'That must be very boring, isn't it?' she blurted out. 'Yes.'
'So why . . .'
'Except . . .'
'Yes? Except what?'
'Game shows. We quite like game shows.'


  There was a terribly long silence as Tricia looked at the aliens and the aliens looked at her.
  'There's something I would just like to get from indoors,' said Tricia very deliberately. 'Tell you what. Would you, or one of you, like to come inside with me and have a look?'
'Very much,' they all said, enthusiastically.


All three of them stood, slightly awkwardly, in her sitting room, as she hurried around picking up a video camera, a 35mm camera, a tape recorder, every recording medium she could grab hold of. They were all thin and, under domestic lighting conditions, a sort of dim purplish green.
  'I really won't be a second, guys,' Tricia said, as she rummaged through some drawers for spare tapes and films.
  The aliens were looking at the shelves that held her CDs and her old records. One of them nudged one of the others very slightly.
'Look,' he said. 'Elvis.'
Tricia stopped, and stared at them all over again. 'You like Elvis?' she said.
'Yes,' they said. 'Elvis Presley?' 'Yes.'
  She shook her head in bewilderment as she tried to stuff a new tape into her video camera.
  'Some of your people,' said one of her visitors, hesitantly, 'think that Elvis has been kidnapped by space aliens.'
'What?' said Tricia. 'Has he?' 'It is possible.'
  'Are you telling me that you have kidnapped Elvis?' gasped Tricia. She was trying to keep cool enough not to foul up her equipment, but this was all almost too much for her.
'No. Not us,' said her guests. 'Aliens. It is a very interesting possibility.
We talk of it often.'
  'I must get this down,' Tricia muttered to herself. She checked her video was properly loaded and working now. She pointed the camera at them. She didn't put it up to her eye because she didn't want to freak them out. But she was sufficiently experienced to be able to shoot accurately from the hip.


  'OK,' she said. 'Now tell me slowly and carefully who you are. You first,' she said to the one on the left. 'What's your name?'
'I don't know.' 'You don't know?' 'No.'
'I see,' said Tricia. 'And what about you other two?' 'We don't know.'
'Good. OK. Perhaps you can tell me where you are from?' They shook their heads.
'You don't know where you're from?' They shook their heads again.
'So,' said Tricia. 'What are you . . . er . . .'
  She was floundering but, being a professional, kept the camera steady while she did it.
'We are on a mission,' said one of the aliens. 'A mission? A mission to do what?'
'We do not know.'
Still she kept the camera steady.
'So what are you doing here on Earth, then?' 'We have come to fetch you.'
  Rock steady, rock steady. Could have been on a tripod. She wondered if she should be using a tripod, in fact. She wondered that because it gave her a moment or two to digest what they had just said. No, she thought, hand- held gave her more flexibility. She also thought, help, what am I going to do?
'Why,' she asked, calmly, 'have you come to fetch me?' 'Because we have lost our minds.'
'Excuse me,' said Tricia, 'I'm going to have to get a tripod.'
  They seemed happy enough to stand there doing nothing while Tricia quickly found a tripod and mounted the camera on it. Her face was completely immobile, but she did not have the faintest idea what was going on or what to think about it.
'OK,' she said, when she was ready. 'Why . . .' 'We liked your interview with the astrologer.' 'You saw it?'
  'We see everything. We are very interested in astrology. We like it. It is very interesting. Not everything is interesting. Astrology is interesting.


What the stars tell us. What the stars foretell. We could do with some information like that.'
'But . . .'
Tricia didn't know where to start.
  Own up, she thought. There's no point in trying to second-guess any of this stuff.
So she said, 'But I don't know anything about astrology.' 'We do.'
'You do?'
  'Yes. We follow our horoscopes. We are very avid. We see all your newspapers and your magazines and are very avid with them. But our leader says we have a problem.'
'You have a leader?' 'Yes.'
'What's his name?' 'We do not know.'
  'What does he say his name is, for Christ's sake? Sorry, I'll need to edit that. What does he say his name is?'
'He does not know.'
'So how do you all know he's the leader?'
'He seized control. He said someone has to do something round here.' 'Ah!' said Tricia, seizing on a clue. 'Where is "here"?'
'Rupert.'
'What?'
  'Your people call it Rupert. The tenth planet from your sun. We have settled there for many years. It is highly cold and uninteresting there. But good for monitoring.'
'Why are you monitoring us?' 'It is all we know to do.'
  'OK,' said Tricia. 'Right. What is the problem that your leader says you have?'
'Triangulation.'
'I beg your pardon?'
'Astrology is a very precise science. We know this.' 'Well . . .' said Tricia, then left it at that.
'But it is precise for you here on Earth.'


  'Ye . . . e . . . s . . .' She had a horrible feeling she was getting a vague glimmering of something.
  'So when Venus is rising in Capricorn, for instance, that is from Earth. How does that work if we are out on Rupert? What if the Earth is rising in Capricorn? It is hard for us to know. Amongst the things we have forgotten, which we think are many and profound, is trigonometry.'
'Let me get this straight,' said Tricia. 'You want me to come with you to .
. . Rupert . . .' 'Yes.'
  'To recalculate your horoscopes for you to take account of the relative positions of Earth and Rupert?'
'Yes.'
'Do I get an exclusive?' 'Yes.'
  'I'm your girl,' said Tricia, thinking that at the very least she could sell it to the National Enquirer.


As she boarded the craft that would take her off to the furthest limits of the solar system, the first thing that met her eyes was a bank of video monitors across which thousands of images were sweeping. A fourth alien was sitting watching them, but was focused on one particular screen that held a steady image. It was a replay of the impromptu interview which Tricia had just conducted with his three colleagues. He looked up when he saw her apprehensively climbing in.
'Good evening, Ms McMillan,' he said. 'Nice camera work.'


6


Ford Prefect hit the ground running. The ground was about three inches further from the ventilation shaft than he remembered it so he misjudged the point at which he would hit the ground, started running too soon, stumbled awkwardly and twisted his ankle. Damn! He ran off down the corridor anyway, hobbling slightly.
  All over the building, alarms were erupting into their usual frenzy of excitement. He dived for cover behind the usual storage cabinets, glanced


around to check that he was unseen, and started rapidly to fish around inside his satchel for the usual things he needed.
His ankle, unusually, was hurting like hell.
  The ground was not only three inches further from the ventilation shaft than he remembered, it was also on a different planet than he remembered, but it was the three inches that had caught him by surprise. The offices of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy were quite often shifted at very short notice to another planet, for reasons of local climate, local hostility, power bills or tax, but they were always reconstructed exactly the same way, almost to the very molecule. For many of the company's employees, the layout of their offices represented the only constant they knew in a severely distorted personal universe.
Something, though, was odd.
  This was not in itself surprising, thought Ford as he pulled out his lightweight throwing towel. Virtually everything in his life was, to a greater or lesser extent, odd. It was just that this was odd in a slightly different way than he was used to things being odd, which was, well, strange. He couldn't quite get it into focus immediately.
He got out his No. 3 gauge prising tool.
  The alarms were going in the same old way that he knew well. There was a kind of music to them that he could almost hum along to. That was all very familiar. The world outside had been a new one on Ford. He had not been to Saquo-Pilia Hensha before, and he had liked it. It had a kind of carnival atmosphere to it.
  He took from his satchel a toy bow and arrow which he had bought in a street market.
  He had discovered that the reason for the carnival atmosphere on Saquo- Pilia Hensha was that the local people were celebrating the annual feast of the Assumption of St Antwelm. St Antwelm had been, during his lifetime, a great and popular king who had made a great and popular assumption. What King Antwelm had assumed was that what everybody wanted, all other things being equal, was to be happy and enjoy themselves and have the best possible time together. On his death he had willed his entire personal fortune to financing an annual festival to remind everyone of this, with lots of good food and dancing and very silly games like Hunt the Wocket. His assumption had been such a brilliantly good one that he was made into a saint for it. Not only that, but all the people who had previously been made


saints for doing things like being stoned to death in a thoroughly miserable way or living upside down in barrels of dung were instantly demoted and were now thought to be rather embarrassing.
  The familiar H-shaped building of the Hitchhiker's Guide offices rose above the outskirts of the city, and Ford Prefect had broken into it in the familiar way. He always entered via the ventilation system rather than the main lobby because the main lobby was patrolled by robots whose job it was to quiz incoming employees about their expense accounts. Ford Prefect's expense accounts were notoriously complex and difficult affairs and he had found, on the whole, that the lobby robots were ill-equipped to understand the arguments he wished to put forward in relation to them. He preferred, therefore, to make his entrance by another route.
  This meant setting off nearly every alarm in the building, but not the one in the accounts department, which was the way that Ford preferred it.
  He hunkered down behind the storage cabinet, he licked the rubber suction cup of the toy arrow, and then fitted it to the string of the bow.
  Within about thirty seconds a security robot the size of a small melon came flying down the corridor at about waist height, scanning left and right for anything unusual as it did so.
  With impeccable timing Ford shot the toy arrow across its path. The arrow flew across the corridor and stuck, wobbling, on the opposite wall. As it flew, the robot's sensors locked on to it instantly and the robot twisted through ninety degrees to follow it, see what the hell it was and where it was going.
  This bought Ford one precious second, during which the robot was looking in the opposite direction from him. He hurled the towel over the flying robot and caught it.
  Because of the various sensory protuberances with which the robot was festooned, it couldn't manoeuvre inside the towel, and it just twitched back and forth without being able to turn and face its captor.
  Ford hauled it quickly towards him and pinned it down to the ground. It was beginning to whine pitifully. With one swift and practised movement, Ford reached under the towel with his No. 3 gauge prising tool and flipped off the small plastic panel on top of the robot which gave access to its logic circuits.
  Now logic is a wonderful thing but it has, as the processes of evolution discovered, certain drawbacks.


  Anything that thinks logically can be fooled by something else which thinks at least as logically as it does. The easiest way to fool a completely logical robot is to feed it the same stimulus sequence over and over again so it gets locked in a loop. This was best demonstrated by the famous Herring Sandwich experiments conducted millennia ago at MISPWOSO (the Maximegalon Institute of Slowly and Painfully Working Out the Surprisingly Obvious).
  A robot was programmed to believe that it liked herring sandwiches. This was actually the most difficult part of the whole experiment. Once the robot had been programmed to believe that it liked herring sandwiches, a herring sandwich was placed in front of it. Whereupon the robot thought to itself, 'Ah! A herring sandwich! I like herring sandwiches.'
  It would then bend over and scoop up the herring sandwich in its herring sandwich scoop, and then straighten up again. Unfortunately for the robot, it was fashioned in such a way that the action of straightening up caused the herring sandwich to slip straight back off its herring sandwich scoop and fall onto the floor in front of the robot. Whereupon the robot thought to itself, 'Ah! A herring sandwich . . .' etc., and repeated the same action over and over and over again. The only thing that prevented the herring sandwich from getting bored with the whole damn business and crawling off in search of other ways of passing the time was that the herring sandwich, being just a bit of dead fish between a couple of slices of bread, was marginally less alert to what was going on than was the robot.
  The scientists at the Institute thus discovered the driving force behind all change, development and innovation in life, which was this: herring sandwiches. They published a paper to this effect, which was widely criticized as being extremely stupid. They checked their figures and realized that what they had actually discovered was 'boredom' or, rather, the practical function of boredom. In a fever of excitement they then went on to discover other emotions, like 'irritability', 'depression', 'reluctance', 'ickiness' and so on. The next big breakthrough came when they stopped using herring sandwiches, whereupon a whole welter of new emotions became suddenly available to them for study, such as 'relief', 'joy', 'friskiness', 'appetite', 'satisfaction', and most important of all, the desire for 'happiness'.
This was the biggest breakthrough of all.


  Vast wodges of complex computer code governing robot behaviour in all possible contingencies could be replaced very simply. All that robots needed was the capacity to be either bored or happy, and a few conditions that needed to be satisfied in order to bring those states about. They would then work the rest out for themselves.
  The robot which Ford had got trapped under his towel was not, at the moment, a happy robot. It was happy when it could move about. It was happy when it could see other things. It was particularly happy when it could see other things moving about, particularly if the other things were moving about doing things they shouldn't do because it could then, with considerable delight, report them.
Ford would soon fix that.
  He squatted over the robot and held it between his knees. The towel was still covering all of its sensory mechanisms, but Ford had now got its logic circuits exposed. The robot was whirring grungily and pettishly, but it could only fidget, it couldn't actually move. Using the prising tool, Ford eased a small chip out from its socket. As soon as it came out, the robot went quiet and just sat there in a coma.
  The chip Ford had taken out was the one which contained the instructions for all the conditions that had to be fulfilled in order for the robot to feel happy. The robot would be happy when a tiny electrical charge from a point just to the left of the chip reached another point just to the right of the chip. The chip determined whether the charge got there or not.
  Ford pulled out a small length of wire that had been threaded into the towel. He dug one end of it into the top left hole of the chip socket and the other into the bottom right hole.
That was all it took. Now the robot would be happy whatever happened.
  Ford quickly stood up and whisked the towel away. The robot rose ecstatically into the air, pursuing a kind of wriggly path.
It turned and saw Ford.
'Mr Prefect, sir! I'm so happy to see you!' 'Good to see you, little fella,' said Ford.
  The robot rapidly reported back to its central control that everything was now for the best in this best of all possible worlds, the alarms rapidly quelled themselves, and life returned to normal.
At least, almost to normal.
There was something odd about the place.


  The little robot was gurgling with electric delight. Ford hurried on down the corridor, letting the thing bob along in his wake telling him how delicious everything was, and how happy it was to be able to tell him that.
Ford, however, was not happy.
  He passed faces of people he didn't know. They didn't look like his sort of people. They were too well groomed. Their eyes were too dead. Every time he thought he saw someone he recognized in the distance, and hurried along to say hello, it would turn out to be someone else, with an altogether neater hairstyle and a much more thrusting, purposeful look than, well, than anybody Ford knew.
  A staircase had been moved a few inches to the left. A ceiling had been lowered slightly. A lobby had been remodelled. All these things were not worrying in themselves, though they were a little disorienting. The thing that was worrying was the decor. It used to be brash and glitzy. Expensive - because the Guide sold so well through the civilized and post-civilized Galaxy - but expensive and fun. Wild games machines lined the corridors. Insanely painted grand pianos hung from ceilings, vicious sea creatures from the planet Viv reared up out of pools in tree-filled atria, robot butlers in stupid shirts roamed the corridors seeking whose hands they might press frothing drinks into. People used to have pet vastdragons on leads and pterospondes on perches in their offices. People knew how to have a good time, and if they didn't there were courses they could sign up for which would put that right.
There was none of that now.
  Somebody had been through the place doing some iniquitous kind of taste job on it.
  Ford turned sharply into a small alcove, cupped his hand and yanked the flying robot in with him. He squatted down and peered at the burbling cybernaut.
'What's been happening here?' he demanded.
  'Oh, just the nicest things, sir, just the nicest possible things. Can I sit on your lap, please?'
  'No,' said Ford, brushing the thing away. It was overjoyed to be spurned in this way and started to bob and burble and swoon. Ford grabbed it again and stuck it firmly in the air a foot in front of his face. It tried to stay where it was put but couldn't help quivering slightly.
'Something's changed, hasn't it?' Ford hissed.


  'Oh yes,' squealed the little robot, 'in the most fabulous and wonderful way. I feel so good about it.'
'Well, what was it like before, then?' 'Scrumptious.'
'But you like the way it's changed?' demanded Ford.
  'I like everything,' moaned the robot. 'Especially when you shout at me like that. Do it again, please.'
'Just tell me what's happened!' 'Oh thank you, thank you!' Ford sighed.
  'OK, OK,' panted the robot. 'The Guide has been taken over. There's a new management. It's all so gorgeous I could just melt. The old management was also fabulous, of course, though I'm not sure if I thought so at the time.'
'That was before you had a bit of wire stuck in your head.' 'How true. How wonderfully true. How wonderfully, bubblingly,
frothingly, burstingly true. What a truly ecstasy-inducingly correct observation.'
  'What's happened?' insisted Ford. 'Who is this new management? When did they take over? I . . . oh, never mind,' he added, as the little robot started to gibber with uncontrollable joy and rub itself against his knee. 'I'll go and find out for myself.'


Ford hurled himself at the door of the editor-in-chief's office, tucked himself into a tight ball as the frame splintered and gave way, rolled rapidly across the floor to where the drinks trolley laden with some of the Galaxy's most potent and expensive beverages habitually stood, seized hold of the trolley and, using it to give himself cover, trundled it and himself across the main exposed part of the office floor to where the valuable and extremely rude statue of Leda and the Octopus stood, and took shelter behind it.
Meanwhile the little security robot, entering at chest height, was suicidally delighted to draw gunfire away from Ford.
  That, at least, was the plan, and a necessary one. The current editor-in- chief, Stagyar-zil-Doggo, was a dangerously unbalanced man who took a homicidal view of contributing staff turning up in his office without pages of fresh, proofed copy, and had a battery of laser-guided guns linked to special scanning devices in the door frame to deter anybody who was


merely bringing extremely good reasons why they hadn't written any. Thus was a high level of output maintained.
Unfortunately the drinks trolley wasn't there.
  Ford hurled himself desperately sideways and somersaulted towards the statue of Leda and the Octopus, which also wasn't there. He rolled and hurtled around the room in a kind of random panic, tripped, spun, hit the window, which fortunately was built to withstand rocket attacks, rebounded, and fell in a bruised and winded heap behind a smart grey crushed-leather sofa, which hadn't been there before.
  After a few seconds he slowly peeked up above the top of the sofa. As well as there being no drinks trolley and no Leda and the Octopus, there had also been a startling absence of gunfire. He frowned. This was all utterly wrong.
'Mr Prefect, I assume,' said a voice.
  The voice came from a smooth-faced individual behind a large ceramo- teak-bonded desk. Stagyar-zil-Doggo may well have been a hell of an individual, but no one, for a whole variety of reasons, would ever have called him smooth-faced. This was not Stagyar-zil-Doggo.
  'I assume from the manner of your entrance that you do not have new material for the, er, Guide, at the moment,' said the smooth-faced individual. He was sitting with his elbows resting on the table and holding his fingertips together in a manner which, inexplicably, has never been made a capital offence.
  'I've been busy,' said Ford, rather weakly. He staggered to his feet, brushing himself down. Then he thought, what the hell was he saying things weakly for? He had to get on top of this situation. He had to find out who the hell this person was, and he suddenly thought of a way of doing it.
'Who the hell are you?' he demanded.
  'I am your new editor-in-chief. That is, if we decide to retain your services. My name is Vann Harl.' He didn't put his hand out. He just added, 'What have you done to that security robot?'
  The little robot was rolling very, very slowly round the ceiling and moaning quietly to itself.
'I've made it very happy,' snapped Ford. 'It's a kind of mission I have.
Where's Stagyar? More to the point, where's his drinks trolley?'
  'Mr zil-Doggo is no longer with this organization. His drinks trolley is, I imagine, helping to console him for this fact.'


  'Organization?' yelled Ford. 'Organization? What a bloody stupid word for a set-up like this!'
  'Precisely our sentiments. Under-structured, over-resourced, under- managed, over-inebriated. And that,' said Harl, 'was just the editor.'
'I'll do the jokes,' snarled Ford.
'No,' said Harl. 'You will do the restaurant column.'
  He tossed a piece of plastic onto the desk in front of him. Ford did not move to pick it up.
'You what?' said Ford.
  'No. Me Harl. You Prefect. You do restaurant column. Me editor. Me sit here tell you you do restaurant column. You get?'
'Restaurant column?' said Ford, too bewildered to be really angry yet. 'Siddown, Prefect,' said Harl. He swung round in his swivel chair, got to
his feet, and stood staring out at the tiny specks enjoying the carnival twenty-three storeys below.
  'Time to get this business on its feet, Prefect,' he snapped. 'We at InfiniDim Enterprises are-'
'You at what?'
'InfiniDim Enterprises. We have bought out the Guide.' 'InfiniDim?'
'We spent millions on that name, Prefect. Start liking it or start packing.' Ford shrugged. He had nothing to pack.
  'The Galaxy is changing,' said Harl. 'We've got to change with it. Go with the market. The market is moving up. New aspirations. New technology. The future is . . .'
'Don't tell me about the future,' said Ford. 'I've been all over the future.
Spend half my time there. It's the same as anywhere else. Anywhen else. Whatever. Just the same old stuff in faster cars and smellier air.'
'That's one future,' said Harl. 'That's your future, if you accept it.
You've got to learn to think multi-dimensionally. There are limitless futures stretching out in every direction from this moment - and from this moment and from this. Billions of them, bifurcating every instant! Every possible position of every possible electron balloons out into billions of probabilities! Billions and billions of shining, gleaming futures! You know what that means?'
'You're dribbling down your chin.' 'Billions and billions of markets!'


'I see,' said Ford. 'So you sell billions and billions of Guides.' 'No,' said Harl, reaching for his handkerchief and not finding one.
'Excuse me,' he said, 'but this gets me so excited.' Ford handed him his towel.
  'The reason we don't sell billions and billions of Guides,' continued Harl, after wiping his mouth, 'is the expense. What we do is we sell one Guide billions and billions of times. We exploit the multidimensional nature of the Universe to cut down on manufacturing costs. And we don't sell to penniless hitchhikers. What a stupid notion that was! Find the one section of the market that, more or less by definition, doesn't have any money, and try and sell to it. No. We sell to the affluent business traveller and his vacationing wife in a billion, billion different futures. This is the most radical, dynamic and thrusting business venture in the entire multidimensional infinity of space/time/probability ever.'
'And you want me to be its restaurant critic,' said Ford. 'We would value your input.'
'Kill!' shouted Ford. He shouted it at his towel. The towel leapt up out of Harl's hands.
  This was not because it had any motive force of its own, but because Harl was so startled at the idea that it might. The next thing that startled him was the sight of Ford Prefect hurtling across the desk at him fists first. In fact Ford was just lunging for the credit card, but you don't get to occupy the sort of position that Harl occupied in the sort of organization in which Harl occupied it without developing a healthily paranoid view of life. He took the sensible precaution of hurling himself backwards, and striking his head a sharp blow on the rocket-proof glass, then subsided into a series of worrying and highly personal dreams.
  Ford lay on the desk, surprised at how swimmingly everything had gone. He glanced quickly at the piece of plastic he now held in his hand - it was a Dine-O-Charge credit card with his name already embossed on it, and an expiry date two years from now, and was possibly the single most exciting thing Ford had ever seen in his life - then he clambered over the desk to see to Harl.
  He was breathing fairly easily. It occurred to Ford that he might breathe more easily yet without the weight of his wallet bearing down on his chest, so he slipped it out of Harl's breast pocket and flipped through it. Fair amount of cash. Credit tokens. Ultragolf club membership. Other club


memberships. Photos of someone's wife and family - presumably Harl's, but it was hard to be sure these days. Busy executives often didn't have time for a full-time wife and family and would just rent them for weekends.
Ha!
He couldn't believe what he'd just found.
  He slowly drew out from the wallet a single and insanely exciting piece of plastic that was nestling amongst a bunch of receipts.
  It wasn't insanely exciting to look at. It was rather dull in fact. It was smaller and a little thicker than a credit card and semi-transparent. If you held it up to the light you could see a lot of holographically encoded information and images buried pseudo-inches deep beneath its surface.
  It was an Ident-i-Eeze, and was a very naughty and silly thing for Harl to have lying around in his wallet, though it was perfectly understandable.
There were so many different ways in which you were required to provide absolute proof of your identity these days that life could easily become extremely tiresome just from that factor alone, never mind the deeper existential problems of trying to function as a coherent consciousness in an epistemologically ambiguous physical universe. Just look at cashpoint machines, for instance. Queues of people standing around waiting to have their fingerprints read, their retinas scanned, bits of skin scraped from the nape of the neck and undergoing instant (or nearly instant - a good six or seven seconds in tedious reality) genetic analysis, then having to answer trick questions about members of their family they didn't even remember they had, and about their recorded preferences for tablecloth colours. And that was just to get a bit of spare cash for the weekend. If you were trying to raise a loan for a jetcar, sign a missile treaty or pay an entire restaurant bill things could get really trying.
  Hence the Ident-i-Eeze. This encoded every single piece of information about you, your body and your life into one all-purpose machine-readable card that you could then carry around in your wallet, and therefore represented technology's greatest triumph to date over both itself and plain common sense.
  Ford pocketed it. A remarkably good idea had just occurred to him. He wondered how long Harl would remain unconscious.
  'Hey!' he shouted to the little melon-sized robot still slobbering with euphoria up on the ceiling. 'You want to stay happy?'
The robot gurgled that it did.


'Then stick with me and do everything I tell you without fail.'
  The robot said that it was quite happy where it was up on the ceiling thank you very much. It had never realized before how much sheer titillation there was to be got from a good ceiling and it wanted to explore its feelings about ceilings in greater depth.
  'You stay there,' said Ford, 'and you'll soon be recaptured and have your conditional chip replaced. You want to stay happy, come now.'
  The robot let out a long heartfelt sigh of impassioned tristesse and sank reluctantly away from the ceiling.
  'Listen,' said Ford, 'can you keep the rest of the security system happy for a few minutes?'
  'One of the joys of true happiness,' trilled the robot, 'is sharing. I brim, I froth, I overflow with . . .'
  'OK,' said Ford. 'Just spread a little happiness around the security network. Don't give it any information. Just make it feel good so it doesn't feel the need to ask for any.'
  He picked up his towel and ran cheerfully for the door. Life had been a little dull of late. It showed every sign now of becoming extremely froody.


7


Arthur Dent had been in some hell-holes in his life, but he had never before seen a spaceport which had a sign saying, 'Even travelling despondently is better than arriving here.' To welcome visitors the arrivals hall featured a picture of the President of Now-What, smiling. It was the only picture anybody could find of him, and it had been taken shortly after he had shot himself so although the photo had been retouched as well as could be managed the smile it wore was rather a ghastly one. The side of his head had been drawn back in in crayon. No replacement had been found for the photograph because no replacement had been found for the President. There was only one ambition which anyone on the planet ever had, and that was to leave.
  Arthur checked himself into a small motel on the outskirts of town, and sat glumly on the bed, which was damp, and flipped through the little information brochure, which was also damp. It said that the planet of NowWhat had been named after the opening words of the first settlers to


arrive there after struggling across light years of space to reach the furthest unexplored outreaches of the Galaxy. The main town was called OhWell.
There weren't any other towns to speak of. Settlement on NowWhat had not been a success and the sort of people who actually wanted to live on NowWhat were not the sort of people you would want to spend time with.
  Trading was mentioned in the brochure. The main trade that was carried out was in the skins of the NowWhattian boghog but it wasn't a very successful one because no one in their right minds would want to buy a NowWhattian boghog skin. The trade only hung on by its fingernails because there was always a significant number of people in the Galaxy who were not in their right minds. Arthur had felt very uncomfortable looking around at some of the other occupants of the small passenger compartment of the ship.
  The brochure described some of the history of the planet. Whoever had written it had obviously started out trying to drum up a little enthusiasm for the place by stressing that it wasn't actually cold and wet all the time, but could find little positive to add to this so the tone of the piece quickly degenerated into savage irony.
  It talked about the early years of settlement. It said that the major activities pursued on NowWhat were those of catching, skinning and eating NowWhattian boghogs, which were the only extant form of animal life on NowWhat, all others having long ago died of despair. The boghogs were tiny, vicious creatures, and the small margin by which they fell short of being completely inedible was the margin by which life on the planet subsisted. So what were the rewards, however small, that made life on NowWhat worth living? Well, there weren't any. Not a one. Even making yourself some protective clothing out of boghog skins was an exercise in disappointment and futility, since the skins were unaccountably thin and leaky. This caused a lot of puzzled conjecture amongst the settlers. What was the boghog's secret of keeping warm? If anyone had ever learnt the language the boghogs spoke to each other they would have discovered that there was no trick. The boghogs were as cold and wet as anyone else on the planet. No one had had the slightest desire to learn the language of the boghogs for the simple reason that these creatures communicated by biting each other very hard on the thigh. Life on NowWhat being what it was, most of what a boghog might have to say about it could easily be signified by these means.


  Arthur flipped through the brochure till he found what he was looking for. At the back there were a few maps of the planet. They were fairly rough and ready because they weren't likely to be of much interest to anyone, but they told him what he wanted to know.
  He didn't recognize it at first because the maps were the other way up from the way he would have expected and looked, therefore, thoroughly unfamiliar. Of course, up and down, north and south, are absolutely arbitrary designations, but we are used to seeing things the way we are used to seeing them, and Arthur had to turn the maps upside-down to make sense of them.
  There was one huge landmass off on the upper left-hand side of the page which tapered down to a tiny waist and then ballooned out again like a large comma. On the right-hand side was a collection of large shapes jumbled familiarly together. The outlines were not exactly the same, and Arthur didn't know if this was because the map was so rough, or because the sea- level was higher or because, well, things were just different here. But the evidence was inarguable.
This was definitely the Earth.
Or rather, it most definitely was not.
  It merely looked a lot like the Earth and occupied the same coordinates in space-time. What coordinates it occupied in probability was anybody's guess.
He sighed.
This, he realized, was about as close to home as he was likely to get.
Which meant that he was about as far from home as he could possibly be. Glumly he slapped the brochure shut and wondered what on earth he was going to do next.
  He allowed himself a hollow laugh at what he had just thought. He looked at his old watch, and shook it a bit to wind it. It had taken him, according to his own timescale, a year of hard travelling to get here. A year since the accident in hyperspace in which Fenchurch had completely vanished. One minute she had been sitting there next to him in the SlumpJet; the next minute the ship had done a perfectly normal hyperspace hop and when he had next looked she was not there. The seat wasn't even warm. Her name wasn't even on the passenger list.
  The spaceline had been wary of him when he had complained. A lot of awkward things happen in space travel, and a lot of them make a lot of


money for lawyers. But when they had asked him what Galactic sector he and Fenchurch had been from and he had said ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha they had relaxed completely in a way that Arthur wasn't at all sure he liked. They even laughed a little, though sympathetically, of course. They pointed to the clause in the ticket contract which said that the entities whose lifespans had originated in any of the Plural zones were advised not to travel in hyperspace and did so at their own risk. Everybody, they said, knew that.
They tittered slightly and shook their heads.
  As Arthur had left their offices he found he was trembling slightly. Not only had he lost Fenchurch in the most complete and utter way possible, but he felt that the more time he spent away out in the Galaxy the more it seemed that the number of things he didn't know anything about actually increased.
  Just as he was lost for a moment in these numb memories a knock came on the door of his motel room, which then opened immediately. A fat and dishevelled man came in carrying Arthur's one small case.
  He got as far as, 'Where shall I put-' when there was a sudden violent flurry and he collapsed heavily against the door, trying to beat off a small and mangy creature that had leapt snarling out of the wet night and buried its teeth in his thigh, even through the thick layers of leather padding he wore there. There was a brief, ugly confusion of jabbering and thrashing. The man shouted frantically and pointed. Arthur grabbed a hefty stick that stood next to the door expressly for this purpose and beat at the boghog with it.
  The boghog suddenly disengaged and limped backwards, dazed and forlorn. It turned anxiously in the corner of the room, its tail tucked up right under its back legs, and stood looking nervously up at Arthur, jerking its head awkwardly and repeatedly to one side. Its jaw seemed to be dislocated. It cried a little and scraped its damp tail across the floor. By the door, the fat man with Arthur's suitcase was sitting and cursing, trying to staunch the flow of blood from his thigh. His clothes were already wet from the rain.
  Arthur stared at the boghog, not knowing what to do. The boghog looked at him questioningly. It tried to approach him, making mournful little whimpering noises. It moved its jaw painfully. It made a sudden leap for Arthur's thigh, but its dislocated jaw was too weak to get a grip and it sank, whining sadly, down to the floor. The fat man jumped to his feet, grabbed the stick, beat the boghog's brains into a sticky, pulpy mess on the thin


carpet, and then stood there breathing heavily as if daring the animal to move again, just once.
  A single boghog eyeball sat looking reproachfully at Arthur from out of the mashed ruins of its head.
'What do you think it was trying to say?' asked Arthur in a small voice. 'Ah, nothing much,' said the man. 'Just its way of trying to be friendly.
This is just our way of being friendly back,' he added, gripping the stick. 'When's the next flight out?' asked Arthur.
'Thought you'd only just arrived,' said the man.
  'Yes,' said Arthur. 'It was only going to be a brief visit. I just wanted to see if this was the right place or not. Sorry.'
  'You mean you're on the wrong planet?' said the man lugubriously. 'Funny how many people say that. Specially the people who live here.' He eyed the remains of the boghog with a deep, ancestral resentment.
  'Oh no,' said Arthur, 'it's the right planet all right.' He picked up the damp brochure lying on the bed and put it in his pocket. 'It's OK, thanks, I'll take that,' he said, taking his case from the man. He went to the door and looked out into the cold, wet night.
  'Yes, it's the right planet, all right,' he said again. 'Right planet, wrong universe.'
  A single bird wheeled in the sky above him as he set off back for the spaceport.


8


Ford had his own code of ethics. It wasn't much of one, but it was his and he stuck by it, more or less. One rule he made was never to buy his own drinks. He wasn't sure if that counted as an ethic, but you have to go with what you've got. He was also firmly and utterly opposed to all and any forms of cruelty to any animals whatsoever except geese. And furthermore he would never steal from his employers.
Well, not exactly steal.
  If his accounts supervisor didn't start to hyperventilate and put out a seal- all-exits security alert when Ford handed in his expenses claim then Ford felt he wasn't doing his job properly. But actually stealing was another thing. That was biting the hand that feeds you. Sucking very hard on it,


even nibbling it in an affectionate kind of a way was OK, but you didn't actually bite it. Not when that hand was the Guide. The Guide was something sacred and special.
  But that, thought Ford as he ducked and weaved his way down through the building, was about to change. And they had only themselves to blame. Look at all this stuff. Lines of neat grey office cubicles and executive workstation pods. The whole place was dreary with the hum of memos and minutes of meetings flitting through its electronic networks. Out in the street they were playing Hunt the Wocket, for zark's sake, but here in the very heart of the Guide offices no one was even recklessly kicking a ball around the corridors or wearing inappropriately coloured beachwear.
  'InfiniDim Enterprises,' Ford snarled to himself as he stalked rapidly down one corridor after another. Door after door magically opened to him without question. Elevators took him happily to places they should not.
Ford was trying to pursue the most tangled and complicated route he could, heading generally downwards through the building. His happy little robot took care of everything, spreading waves of acquiescent joy through all the security circuits it encountered.
  Ford thought it needed a name and decided to call it Emily Saunders, after a girl he had very fond memories of. Then he thought that Emily Saunders was an absurd name for a security robot, and decided to call it Colin instead, after Emily's dog.
  He was moving deep into the bowels of the building now, into areas he had never entered before, areas of higher and higher security. He was beginning to encounter puzzled looks from the operatives he passed. At this level of security you didn't even call them people any more. And they were probably doing stuff that only operatives would do. When they went home to their families in the evening they became people again, and when their little children looked up to them with their sweet shining eyes and said, 'Daddy, what did you do all day today?' they just said, 'I performed my duties as an operative,' and left it at that.
  The truth of the matter was that all sorts of highly dodgy stuff went on behind the cheery, happy-go-lucky front that the Guide liked to put up - or used to like to put up before this new InfiniDim Enterprises bunch marched in and started to make the whole thing highly dodgy. There were all kinds of tax scams and rackets and graft and shady deals supporting the shining


edifice, and down in the secure research and data-processing levels of the building was where it all went on.
  Every few years the Guide would set up its business, and indeed its building, on a new world, and all would be sunshine and laughter for a while as the Guide would put down its roots in the local culture and economy, provide employment, a sense of glamour and adventure and, in the end, not quite as much actual revenue as the locals had expected.
  When the Guide moved on, taking its building with it, it left a little like a thief in the night. Exactly like a thief in the night, in fact. It usually left in the very early hours of the morning, and the following day there always turned out to be a very great deal of stuff missing. Whole cultures and economies would collapse in its wake, often within a week, leaving once thriving planets desolate and shell-shocked but still somehow feeling they had been part of some great adventure.
  The 'operatives' who shot puzzled glances at Ford as he marched on into the depths of the building's most sensitive areas were reassured by the presence of Colin, who was flying along with him in a buzz of emotional fulfilment and easing his path for him at every stage.
  Alarms were starting to go off in other parts of the building. Perhaps that meant that Vann Harl had already been discovered, which might be a problem. Ford had been hoping he would be able to slip the Ident-i-Eeze back into his pocket before he came round. Well, that was a problem for later, and he didn't for the moment have the faintest idea how he was going to solve it. For the moment he wasn't going to worry. Wherever he went with little Colin, he was surrounded by a cocoon of sweetness and light and, most importantly, willing and acquiescent elevators and positively obsequious doors.
  Ford even began to whistle, which was probably his mistake. Nobody likes a whistler, particularly not the divinity that shapes our ends.
The next door wouldn't open.
  And that was a pity, because it was the very one that Ford had been making for. It stood there before him, grey and resolutely closed with a sign on it saying:


NO ADMITTANCE.
NOT EVEN TO AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL. YOU ARE WASTING YOUR TIME HERE.


GO AWAY.


  Colin reported that the doors had been getting generally a lot grimmer down in these lower reaches of the building.
  They were about ten storeys below ground level now. The air was refrigerated and the tasteful grey hessian wall weave had given way to brutal grey bolted steel walls. Colin's rampant euphoria had subsided into a kind of determined cheeriness. He said that he was beginning to tire a little. It was taking all his energy to pump the slightest bonhomie whatsoever into the doors down here.
Ford kicked at the door. It opened.
'Mixture of pleasure and pain,' he muttered. 'Always does the trick.'
  He walked in and Colin flew in after him. Even with a wire stuck straight into his pleasure electrode his happiness was a nervous kind of happiness.
He bobbed around a little.
The room was small, grey and humming. This was the nerve centre of the entire Guide.
  The computer terminals that lined the grey walls were windows onto every aspect of the Guide's operations. Here, on the left-hand side of the room, reports were gathered over the Sub-Etha Net from field researchers in every corner of the Galaxy, fed straight up into the network of sub-editors' offices where they had all the good bits cut out by secretaries because the sub-editors were out having lunch. The remaining copy would then be shot across to the other half of the building - the other leg of the 'H' - which was the legal department. The legal department would cut out anything that was still even remotely good from what remained and fire it back to the offices of the executive editors, who were also out at lunch. So the editors' secretaries would read it and say it was stupid and cut most of what was left.
  When any of the editors finally staggered in from lunch they would exclaim 'What is this feeble crap that X' - where X was the name of the field researcher in question - 'has sent us from halfway across the bloody Galaxy? What's the point of having somebody spending three whole orbital periods out in the bloody Gagrakacka Mind Zones, with all that stuff going on out there, if this load of anaemic squitter is the best he can be bothered to send us. Disallow his expenses!'
'What shall we do with the copy?' the secretary would ask.


'Ah, put it out over the network. Got to have something going out there.
I've got a headache, I'm going home.'
  So the edited copy would go for one last slash and burn through the legal department, and then be sent back down here where it would be broadcast out over the Sub-Etha Net for instantaneous retrieval anywhere in the Galaxy. That was handled by equipment which was monitored and controlled by the terminals on the right-hand side of the room.
  Meanwhile the order to disallow the researcher's expenses was relayed down to the computer terminal stuck off in the right-hand corner, and it was to this terminal that Ford Prefect now swiftly made his way.
(If you are reading this on planet Earth then:
  a) Good luck to you. There is an awful lot of stuff you don't know anything about, but you are not alone in this. It's just that in your case the consequences of not knowing any of this stuff are particularly terrible, but then, hey, that's just the way the cookie gets completely stomped on and obliterated.
b) Don't imagine you know what a computer terminal is.
  A computer terminal is not some clunky old television with a typewriter in front of it. It is an interface where the mind and body can connect with the Universe and move bits of it about.)
  Ford hurried over to the terminal, sat in front of it and quickly dipped himself into its universe.
  It wasn't the normal universe he knew. It was a universe of densely enfolded worlds, of wild topographies, towering mountain peaks, heart- stopping ravines, of moons shattering off into sea horses, hurtful blurting crevices, silently heaving oceans and bottomless hurtling hooping funts.
  He held still to get his bearings. He controlled his breathing, closed his eyes and looked again.
  So this was where accountants spent their time. There was clearly more to them than met the eye. He looked around carefully, trying not to let it all swell and swim and overwhelm him.
  He didn't know his way around this universe. He didn't even know the physical laws that determined its dimensional extents or behaviours, but his instinct told him to look for the most outstanding feature he could detect and make towards it.
  Way off in some indistinguishable distance - was it a mile or a million or a mote in his eye? - was a stunning peak that overarched the sky, climbed


and climbed and spread out in flowering aigrettes,* agglomerates,* and archimandrites.*
  He weltered towards it, hooling and thurling, and at last reached it in a meaninglessly long umthingth of time.
  He clung to it, arms outspread, gripping tightly on to its roughly gnarled and pitted surface. Once he was certain that he was secure he made the hideous mistake of looking down.
  While he had been weltering, hooling and thurling, the distance beneath him had not bothered him unduly, but now that he was gripping, the distance made his heart wilt and his brain bend. His fingers were white with pain and tension. His teeth were grinding and twisting against each other beyond his control. His eyes turned inwards with waves from the willowing extremities of nausea.
With an immense effort of will and faith he simply let go and pushed.
  He felt himself float. Away. And then, counter-intuitively, upwards. And upwards.
  He threw his shoulders back, let his arms drop, gazed upwards and let himself be drawn loosely, higher and higher.
  Before long, insofar as such terms had any meaning in this virtual universe, a ledge loomed up ahead of him on which he could grip and onto which he could clamber.
He rose, he gripped, he clambered.
He panted a little. This was all a little stressful.
  He held tightly on to the ledge as he sat. He wasn't certain if this was to prevent himself from falling down off it or rising up from it, but he needed something to grip on to as he surveyed the world in which he found himself.
  The whirling, turning height spun him and twisted his brain in upon itself till he found himself, eyes closed, whimpering and hugging the hideous wall of towering rock.
  He slowly brought his breathing back under control again. He told himself repeatedly that he was just in a graphic representation of a world. A virtual universe. A simulated reality. He could snap back out of it at any moment.
He snapped back out of it.
  He was sitting in a blue leatherette foam-filled swivel-seated office chair in front of a computer terminal.
He relaxed.


  He was clinging to the face of an impossibly high peak perched on a narrow ledge above a drop of brain-swivelling dimensions.
  It wasn't just the landscape being so far beneath him - he wished it would stop undulating and waving.
  He had to get a grip. Not on the rock wall - that was an illusion. He had to get a grip on the situation, be able to look at the physical world he was in while drawing himself out of it emotionally.
  He clenched inwardly and then, just as he had let go of the rock face itself, he let go of the idea of the rock face and let himself just sit there clearly and freely. He looked out at the world. He was breathing well. He was cool. He was in charge again.
  He was in a four-dimensional topological model of the Guide's financial systems, and somebody or something would very shortly want to know why.
And here they came.
  Swooping through virtual space towards him came a small flock of mean and steely-eyed creatures with pointy little heads, pencil moustaches and querulous demands as to who he was, what he was doing there, what his authorization was, what the authorization of his authorizing agent was, what his inside-leg measurement was and so on. Laser light flickered all over him as if he was a packet of biscuits at a supermarket checkout. The heavier- duty laser guns were held, for the moment, in reserve. The fact that all of this was happening in virtual space made no difference. Being virtually killed by a virtual laser in virtual space is just as effective as the real thing, because you are as dead as you think you are.
  The laser readers were becoming very agitated as they flickered over his fingerprints, his retina and the follicle pattern where his hair line was receding. They didn't like what they were finding at all. The chattering and screeching of highly personal and insolent questions was rising in pitch. A little surgical-steel scraper was reaching out towards the skin at the nape of his neck when Ford, holding his breath and praying very slightly, pulled Vann Harl's Ident-i-Eeze out of his pocket and waved it in front of them.
  Instantly every laser was diverted to the little card and swept backwards and forwards over it and in it, examining and reading every molecule.
Then, just as suddenly, they stopped.
The entire flock of little virtual inspectors snapped to attention.


  'Nice to see you, Mr Harl,' they said in smarmy unison. 'Is there anything we can do for you?'
Ford smiled a slow and vicious smile.
'Do you know,' he said, 'I rather think there is.'


Five minutes later he was out of there.
  About thirty seconds to do the job, and three minutes thirty to cover his tracks. He could have done anything he liked in the virtual structure, more or less. He could have transferred ownership of the entire organization into his own name, but he doubted if that would have gone unnoticed. He didn't want it anyway. It would have meant responsibility, working late nights at the office, not to mention massive and time-consuming fraud investigations and a fair amount of time in jail. He wanted something that nobody other than the computer would notice: that was the bit that took thirty seconds.
  The thing that took three minutes thirty was programming the computer not to notice that it had noticed anything.
  It had to want not to know about what Ford was up to, and then he could safely leave the computer to rationalize its own defences against the information ever emerging. It was a programming technique that had been reverse-engineered from the sort of psychotic mental blocks that otherwise perfectly normal people had been observed invariably to develop when elected to high political office.
  The other minute was spent discovering that the computer system already had a mental block. A big one.
  He would never have discovered it if he hadn't been busy engineering a mental block himself. He came across a whole slew of smooth and plausible denial procedures and diversionary subroutines exactly where he had been planning to install his own. The computer denied all knowledge of them, of course, then blankly refused to accept that there was anything even to deny knowledge of, and was generally so convincing that even Ford almost found himself thinking he must have made a mistake.
He was impressed.
  He was so impressed, in fact, that he didn't bother to install his own mental block procedures, he just set up calls to the ones that were already there, which then called themselves when questioned, and so on.
  He quickly set about debugging the little bits of code he had installed himself, only to discover they weren't there. Cursing, he searched all over


for them, but could find no trace of them at all.
  He was just about to start installing them all over again when he realized that the reason he couldn't find them was that they were working already.
He grinned with satisfaction.
  He tried to discover what the computer's other mental block was all about, but it seemed, not unnaturally, to have a mental block about it. He could no longer find any trace of it at all, in fact; it was that good. He wondered if he had been imagining it. He wondered if he had been imagining that it was something to do with something in the building, and something to do with the number 13. He ran a few tests. Yes, he had obviously been imagining it.


No time for fancy routes now, there was obviously a major security alert in progress. Ford took the elevator up to the ground floor to change to the express elevators. He had somehow to get the Identi-Eeze back into Harl's pocket before it was missed. How, he didn't know.
  The doors of the elevator slid open to reveal a large posse of security guards and robots poised waiting for it and brandishing filthy-looking weapons.
They ordered him out.
  With a shrug he stepped forward. They all pushed rudely past him into the elevator, which took them down to continue their search for him on the lower levels.
  This was fun, thought Ford, giving Colin a friendly pat. Colin was about the first genuinely useful robot Ford had ever encountered. Colin bobbed along in the air in front of him in a lather of cheerful ecstasy. Ford was glad he'd named him after a dog.
  He was highly tempted just to leave at that point and hope for the best, but he knew that the best had a far greater chance of actually occurring if Harl did not discover that his Ident-i-Eeze was missing. He had somehow, surreptitiously, to return it.
They went to the express elevators. 'Hi,' said the elevator they got into. 'Hi,' said Ford.
'Where can I take you folks today?' said the elevator. 'Floor twenty-three,' said Ford.
'Seems to be a popular floor today,' said the elevator.


  Hmm, thought Ford, not liking the sound of that at all. The elevator lit up the twenty-third floor on its floor display and started to zoom upwards.
Something about the floor display tweaked at Ford's mind but he couldn't catch what it was and forgot about it. He was more worried about the idea of the floor he was going to being a popular one. He hadn't really thought through how he was going to deal with whatever it was that was happening up there because he had no idea what he was going to find. He would just have to busk it.
They were there. The doors slid open. Ominous quiet.
Empty corridor.
  There was the door to Harl's office, with a slight layer of dust around it. Ford knew that this dust consisted of billions of tiny molecular robots that had crawled out of the woodwork, built each other, rebuilt the door, disassembled each other and then crept back into the woodwork again and just waited for damage. Ford wondered what kind of life that was, but not for long because he was a lot more concerned about what his own life was like at that moment.
He took a deep breath and started his run.


9


Arthur felt at a bit of a loss. There was a whole Galaxy of stuff out there for him, and he wondered if it was churlish of him to complain to himself that it lacked just two things: the world he was born on and the woman he loved.
  Damn it and blast it, he thought, and felt the need of some guidance and advice. He consulted The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. He looked up 'guidance' and it said 'See under ADVICE'. He looked up 'advice' and it said 'See under GUIDANCE'. It had been doing a lot of that kind of stuff recently and he wondered if it was all it was cracked up to be.
  He headed to the Outer Eastern Rim of the Galaxy where, it was said, wisdom and truth were to be found, most particularly on the planet Hawalius, which was a planet of oracles and seers and soothsayers and also takeaway pizza shops, because most mystics were completely incapable of cooking for themselves.


However it appeared that some sort of calamity had befallen this planet.
As Arthur wandered the streets of the village where the major prophets lived, it had something of a crestfallen air. He came across one prophet who was clearly shutting up shop in a despondent kind of way and asked him what was happening.
  'No call for us any more,' he said gruffly as he started to bang a nail into the plank he was holding across the window of his hovel.
'Oh? Why's that?'
'Hold on to the other end of this and I'll show you.'
  Arthur held up the unnailed end of the plank and the old prophet scuttled into the recesses of his hovel, returning a moment or two later with a small sub-etha radio. He turned it on, fiddled with the dial for a moment and put the thing on the small wooden bench that he usually sat and prophesied on. He then took hold of the plank again and resumed hammering.
Arthur sat and listened to the radio. '. . . be confirmed,' said the radio.
  'Tomorrow,' it continued, 'the Vice-President of Poffla Vigus, Roopy Ga Stip, will announce that he intends to run for President. In a speech he will give tomorrow at . . .'
'Find another channel,' said the prophet. Arthur pushed the preset button. '. . . refused to comment,' said the radio. 'Next week's jobless totals in
the Zabush sector,' it continued, 'will be the worst since records began. A report published next month says . . .'
  'Find another,' barked the prophet, crossly. Arthur pushed the button again.
  '. . . denied it categorically,' said the radio. 'Next month's Royal Wedding between Prince Gid of the Soofling Dynasty and Princess Hooli of Raui Alpha will be the most spectacular ceremony the Bjanjy Territories has ever witnessed. Our reporter Trillian Astra is there and sends us this report.'
Arthur blinked.
  The sound of cheering crowds and a hubbub of brass bands erupted from the radio. A very familiar voice said, 'Well, Krart, the scene here in the middle of next month is absolutely incredible. Princess Hooli is looking radiant in a . . .'
  The prophet swiped the radio off the bench and onto the dusty ground, where it squawked like a badly tuned chicken.


  'See what we have to contend with?' grumbled the prophet. 'Here, hold this. Not that, this. No, not like that. This way up. Other way round, you fool.'
  'I was listening to that,' complained Arthur, grappling helplessly with the prophet's hammer.
  'So does everybody. That's why this place is like a ghost town.' He spat into the dust.
'No, I mean, that sounded like someone I knew.'
  'Princess Hooli? If I had to stand around saying hello to everybody who's known Princess Hooli I'd need a new set of lungs.'
  'Not the princess,' said Arthur. 'The reporter. Her name's Trillian. I don't know where she got the Astra from. She's from the same planet as me. I wondered where she'd got to.'
  'Oh, she's all over the continuum these days. We can't get the tri-D TV stations out here of course, thank the Great Green Arkleseizure, but you hear her on the radio, gallivanting here and there through space-time. She wants to settle down and find herself a steady era, that young lady does. It'll all end in tears. Probably already has.' He swung with his hammer and hit his thumb rather hard. He started to speak in tongues.


The village of oracles wasn't much better.
  He had been told that when looking for a good oracle it was best to find the oracle that other oracles went to, but he was shut. There was a sign by the entrance saying, 'I just don't know any more. Try next door, but that's just a suggestion, not formal oracular advice.'
  'Next door' was a cave a few hundred yards away and Arthur walked towards it. Smoke and steam were rising from, respectively, a small fire and a battered tin pot that was hanging over it. There was also a very nasty smell coming from the pot. At least, Arthur thought it was coming from the pot. The distended bladders of some of the local goat-like things were hanging from a propped-up line drying in the sun, and the smell could have been coming from them. There was also, a worryingly small distance away, a pile of discarded bodies of the local goat-like things and the smell could have been coming from them.
  But the smell could just as easily have been coming from the old lady who was busy beating flies away from the pile of bodies. It was a hopeless task because each of the flies was about the size of a winged bottle top and


all she had was a table-tennis bat. Also she seemed half blind. Every now and then, by chance, her wild thrashing would connect with one of the flies with a richly satisfying thunk, and the fly would hurtle through the air and smack itself open against the rock face a few yards from the entrance to her cave.
  She gave every impression, by her demeanour, that these were the moments she lived for.
  Arthur watched this exotic performance for a while from a polite distance, and then at last tried giving a gentle cough to attract her attention. The gentle cough, courteously meant, unfortunately involved first inhaling rather more of the local atmosphere than he had so far been doing and, as a result, he erupted into a fit of raucous expectoration, and collapsed against the rock face, choking and streaming with tears. He struggled for breath, but each new breath made things worse. He vomited, half-choked again, rolled over his vomit, kept rolling for a few yards, and eventually made it up onto his hands and knees and crawled, panting, into slightly fresher air.
  'Excuse me,' he said. He got some breath back. 'I really am most dreadfully sorry. I feel a complete idiot and . . .' He gestured helplessly towards the small pile of his own vomit lying spread around the entrance to her cave.
'What can I say?' he said. 'What can I possibly say?'
  This at least had gained her attention. She looked round at him suspiciously, but, being half blind, had difficulty finding him in the blurred and rocky landscape.
He waved, helpfully. 'Hello!' he called.
  At last she spotted him, grunted to herself and turned back to whacking flies.
  It was horribly apparent from the way that currents of air moved when she did that the major source of the smell was in fact her. The drying bladders, the festering bodies and the noxious potage may all have been making violent contributions to the atmosphere, but the major olfactory presence was the woman herself.
  She got another good thwack at a fly. It smacked against the rock and dribbled its insides down it in what she clearly regarded, if she could see that far, as a satisfactory manner.
  Unsteadily, Arthur got to his feet and brushed himself down with a fistful of dried grass. He didn't know what else to do by way of announcing


himself. He had half a mind just to wander off again, but felt awkward about leaving a pile of his vomit in front of the entrance to the woman's home. He wondered what to do about it. He started to pluck up more handfuls of the scrubby dried grass that was to be found here and there. He was worried, though, that if he ventured nearer to the vomit he might simply add to it rather than clear it up.
  Just as he was debating with himself as to what the right course of action was he began to realize that she was at last saying something to him.
'I beg your pardon?' he called out.
  'I said, can I help you?' she said, in a thin, scratchy voice that he could only just hear.
'Er, I came to ask your advice,' he called back, feeling a bit ridiculous.
  She turned to peer at him, myopically, then turned back, swiped at a fly and missed.
'What about?' she said.
'I beg your pardon?' he said.
'I said, what about?' she almost screeched.
  'Well,' said Arthur. 'Just sort of general advice, really. It said in the brochure-'
  'Ha! Brochure!' spat the old woman. She seemed to be waving her bat more or less at random now.
  Arthur fished the crumpled-up brochure from his pocket. He wasn't quite certain why. He had already read it and she, he expected, wouldn't want to. He unfolded it anyway in order to have something to frown thoughtfully at for a moment or two. The copy in the brochure wittered on about the ancient mystical arts of the seers and sages of Hawalius, and wildly over- represented the level of accommodation available. Arthur still carried a copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy with him but found, when he consulted it, that the entries were becoming more abstruse and paranoid and had lots of x's and j's and {'s in them. Something was wrong somewhere.
Whether it was in his own personal unit, or whether it was something or someone going terribly amiss, or perhaps just hallucinating, at the heart of the Guide organization itself, he didn't know. But one way or another he was even less inclined to trust it than usual, which meant that he trusted it not one bit, and mostly used it for eating his sandwiches off when he was sitting on a rock staring at something.


  The woman had turned and was walking slowly towards him now. Arthur tried, without making it too obvious, to judge the wind direction, and bobbed about a bit as she approached.
'Advice,' she said. 'Advice, eh?'
'Er, yes,' said Arthur. 'Yes, that is . . .'
  He frowned again at the brochure, as if to be certain that he hadn't misread it and stupidly turned up on the wrong planet or something. The brochure said: 'The friendly local inhabitants will be glad to share with you the knowledge and wisdom of the ancients. Peer with them into the swirling mysteries of past and future time!' There were some coupons as well, but Arthur had been far too embarrassed actually to cut them out or try to present them to anybody.
  'Advice, eh,' said the old woman again. 'Just sort of general advice, you say. On what? What to do with your life, that sort of thing?'
  'Yes,' said Arthur. 'That sort of thing. Bit of a problem I sometimes find, if I'm being perfectly honest.' He was trying desperately, with tiny darting movements, to stay upwind of her. She surprised him by suddenly turning sharply away from him and heading off towards her cave.
'You'll have to help me with the photocopier, then,' she said. 'What?' said Arthur.
  'The photocopier,' she repeated, patiently. 'You'll have to help me drag it out. It's solar-powered. I have to keep it in the cave, though, so the birds don't shit on it.'
'I see,' said Arthur.
  'I'd take a few deep breaths if I were you,' muttered the old woman, as she stomped into the gloom of the cave mouth.
  Arthur did as she advised. He almost hyperventilated in fact. When he felt he was ready, he held his breath and followed her in.
  The photocopier was a big old thing on a rickety trolley. It stood just inside the dim shadows of the cave. The wheels were stuck obstinately in different directions and the ground was rough and stony.
  'Go ahead and take a breath outside,' said the old woman. Arthur was going red in the face trying to help her move the thing.
  He nodded in relief. If she wasn't going to be embarrassed about it then neither, he was determined, would he. He stepped outside and took a few breaths, then came back in to do more heaving and pushing. He had to do this quite a few times till at last the machine was outside.


  The sun beat down on it. The old woman disappeared back into her cave again and brought with her some mottled metal panels, which she connected to the machine to collect the sun's energy.
  She squinted up into the sky. The sun was quite bright, but the day was hazy and vague.
'It'll take a while,' she said. Arthur said he was happy to wait.
  The old woman shrugged and stomped across to the fire. Above it, the contents of the tin can were bubbling away. She poked about at them with a stick.
'You won't be wanting any lunch?' she enquired of Arthur. 'I've eaten, thanks,' said Arthur. 'No, really. I've eaten.'
  'I'm sure you have,' said the old lady. She stirred with the stick. After a few minutes she fished a lump of something out, blew on it to cool it a little, and then put it in her mouth.
She chewed on it thoughtfully for a bit.
  Then she hobbled slowly across to the pile of dead goat-like things. She spat the lump out onto the pile. She hobbled slowly back to the can. She tried to unhook it from the sort of tripod-like thing that it was hanging from.
'Can I help you?' said Arthur, jumping up politely. He hurried over.
  Together they disengaged the tin from the tripod and carried it awkwardly down the slight slope that led downwards from her cave and towards a line of scrubby and gnarled trees which marked the edge of a steep but quite shallow gully from which a whole new range of offensive smells was emanating.
'Ready?' said the old lady.
'Yes . . .' said Arthur, though he didn't know for what. 'One,' said the old lady.
'Two,' she said. 'Three,' she added.
  Arthur realized just in time what she intended. Together they tossed the contents of the tin into the gully.
  After an hour or two of uncommunicative silence, the old woman decided that the solar panels had absorbed enough sunlight to run the photocopier now and she disappeared to rummage inside her cave. She emerged at last with a few sheaves of paper and fed them through the machine.


She handed the copies to Arthur.
  'This is, er, this your advice, then, is it?' said Arthur, leafing through them uncertainly.
  'No,' said the old lady. 'It's the story of my life. You see, the quality of any advice anybody has to offer has to be judged against the quality of life they actually lead. Now, as you look through this document you'll see that I've underlined all the major decisions I ever made to make them stand out. They're all indexed and cross-referenced. See? All I can suggest is that if you take decisions that are exactly opposite to the sort of decisions that I've taken, then maybe you won't finish up at the end of your life . . .' she paused, and filled her lungs for a good shout '. . . in a smelly old cave like this!'
  She grabbed up her table-tennis bat, rolled up her sleeves, stomped off to her pile of dead goat-like things, and started to set about the flies with vim and vigour.


The last village Arthur visited consisted entirely of extremely high poles. They were so high that it wasn't possible to tell, from the ground, what was on top of them, and Arthur had to climb three before he found one that had anything on top of it at all other than a platform covered with bird droppings.
  Not an easy task. You went up the poles by climbing on the short wooden pegs that had been hammered into them in slowly ascending spirals.
Anybody who was a less diligent tourist than Arthur would have taken a couple of snapshots and sloped right off to the nearest Bar & Grill, where you also could buy a range of particularly sweet and gooey chocolate cakes to eat in front of the ascetics. But, largely as a result of this, most of the ascetics had gone now. In fact they had mostly gone and set up lucrative therapy centres on some of the more affluent worlds in the North West Ripple of the Galaxy, where the living was easier by a factor of about seventeen million, and the chocolate was just fabulous. Most of the ascetics, it turned out, had not known about chocolate before they took up asceticism. Most of the clients who came to their therapy centres knew about it all too well.
  At the top of the third pole Arthur stopped for a breather. He was very hot and out of breath, since each pole was about fifty or sixty feet high. The world seemed to swing vertiginously around him, but it didn't worry Arthur


too much. He knew that, logically, he could not die until he had been to Stavromula Beta,* and had therefore managed to cultivate a merry attitude towards extreme personal danger. He felt a little giddy perched fifty feet up in the air on top of a pole, but he dealt with it by eating a sandwich. He was just about to embark on reading the photocopied life history of the oracle when he was rather startled to hear a slight cough behind him.
  He turned so abruptly that he dropped his sandwich, which turned downwards through the air and was rather small by the time it was stopped by the ground.
  About thirty feet behind Arthur was another pole, and, alone amongst the sparse forest of about three dozen poles, the top of it was occupied. It was occupied by an old man who, in turn, seemed to be occupied by profound thoughts that were making him scowl.
  'Excuse me,' said Arthur. The man ignored him. Perhaps he couldn't hear him. The breeze was moving about a bit. It was only by chance that Arthur had heard the slight cough.
'Hello?' called Arthur. 'Hello!'
The man at last glanced round at him. He seemed surprised to see him.
Arthur couldn't tell if he was surprised and pleased to see him or just surprised.
'Are you open?' called Arthur.
  The man frowned in incomprehension. Arthur couldn't tell if he couldn't understand or couldn't hear.
'I'll pop over,' called Arthur. 'Don't go away.'
  He clambered off the small platform and climbed quickly down the spiralling pegs, arriving at the bottom quite dizzy.
  He started to make his way over to the pole on which the old man was sitting, and then suddenly realized that he had disoriented himself on the way down and didn't know for certain which one it was.
He looked around for landmarks and worked out which was the right one. He climbed it. It wasn't.
  'Damn,' he said. 'Excuse me!' he called out to the old man again, who was now straight in front of him and forty feet away. 'Got lost. Be with you in a minute.' Down he went again, getting very hot and bothered.
  When he arrived, panting and sweating, at the top of the pole that he knew for certain was the right one he realized that the man was, somehow or other, mucking him about.


  'What do you want?' shouted the old man crossly at him. He was now sitting on top of the pole that Arthur recognized as the one that he had been on himself when eating his sandwich.
'How did you get over there?' called Arthur in bewilderment. 'You think I'm going to tell you just like that what it took me forty
springs, summers and autumns of sitting on top of a pole to work out?' 'What about winter?'
'What about winter?'
'Don't you sit on the pole in the winter?'
  'Just because I sit up a pole for most of my life,' said the man, 'doesn't mean I'm an idiot. I go south in the winter. Got a beach house. Sit on the chimney stack.'
'Do you have any advice for a traveller?' 'Yes. Get a beach house.'
'I see.'
  The man stared out over the hot dry scrubby landscape. From here Arthur could just see the old woman, a tiny speck in the distance, dancing up and down swatting flies.
'You see her?' called the old man, suddenly. 'Yes,' said Arthur. 'I consulted her, in fact.'
'Fat lot she knows. I got the beach house because she turned it down.
What advice did she give you?'
'Do exactly the opposite of everything she's done.' 'In other words, get a beach house.'
'I suppose so,' said Arthur. 'Well, maybe I'll get one.' 'Hmmm.'
The horizon was swimming in a fetid heat haze.
'Any other advice?' asked Arthur. 'Other than to do with real estate?' 'A beach house isn't just real estate. It's a state of mind,' said the man.
He turned and looked at Arthur.
  Oddly, the man's face was now only a couple of feet away. He seemed in one way to be a perfectly normal shape, but his body was sitting cross- legged on a pole forty feet away while his face was only two feet from Arthur's. Without moving his head, and without seeming to do anything odd at all, he stood up and stepped onto the top of another pole. Either it was just the heat, thought Arthur, or space was a different shape for him.


  'A beach house,' he said, 'doesn't even have to be on the beach. Though the best ones are. We all like to congregate,' he went on, 'at boundary conditions.'
'Really?' said Arthur.
  'Where land meets water. Where earth meets air. Where body meets mind. Where space meets time. We like to be on one side, and look at the other.'
  Arthur got terribly excited. This was exactly the sort of thing he'd been promised in the brochure. Here was a man who seemed to be moving through some kind of Escher space saying really profound things about all sorts of stuff.
  It was unnerving though. The man was now stepping from pole to ground, from ground to pole, from pole to pole, from pole to horizon and back: he was making complete nonsense of Arthur's spatial universe. 'Please stop!' Arthur said, suddenly.
  'Can't take it, huh?' said the man. Without the slightest movement he was now back, sitting cross-legged, on top of the pole forty feet in front of Arthur. 'You come to me for advice, but you can't cope with anything you don't recognize. Hmmm. So we'll have to tell you something you already know but make it sound like news, eh? Well, business as usual, I suppose.' He sighed and squinted mournfully into the distance.
'Where you from, boy?' he then asked.
  Arthur decided to be clever. He was fed up with being mistaken for a complete idiot by everyone he ever met. 'Tell you what,' he said. 'You're a seer. Why don't you tell me?'
  The old man sighed again. 'I was just,' he said, passing his hand round behind his head, 'making conversation.' When he brought his hand round to the front again, he had a globe of the Earth spinning on his up-pointed forefinger. It was unmistakable. He put it away again. Arthur was stunned.
'How did you-' 'I can't tell you.'
'Why not? I've come all this way.'
  'You cannot see what I see because you see what you see. You cannot know what I know because you know what you know. What I see and what I know cannot be added to what you see and what you know because they are not of the same kind. Neither can it replace what you see and what you know, because that would be to replace you yourself.'


  'Hang on, can I write this down?' said Arthur, excitedly fumbling in his pocket for a pencil.
  'You can pick up a copy at the spaceport,' said the old man. 'They've got racks of the stuff.'
  'Oh,' said Arthur, disappointed. 'Well, isn't there anything that's perhaps a bit more specific to me?'
  'Everything you see or hear or experience in any way at all is specific to you. You create a universe by perceiving it, so everything in the universe you perceive is specific to you.'
  Arthur looked at him doubtfully. 'Can I get that at the spaceport, too?' he said.
'Check it out,' said the old man.
  'It says in the brochure,' said Arthur, pulling it out of his pocket and looking at it again, 'that I can have a special prayer, individually tailored to me and my special needs.'
'Oh, all right,' said the old man. 'Here's a prayer for you. Got a pencil?' 'Yes,' said Arthur.
  'It goes like this. Let's see now: "Protect me from knowing what I don't need to know. Protect me from even knowing that there are things to know that I don't know. Protect me from knowing that I decided not to know about the things that I decided not to know about. Amen." That's it. It's what you pray silently inside yourself anyway, so you may as well have it out in the open.'
'Hmmm,' said Arthur. 'Well, thank you-'
  'There's another prayer that goes with it that's very important,' continued the old man, 'so you'd better jot this down, too.'
'OK.'
  'It goes, "Lord, lord, lord . . ." It's best to put that bit in, just in case. You can never be too sure. "Lord, lord, lord. Protect me from the consequences of the above prayer. Amen." And that's it. Most of the trouble people get into in life comes from missing out that last part.'
'Ever heard of a place called Stavromula Beta?' asked Arthur. 'No.'
'Well, thank you for your help,' said Arthur.
'Don't mention it,' said the man on the pole, and vanished.


10


Ford hurled himself at the door of the editor-in-chief's office, tucked himself into a tight ball as the frame splintered and gave way once again, rolled rapidly across the floor to where the smart grey crushed-leather sofa was and set up his strategic operational base behind it.
That, at least, was the plan.
Unfortunately the smart grey crushed-leather sofa wasn't there.
  Why, thought Ford, as he twisted himself round in mid-air, lurched, dived and scuttled for cover behind Harl's desk, did people have this stupid obsession with rearranging their office furniture every five minutes?
  Why, for instance, replace a perfectly serviceable if rather muted grey crushed-leather sofa with what appeared to be a small tank?
  And who was the big guy with the mobile rocket launcher on his shoulder? Someone from head office? Couldn't be. This was head office. At least it was the head office of the Guide. Where these InfiniDim Enterprises guys came from Zarquon knew. Nowhere very sunny, judging from the
slug-like colour and texture of their skins. This was all wrong, thought Ford. People connected with the Guide should come from sunny places.
  There were several of them, in fact, and all of them seemed to be more heavily armed and armoured than you normally expected corporate executives to be, even in today's rough and tumble business world.
  He was making a lot of assumptions here, of course. He was assuming that the big, bull-necked, slug-like guys were in some way connected with InfiniDim Enterprises, but it was a reasonable assumption and he felt happy about it because they had logos on their armour-plating which said 'InfiniDim Enterprises' on them. He had a nagging suspicion that this was not a business meeting, though. He also had a nagging feeling that these slug-like creatures were familiar to him in some way. Familiar, but in an unfamiliar guise.
  Well, he had been in the room for a good two and a half seconds now, and thought that it was probably about time to start doing something constructive. He could take a hostage. That would be good.
  Vann Harl was in his swivel chair, looking alarmed, pale and shaken. Had probably had some bad news as well as a nasty bang to the back of his head. Ford leapt to his feet and made a running grab for him.


  Under the pretext of getting him into a good solid double underpinned elbow-lock, Ford managed surreptitiously to slip the Ident-i-Eeze back into Harl's inner pocket.
Bingo!
  He'd done what he came to do. Now he just had to talk his way out of here.
'OK,' he said. 'I . . .' He paused.
  The big guy with the rocket launcher was turning towards Ford Prefect and pointing it at him, which Ford couldn't help feeling was wildly irresponsible behaviour.
'I . . .' he started again, and then on a sudden impulse decided to duck.
  There was a deafening roar as flames leapt from the back of the rocket launcher and a rocket leapt from its front.
  The rocket hurtled past Ford and hit the large plate-glass window, which billowed outwards in a shower of a million shards under the force of the explosion. Huge shock waves of noise and air pressure reverberated around the room, sweeping a couple of chairs, a filing cabinet and Colin the security robot out of the window.
  Ah! So they're not totally rocket-proof after all, thought Ford Prefect to himself. Someone should have a word with somebody about that. He disentangled himself from Harl and tried to work out which way to run.
He was surrounded.
  The big guy with the rocket launcher was moving it up into position for another shot.
Ford was completely at a loss for what to do next.
  'Look,' he said in a stern voice. But he wasn't certain how far saying things like 'Look' in a stern voice was necessarily going to get him, and time was not on his side. What the hell, he thought, you're only young once, and threw himself out of the window. That would at least keep the element of surprise on his side.


11


The first thing Arthur Dent had to do, he realized resignedly, was to get himself a life. This meant he had to find a planet he could have one on. It had to be a planet he could breathe on, where he could stand up and sit


down without experiencing gravitational discomfort. It had to be somewhere where the acid levels were low and the plants didn't actually attack you.
  'I hate to be anthropic about this,' he said to the strange thing behind the desk at the Resettlement Advice Centre on Pintleton Alpha, 'but I'd quite like to live somewhere where the people look vaguely like me as well. You know. Sort of human.'
  The strange thing behind the desk waved some of its stranger bits around and seemed rather taken aback by this. It oozed and glopped off its seat, thrashed its way slowly across the floor, ingested the old metal filing cabinet and then, with a great belch, excreted the appropriate drawer. It popped out a couple of glistening tentacles from its ear, removed some files from the drawer, sucked the drawer back in and vomited up the cabinet again. It thrashed its way back across the floor, slimed its way back up onto the seat and slapped the files on the table.
'See anything you fancy?' it asked.
Arthur looked nervously through some grubby and damp pieces of paper.
He was definitely in some backwater part of the Galaxy here, and somewhere off to the left as far as the universe he knew and recognized was concerned. In the space where his own home should have been there was a rotten hick planet, drowned with rain and inhabited by thugs and boghogs.
Even The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy seemed to work only fitfully here, which was why he was reduced to making these sorts of enquiries in these sorts of places. One place he always asked after was Stavromula Beta, but no one had ever heard of such a planet.
  The available worlds looked pretty grim. They had little to offer him because he had little to offer them. He had been extremely chastened to realize that although he originally came from a world which had cars and computers and ballet and Armagnac he didn't, by himself, know how any of it worked. He couldn't do it. Left to his own devices he couldn't build a toaster. He could just about make a sandwich and that was it. There was not a lot of demand for his services.
  Arthur's heart sank. This surprised him, because he thought it was already about as low as it could possibly be. He closed his eyes for a moment. He so much wanted to be home. He so much wanted his own home world, the actual Earth he had grown up on, not to have been demolished. He so much wanted none of this to have happened. He so much


wanted that when he opened his eyes again he would be standing on the doorstep of his little cottage in the West Country of England, that the sun would be shining over the green hills, the post van would be going up the lane, the daffodils would be blooming in his garden, and in the distance the pub would be opening for lunch. He so much wanted to take the newspaper down to the pub and read it over a pint of bitter. He so much wanted to do the crossword. He so much wanted to be able to get completely stuck on 17 across.
He opened his eyes.
  The strange thing was pulsating irritably at him, tapping some kind of pseudopod on the desk.
Arthur shook his head and looked at the next sheet of paper. Grim, he thought. And the next.
Very grim. And the next.
Oh . . . Now that looked better.
  It was a world called Bartledan. It had oxygen. It had green hills. It even, it seemed, had a renowned literary culture. But the thing that most aroused his interest was a photograph of a small bunch of Bartledanian people, standing around in a village square, smiling pleasantly at the camera.
  'Ah,' he said, and held the picture up to the strange thing behind the desk.
  Its eyes squirmed out on stalks and rolled up and down the piece of paper, leaving a glistening trail of slime all over it.
'Yes,' it said with distaste. 'They do look exactly like you.'


Arthur moved to Bartledan and, using some money he had made by selling some toenail clippings and spit to a DNA bank, he bought himself a room in the village featured in the picture. It was pleasant there. The air was balmy. The people looked like him and seemed not to mind him being there. They didn't attack him with anything. He bought some clothes and a cupboard to put them in.
He had got himself a life. Now he had to find a purpose in it.
  At first he tried to sit and read. But the literature of Bartledan, famed though it was throughout this sector of the Galaxy for its subtlety and grace, didn't seem to be able to sustain his interest. The problem was that it wasn't actually about human beings after all. It wasn't about what human beings wanted. The people of Bartledan were remarkably like human beings to


look at, but when you said 'Good evening' to one, he would tend to look around with a slight sense of surprise, sniff the air and say that, yes, he supposed that it probably was a goodish evening now that Arthur came to mention it.
  'No, what I meant was to wish you a good evening,' Arthur would say, or rather, used to say. He soon learned to avoid these conversations. 'I mean that I hope you have a good evening,' he would add.
More puzzlement.
'Wish?' the Bartledanian would say at last, in polite bafflement.
'Er, yes,' Arthur would then have said. 'I'm just expressing the hope that
. . .'
'Hope?'
'Yes.'
'What is hope?'
  Good question, thought Arthur to himself, and retreated back to his room to think about things.
  On the one hand he could only recognize and respect what he learnt about the Bartledanian view of the Universe, which was that the Universe was what the Universe was, take it or leave it. On the other hand he could not help but feel that not to desire anything, not ever to wish or to hope, was just not natural.
Natural. There was a tricky word.
  He had long ago realized that a lot of things that he had thought of as natural, like buying people presents at Christmas, stopping at red lights or falling at a rate of 32 feet per second per second, were just the habits of his own world and didn't necessarily work the same way anywhere else; but not to wish - that really couldn't be natural, could it? That would be like not breathing.
  Breathing was another thing that the Bartledanians didn't do, despite all the oxygen in the atmosphere. They just stood there. Occasionally they ran around and played netball and stuff (without ever wishing to win though, of course - they would just play, and whoever won, won), but they never actually breathed. It was, for some reason, unnecessary. Arthur quickly learned that playing netball with them was just too spooky. Though they looked like humans, and even moved and sounded like humans, they didn't breathe and they didn't wish for things.


  Breathing and wishing for things, on the other hand, was just about all that Arthur seemed to do all day. Sometimes he would wish for things so much that his breathing would get quite agitated, and he would have to go and lie down for a bit. On his own. In his small room. So far from the world which had given birth to him that his brain could not even process the sort of numbers involved without just going limp.
  He preferred not to think about it. He preferred just to sit and read - or at least he would prefer it if there was anything worth reading. But nobody in Bartledanian stories ever wanted anything. Not even a glass of water.
Certainly, they would fetch one if they were thirsty, but if there wasn't one available, they would think no more about it. He had just read an entire book in which the main character had, over the course of a week, done some work in his garden, played a great deal of netball, helped mend a road, fathered a child on his wife and then unexpectedly died of thirst just before the last chapter. In exasperation Arthur had combed his way back through the book and in the end had found a passing reference to some problem with the plumbing in Chapter 2. And that was it. So the guy dies. It just happens.
  It wasn't even the climax of the book, because there wasn't one. The character died about a third of the way through the penultimate chapter of the book, and the rest of it was just more stuff about road-mending. The book just finished dead at the one hundred thousandth word, because that was how long books were on Bartledan.
  Arthur threw the book across the room, sold the room and left. He started to travel with wild abandon, trading in more and more spit, toenails, fingernails, blood, hair, anything that anybody wanted, for tickets. For semen, he discovered, he could travel first class. He settled nowhere, but only existed in the hermetic, twilight world of the cabins of hyperspatial starships, eating, drinking, sleeping, watching movies, only stopping at spaceports to donate more DNA and catch the next long-haul ship out. He waited and waited for another accident to happen.
The trouble with trying to make the right accident happen is that it won't.
That is not what 'accident' means. The accident that eventually occurred was not what he had planned at all. The ship he was on blipped in hyperspace, flickered horribly between ninety-seven different points in the Galaxy simultaneously, caught the unexpected gravitational pull of an


uncharted planet in one of them, became ensnared in its outer atmosphere and began to fall, screaming and tearing, into it.
  The ship's systems protested all the way down that everything was perfectly normal and under control, but when it went into a final hectic spin, ripped wildly through half a mile of trees and finally exploded into a seething ball of flame it became clear that this was not the case.
  Fire engulfed the forest, boiled into the night, then neatly put itself out, as all unscheduled fires over a certain size are now required to do by law. For a short while afterwards, other small fires flared up here and there as odd pieces of scattered debris exploded quietly in their own time. Then they too died away.
  Arthur Dent, because of the sheer boredom of endless interstellar flight, was the only one on board who had actually familiarized himself with the ship's safety procedures in case of an unscheduled landing, and was therefore the sole survivor. He lay dazed, broken and bleeding in a sort of fluffy pink plastic cocoon with 'Have a nice day' printed in over three thousand different languages all over it.
  Black, roaring silences swam sickeningly through his shattered mind. He knew with a kind of resigned certainty that he would survive, because he had not yet been to Stavromula Beta.
  After what seemed an eternity of pain and darkness, he became aware of quiet shapes moving around him.


12


Ford tumbled through the open air in a cloud of glass splinters and chair parts. Again, he hadn't really thought things through, really, and was just playing it by ear, buying time. At times of major crisis he found it was often quite helpful to have his life flash before his eyes. It gave him a chance to reflect on things, see things in some sort of perspective, and it sometimes furnished him with a vital clue as to what to do next.
  There was the ground rushing up to meet him at 30 feet per second per second, but he would, he thought, deal with that problem when he got to it. First things first.
  Ah, here it came. His childhood. Humdrum stuff, he'd been through it all before. Images flashed by. Boring times on Betelgeuse Five. Zaphod


Beeblebrox as a kid. Yes, he knew all that. He wished he had some kind of fast-forward in his brain. His seventh birthday party, being given his first towel. Come on, come on.
  He was twisting and turning downwards, the outside air at this height a cold shock to his lungs. Trying not to inhale glass.
  Early voyages to other planets. Oh for zark's sake, this was like some sort of bloody travelogue documentary before the main feature. First beginning to work for the Guide.
Ah!
  Those were the days. They worked out of a hut on the Bwenelli Atoll on Fanalla before the Riktanarqals and the Danqueds vertled it. Half a dozen guys, some towels, a handful of highly sophisticated digital devices, and most importantly a lot of dreams. No. Most importantly a lot of Fanallan rum. To be completely accurate, that Ol' Janx Spirit was the absolute most important thing, then the Fanallan rum, and also some of the beaches on the atoll where the local girls would hang out, but the dreams were important as well. Whatever happened to those?
  He couldn't quite remember what the dreams were, in fact, but they had seemed immensely important at the time. They had certainly not involved this huge towering office block he was now falling down the side of. All of that had come when some of the original team had started to settle down and get greedy, while he and others had stayed out in the field, researching and hitchhiking, and gradually becoming more and more isolated from the corporate nightmare the Guide had inexorably turned into, and the architectural monstrosity it had come to occupy. Where were the dreams in that? He thought of all the corporate lawyers who occupied half of the building, all the 'operatives' who occupied the lower levels, and all the sub- editors and their secretaries and their secretaries' lawyers and their secretaries' lawyers' secretaries, and worst of all the accountants and the marketing department.
He had half a mind just to keep on falling. Two fingers to the lot of them.
  He was just passing the seventeenth floor now, where the marketing department hung out. Load of tosspots all arguing about what colour the Guide should be and exercising their infinitely infallible skills of being wise after the event. If any of them had chosen to look out of the window at that moment they would have been startled by the sight of Ford Prefect dropping past them to his certain death and flicking V-signs at them.


  Sixteenth floor. Sub-editors. Bastards. What about all that copy of his they'd cut? Fifteen years of research he'd filed from one planet alone and they'd cut it to two words. 'Mostly harmless.' V-signs to them as well.
  Fifteenth floor. Logistical Administration, whatever that was about. They all had big cars. That, he thought, was what that was about.
  Fourteenth floor. Personnel. He had a very shrewd suspicion that it was they who had engineered his fifteen-year exile while the Guide metamorphosed into the corporate monolith (or rather, duolith - mustn't forget the lawyers) it had become.
Thirteenth floor. Research and development. Hang about.
Thirteenth floor.
  He was having to think rather fast at the moment because the situation was becoming a little urgent.
  He suddenly remembered the floor display panel in the elevator. It hadn't had a thirteenth floor. He'd thought no more about it because, having spent fifteen years on the rather backward planet Earth where they were superstitious about the number thirteen, he was used to being in buildings that numbered their floors without it. No reason for that here, though.
  The windows of the thirteenth floor, he could not help noticing as he flashed swiftly by them, were darkened.
  What was going on in there? He started to remember all the stuff that Harl had been talking about. One, new, multidimensional Guide spread across an infinite number of universes. It had sounded, the way Harl had put it, like wild meaninglessness dreamed up by the marketing department with the backing of the accountants. If it was any more real than that then it was a very weird and dangerous idea. Was it real? What was going on behind the darkened windows of the sealed-off thirteenth floor?
  Ford felt a rising sense of curiosity, and then a rising sense of panic. That was the complete list of rising feelings he had. In every other respect he was falling very rapidly. He really ought to turn his mind to wondering how he was going to get out of this situation alive.
  He glanced down. A hundred feet or so below him people were milling around, some of them beginning to look up expectantly. Clearing a space for him. Even temporarily calling off the wonderful and completely fatuous hunt for wockets.


  He would hate to disappoint them, but about two feet below him, he hadn't realized before, was Colin. Colin had obviously been happily dancing attendance and waiting for him to decide what he wanted to do.
'Colin!' Ford bawled.
  Colin didn't respond. Ford went cold. Then he suddenly realized that he hadn't told Colin his name was Colin.
'Come up here!' Ford bawled.
  Colin bobbed up beside him. Colin was enjoying the ride down immensely and hoped that Ford was, too.
  Colin's world went unexpectedly dark as Ford's towel suddenly enveloped him. Colin immediately felt himself get much, much heavier. He was thrilled and delighted by the challenge that Ford had presented him with. Just not sure if he could handle it, that was all.
  The towel was slung over Colin. Ford was hanging from the towel, gripping its seams. Other hitchhikers had seen fit to modify their towels in exotic ways, weaving all kinds of esoteric tools and utilities and even computer equipment into their fabric. Ford was a purist. He liked to keep things simple. He carried a regular towel from a regular domestic soft- furnishings shop. It even had a kind of blue and pink floral pattern despite his repeated attempts to bleach and stone wash it. It had a couple of pieces of wire threaded into it, a bit of flexible writing stick, and also some nutrients soaked into one of the corners of the fabric so he could suck it in an emergency, but otherwise it was a simple towel you could dry your face on.
  The only actual modification he had been persuaded by a friend to make to it was to reinforce the seams.
Ford gripped the seams like a maniac.
They were still descending, but the rate had slowed. 'Up, Colin!' he shouted.
Nothing.
  'Your name,' shouted Ford, 'is Colin. So when I shout "Up, Colin!" I want you, Colin, to go up. OK? Up, Colin!'
  Nothing. Or rather a sort of muffled groaning sound from Colin. Ford was very anxious. They were descending very slowly now, but Ford was very anxious about the sort of people he could see assembling on the ground beneath him. Friendly, local, wocket-hunting types were dispersing, and thick, heavy, bull-necked, slug-like creatures with rocket launchers


were, it seemed, sliding out of what was usually called thin air. Thin air, as all experienced Galactic travellers well know, is, in fact, extremely thick with multi-dimensional complexities.
'Up,' bellowed Ford again. 'Up! Colin, go up!'
  Colin was straining and groaning. They were now more or less stationary in the air. Ford felt as if his fingers were breaking.
'Up!'
They stayed put. 'Up, up, up!'
A slug was preparing to launch a rocket at him. Ford couldn't believe it.
He was hanging from a towel in mid-air and a slug was preparing to fire rockets at him. He was running out of anything he could think of doing and was beginning to get seriously alarmed.
  This was the sort of predicament that he usually relied on having the Guide available for to give advice, however infuriating or glib, but this was not a moment for reaching into his pocket. And the Guide seemed to be no longer a friend and ally but was now itself a source of danger. These were the Guide offices he was hanging outside, for Zark's sake, in danger of his life from the people who now appeared to own the thing. What had become of all the dreams he vaguely remembered having on the Bwenelli Atoll?
They should have let it all be. They should have stayed there. Stayed on the beach. Loved good women. Lived on fish. He should have known it was all wrong the moment they started hanging grand pianos over the sea-monster pool in the atrium. He began to feel thoroughly wasted and miserable. His fingers were on fire with clenched pain. And his ankle was still hurting.
  Oh thank you, ankle, he thought to himself bitterly. Thank you for bringing up your problems at this time. I expect you'd like a nice warm footbath to make you feel better, wouldn't you? Or at least you'd like me to
. . .
He had an idea.
  The armoured slug had hoisted the rocket launcher up onto its shoulder. The rocket was presumably designed to hit anything in its path that moved.
  Ford tried not to sweat because he could feel his grip on the seams of his towel slipping.
  With the toe of his good foot he nudged and prised at the heel of the shoe on his hurting foot.


  'Go up, damn you!' Ford muttered hopelessly to Colin, who was cheerily straining away but unable to rise. Ford worked away at the heel of his shoe.
He was trying to judge the timing, but there was no point. Just go for it.
He only had one shot and that was it. He had now eased the back of his shoe down off his heel. His twisted ankle felt a little better. Well that was good, wasn't it?
  With his other foot he kicked at the heel of the shoe. It slipped off his foot and fell through the air. About half a second later a rocket erupted up from the muzzle of its launcher, encountered the shoe falling through its path, went straight for it, hit it, and exploded with a great sense of satisfaction and achievement.
This happened about fifteen feet from the ground.
  The main force of the explosion was directed downwards. Where, a second earlier, there had been a squad of InfiniDim Enterprises executives with a rocket launcher standing on an elegant terraced plaza paved with large slabs of lustrous stone cut from the ancient alabastrum quarries of Zentalquabula there was now, instead, a bit of a pit with nasty bits in it.
  A great wump of hot air welled up from the explosion, throwing Ford and Colin violently up into the sky. Ford fought desperately and blindly to hold on and failed. He turned helplessly upwards through the sky, reached the peak of a parabola, paused and then started to fall again. He fell and fell and fell and suddenly winded himself badly on Colin, who was still rising.
  He clasped himself desperately on to the small spherical robot. Colin slewed wildly through the air towards the tower of the Guide offices, trying delightedly to control himself and slow down.
  The world spun sickeningly round Ford's head as they spun and twisted round each other and then, equally sickeningly, everything suddenly stopped.
Ford found himself deposited dizzily on a window ledge. His towel fell past and he grabbed at it and caught it.
Colin bobbed in the air inches away from him.
  Ford looked around himself in a bruised, bleeding and breathless daze. The ledge was only about a foot wide and he was perched precariously on it, thirteen storeys up.
Thirteen.
He knew they were thirteen storeys up because the windows were dark.
He was bitterly upset. He had bought those shoes for some absurd price in a


store on the Lower East Side in New York. He had, as a result, written an entire essay on the joys of great footwear, all of which had been jettisoned in the 'Mostly harmless' debacle. Damn everything.
  And now one of the shoes was gone. He threw his head back and stared at the sky.
  It wouldn't be such a grim tragedy if the planet in question hadn't been demolished, which meant that he wouldn't even be able to get another pair.
  Yes, given the infinite sideways extension of probability there was, of course, an almost infinite multiplicity of planets Earth, but, when you came down to it, a major pair of shoes wasn't something you could just replace by mucking about in multidimensional space-time.
He sighed.
  Oh well, he'd better make the best of it. At least it had saved his life. For the time being.
  He was perched on a foot-wide ledge thirteen storeys up the side of a building and he wasn't at all sure that that was worth a good shoe.
He stared in woozily through the darkened glass. It was as dark and silent as the tomb.
  No. That was a ridiculous thing to think. He'd been to some great parties in tombs.
  Could he detect some movement? He wasn't quite sure. It seemed that he could see some kind of weird, flapping shadow. Perhaps it was just blood dribbling over his eyelashes. He wiped it away. Boy, he'd love to have a farm somewhere, keep some sheep. He peered into the window again, trying to make out what the shape was, but he had the feeling, so common in today's universe, that he was looking into some kind of optical illusion and that his eyes were just playing silly buggers with him.
  Was there a bird of some kind in there? Was that what they had hidden away up here on a concealed floor behind darkened, rocket-proof glass? Someone's aviary? There was certainly something flapping about in there, but it seemed like not so much a bird, more a kind of bird-shaped hole in space.
  He closed his eyes, which he'd been wanting to do for a bit anyway. He wondered what the hell to do next. Jump? Climb? He didn't think there was going to be any way of breaking in. OK, the supposedly rocket-proof glass hadn't stood up, when it came to it, to an actual rocket, but then that had been a rocket that had been fired at very short range from inside, which


probably wasn't what the engineers who designed it had had in mind. It didn't mean he was going to be able to break the window here by wrapping his fist in his towel and punching. What the hell, he tried it anyway and hurt his fist. It was just as well he couldn't get a good swing from where he was sitting or he might have hurt it quite badly. The building had been sturdily reinforced when it was completely rebuilt after the Frogstar attack, and was probably the most heavily armoured publishing company in the business, but there was always, he thought, some weakness in any system designed by a corporate committee. He had already found one of them. The engineers who designed the windows had not expected them to be hit by a rocket from short range from the inside, so the window had failed.
  So, what would the engineers not be expecting someone sitting on the ledge outside the window to do?
He racked his brains for a moment or so before he got it.
  The thing they wouldn't be expecting him to do was to be there in the first place. Only an absolute idiot would be sitting where he was, so he was winning already. A common mistake that people make when trying to design something completely foolproof is to underestimate the ingenuity of complete fools.
  He pulled his newly acquired credit card from his pocket, slid it into a crack where the window met its surrounding frame, and did something a rocket would not have been able to do. He wiggled it around a bit. He felt a catch slip. He slid the window open and almost fell backwards off the ledge laughing, giving thanks as he did so for the Great Ventilation and Telephone Riots of SrDt 3454.


The Great Ventilation and Telephone Riots of SrDt 3454 had started off as just a lot of hot air. Hot air was, of course, the problem that ventilation was supposed to solve and generally it had solved the problem reasonably well up to the point when someone invented air-conditioning, which solved the problem far more throbbingly.
  And that was all well and good provided you could stand the noise and the dribbling until someone else came up with something even sexier and smarter than air-conditioning, which was called in-building climate control.
Now this was quite something.
  The major differences from just ordinary air-conditioning were that it was thrillingly more expensive and involved a huge amount of sophisticated


measuring and regulating equipment which was far better at knowing, moment by moment, what kind of air people wanted to breathe than mere people did.
  It also meant that, to be sure that mere people didn't muck up the sophisticated calculations which the system was making on their behalf, all the windows in the buildings were sealed shut. This is true.
  While the systems were being installed, a number of people who were going to work in the buildings found themselves having conversations with Breathe-O-Smart systems fitters which went something like this:
'But what if we want to have the windows open?'
'You won't want to have the windows open with new Breathe-O-Smart.' 'Yes, but supposing we just wanted to have them open for a little bit?' 'You won't want to have them open even for a little bit. The new
Breathe-O-Smart system will see to that.' 'Hmmm.'
'Enjoy Breathe-O-Smart!'
  'OK, so what if the Breathe-O-Smart breaks down or goes wrong or something?'
  'Ah! One of the smartest features of the Breathe-O-Smart is that it cannot possibly go wrong. So. No worries on that score. Enjoy your breathing now, and have a nice day.'
  (It was, of course, as a result of the Great Ventilation and Telephone Riots of SrDt 3454 that all mechanical or electrical or quantum-mechanical or hydraulic or even wind, steam or piston-driven devices are now required to have a certain legend emblazoned on them somewhere. It doesn't matter how small the object is, the designers of the object have got to find a way of squeezing the legend in somewhere, because it is their attention which is being drawn to it rather than necessarily that of the user's.
The legend is this:
  'The major difference between a thing that might go wrong and a thing that cannot possibly go wrong is that when a thing that cannot possibly go wrong goes wrong it usually turns out to be impossible to get at or repair.')
  Major heatwaves started to coincide, with almost magical precision, with major failures of the Breathe-O-Smart systems. To begin with this merely caused simmering resentment and only a few deaths from asphyxiation.
  The real horror erupted on the day that three events happened simultaneously. The first event was that Breathe-O-Smart Inc. issued a


statement to the effect that best results were achieved by using their systems in temperate climates.
  The second event was the breakdown of a Breathe-O-Smart system on a particularly hot and humid day with the resulting evacuation of many hundreds of office staff into the street where they met the third event, which was a rampaging mob of long-distance telephone operators who had got so twisted with having to say, all day and every day, 'Thank you for using BS&S,' to every single idiot who picked up a phone that they had finally taken to the streets with trash cans, megaphones and rifles.
  In the ensuing days of carnage every single window in the city, rocket- proof or not, was smashed, usually to accompanying cries of 'Get off the line, asshole! I don't care what number you want, what extension you're calling from. Go and stick a firework up your bottom! Yeeehaah! Hoo Hoo Hoo! Velooooom! Squawk!' and a variety of other animal noises that they didn't get a chance to practise in the normal line of their work.
  As a result of this, all telephone operators were granted a constitutional right to say 'Use BS&S and die!' at least once an hour when answering the phone and all office buildings were required to have windows that opened, even if only a little bit.
  Another, unexpected result was a dramatic lowering of the suicide rate. All sorts of stressed and rising executives who had been forced, during the dark days of the Breathe-O-Smart tyranny, to jump in front of trains or stab themselves, could now just clamber out onto their own window ledges and leap off at their leisure. What frequently happened, though, was that in the moment or two they had to look around and gather their thoughts they would suddenly discover that all they had really needed was a breath of air and a fresh perspective on things, and maybe also a farm on which they could keep a few sheep.
  Another completely unlooked-for result was that Ford Prefect, stranded thirteen storeys up a heavily armoured building armed with nothing but a towel and a credit card, was nevertheless able to clamber through a supposedly rocket-proof window to safety.
  He closed the window neatly after him, having first allowed Colin to follow him through, and then started to look around for this bird thing.
  The thing he realized about the windows was this: because they had been converted into openable windows after they had first been designed to be


impregnable, they were, in fact, much less secure than if they had been designed as openable windows in the first place.
  Hey ho, it's a funny old life, he was just thinking to himself, when he suddenly realized that the room he had gone to all this trouble to break into was not a very interesting one.
He stopped in surprise.
  Where was the strange flapping shape? Where was anything that was worth all this palaver - the extraordinary veil of secrecy that seemed to lie over this room and the equally extraordinary sequence of events that had seemed to conspire to get him into it?
  The room, like every other room in this building now, was done out in some appallingly tasteful grey. There were a few charts and drawings on the wall. Most of them were meaningless to Ford, but then he came across something that was obviously a mock-up for a poster of some kind.
  There was a kind of bird-like logo on it, and a slogan which said: 'The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Mk II: the single most astounding thing of any kind ever. Coming soon to a dimension near you.' No more information than that.
  Ford looked around again. Then his attention was gradually drawn to Colin, the absurdly over-happy security robot, who was cowering in a corner of the room gibbering with what seemed strangely like fear.
  Odd, thought Ford. He looked around to see what it was that Colin might have been reacting to. Then he saw something that he hadn't noticed before, lying quietly on top of a work bench.
  It was circular and black and about the size of a small side plate. Its top and its bottom were smoothly convex so that it resembled a small lightweight throwing discus.
Its surfaces seemed to be completely smooth, unbroken and featureless. It was doing nothing.
  Then Ford noticed that there was something written on it. Strange. There hadn't been anything written on it a moment ago and now suddenly there was. There just didn't seem to have been any observable transition between the two states.
All it said, in small, alarming letters was a single word: PANIC
  A moment ago there hadn't been any marks or cracks in its surface. Now there were. They were growing.


  Panic, the Guide Mk II said. Ford began to do as he was told. He had just remembered why the slug-like creatures looked familiar. Their colour scheme was a kind of corporate grey, but in all other respects they looked exactly like Vogons.


13


The ship dropped quietly to land on the edge of the wide clearing, a hundred yards or so from the village.
  It arrived suddenly and unexpectedly but with a minimum of fuss. One moment it was a perfectly ordinary late afternoon in the early autumn - the leaves were just beginning to turn red and gold, the river was beginning to swell again with the rains from the mountains in the north, the plumage of the pikka birds was beginning to thicken in anticipation of the coming winter frosts, any day now the Perfectly Normal Beasts would start their thunderous migration across the plains, and Old Thrashbarg was beginning to mutter to himself as he hobbled his way around the village, a muttering which meant that he was rehearsing and elaborating the stories that he would tell of the past year once the evenings had drawn in and people had no choice but to gather round the fire and listen to him and grumble and say that that wasn't how they remembered it - and the next moment there was a spaceship sitting there, gleaming in the warm autumn sun.
It hummed for a bit and then stopped.
  It wasn't a big spaceship. If the villagers had been experts on spaceships they would have known at once that it was a pretty nifty one, a small sleek Hrundi four-berth runabout with just about every optional extra in the brochure except Advanced Vectoid Stabilisis, which only wimps went for. You can't get a good tight, sharp curve round a tri-lateral time axis with Advanced Vectoid Stabilisis. All right, it's a bit safer, but it makes the handling go all soggy.
  The villagers didn't know all that, of course. Most of them here on the remote planet of Lamuella had never seen a spaceship, certainly not one that was all in one piece, and as it shone warmly in the evening light it was just the most extraordinary thing they had come across since the day Kirp caught a fish with a head at both ends.
Everybody had fallen silent.


  Whereas a moment before two or three dozen people had been wandering about, chattering, chopping wood, carrying water, teasing the pikka birds, or just amiably trying to stay out of Old Thrashbarg's way, suddenly all activity died away and everybody turned to look at the strange object in amazement.
  Or, not quite everybody. The pikka birds tended to be amazed by completely different things. A perfectly ordinary leaf lying unexpectedly on a stone would cause them to skitter off in paroxysms of confusion; sunrise took them completely by surprise every morning; but the arrival of an alien craft from another world simply failed to engage any part of their attention. They continued to kar and rit and huk as they pecked for seeds on the ground; the river continued with its quiet, spacious burbling.
  Also, the noise of loud and tuneless singing from the last hut on the left continued unabated.
  Suddenly, with a slight click and a hum, a door folded itself outwards and downwards from the spaceship. Then, for a minute or two, nothing further seemed to happen other than the loud singing from the last hut on the left, and the thing just sat there.
  Some of the villagers, particularly the boys, began to edge forward a little bit to have a closer look. Old Thrashbarg tried to shoo them back. This was exactly the sort of thing that Old Thrashbarg didn't like to have happening. He hadn't foretold it, not even slightly, and even though he would be able to wrestle the whole thing into his continuing story somehow or other, it really was all getting a bit much to deal with.
  He strode forward, pushed the boys back, and raised his arms and his ancient knobbly staff into the air. The long warm light of the evening sun caught him nicely. He prepared to welcome whatever gods these were as if he had been expecting them all along.
Still nothing happened.
  Gradually it became clear that there was some kind of argument going on inside the craft. Time went by and Old Thrashbarg's arms were beginning to ache.
Suddenly the ramp folded itself back up again.
  That made it easy for Thrashbarg. They were demons and he had repulsed them. The reason he hadn't foretold it was that prudence and modesty forbade.


  Almost immediately a different ramp folded itself out on the other side of the craft from where Thrashbarg was standing, and two figures at last emerged on it, still arguing with each other and ignoring everybody, even Thrashbarg, whom they wouldn't even have noticed from where they were standing.
Old Thrashbarg chewed angrily on his beard.
  To continue to stand there with his arms upraised? To kneel with his head bowed forward and his staff held out pointing at them? To fall backwards as if overcome in some titanic inner struggle? Perhaps just to go off to the woods and live in a tree for a year without speaking to anyone?
  He opted just to drop his arms smartly as if he had done what he meant to do. They were really hurting so he didn't have much choice. He made a small, secret sign he had just invented towards the ramp which had closed and then made three and a half steps backwards, so he could at least get a good look at whoever these people were and then decide what to do next.
  The taller one was a very good-looking woman wearing soft and crumply clothes. Old Thrashbarg didn't know this, but they were made of Rymplon(tm), a new synthetic fabric which was terrific for space travel because it looked its absolute best when it was all creased and sweaty.
  The shorter one was a girl. She was awkward and sullen-looking, and was wearing clothes which looked their absolute worst when they were all creased and sweaty, and what was more she almost certainly knew it.
  All eyes watched them, except for the pikka birds, which had their own things to watch.
  The woman stood and looked around her. She had a purposeful air about her. There was obviously something in particular she wanted, but she didn't know exactly where to find it. She glanced from face to face among the villagers assembled curiously around her without apparently seeing what she was looking for.
  Thrashbarg had no idea how to play this at all, and decided to resort to chanting. He threw back his head and began to wail, but was instantly interrupted by a fresh outbreak of song from the hut of the Sandwich Maker: the last one on the left. The woman looked round sharply, and gradually a smile came over her face. Without so much as a glance at Old Thrashbarg she started to walk towards the hut.


There is an art to the business of making sandwiches which it is given to few ever to find the time to explore in depth. It is a simple task, but the opportunities for satisfaction are many and profound: choosing the right bread, for instance. The Sandwich Maker had spent many months in daily consultation and experiment with Grarp the Baker and eventually they had between them created a loaf of exactly the consistency that was dense enough to slice thinly and neatly, while still being light, moist and having that fine nutty flavour which best enhanced the savour of roast Perfectly Normal Beast flesh.
  There was also the geometry of the slice to be refined: the precise relationships between the width and height of the slice and also its thickness which would give the proper sense of bulk and weight to the finished sandwich: here again, lightness was a virtue, but so too were firmness, generosity and that promise of succulence and savour that is the hallmark of a truly intense sandwich experience.
  The proper tools, of course, were crucial, and many were the days that the Sandwich Maker, when not engaged with the Baker at his oven, would spend with Strinder the Tool Maker, weighing and balancing knives, taking them to the forge and back again. Suppleness, strength, keenness of edge, length and balance were all enthusiastically debated, theories put forward, tested, refined, and many was the evening when the Sandwich Maker and the Tool Maker could be seen silhouetted against the light of the setting sun and the Tool Maker's forge making slow sweeping movements through the air trying one knife after another, comparing the weight of this one with the balance of another, the suppleness of a third and the handle binding of a fourth.
  Three knives altogether were required. First there was the knife for the slicing of the bread: a firm, authoritative blade which imposed a clear and defining will on a loaf. Then there was the butter-spreading knife, which was a whippy little number but still with a firm backbone to it. Early versions had been a little too whippy, but now the combination of flexibility with a core of strength was exactly right to achieve the maximum smoothness and grace of spread.
  The chief amongst the knives, of course, was the carving knife. This was the knife that would not merely impose its will on the medium through which it moved, as did the bread knife; it must work with it, be guided by the grain of the meat, to achieve slices of the most exquisite consistency


and translucency that would slide away in filmy folds from the main hunk of meat. The Sandwich Maker would then flip each sheet with a smooth flick of the wrist onto the beautifully proportioned lower bread slice, trim it with four deft strokes and then at last perform the magic that the children of the village so longed to gather round and watch with rapt attention and wonder. With just four more dexterous flips of the knife he would assemble the trimmings into a perfectly fitting jigsaw of pieces on top of the primary slice. For every sandwich the size and shape of the trimmings were different, but the Sandwich Maker would always effortlessly and without hesitation assemble them into a pattern which fitted perfectly. A second layer of meat and a second layer of trimmings, and the main act of creation would be accomplished.
  The Sandwich Maker would pass what he had made to his assistant who would then add a few slices of newcumber and fladish and a touch of splagberry sauce, and then apply the topmost layer of bread and cut the sandwich with a fourth and altogether plainer knife. It was not that these were not also skilful operations, but they were lesser skills to be performed by a dedicated apprentice who would one day, when the Sandwich Maker finally laid down his tools, take over from him. It was an exalted position and that apprentice, Drimple, was the envy of his fellows. There were those in the village who were happy chopping wood, those who were content carrying water, but to be the Sandwich Maker was very heaven.
And so the Sandwich Maker sang as he worked.
  He was using the last of the year's salted meat. It was a little past its best now, but still the rich savour of Perfectly Normal Beast meat was something unsurpassed in any of the Sandwich Maker's previous experience. Next week it was anticipated that the Perfectly Normal Beasts would appear again for their regular migration, whereupon the whole village would once again be plunged into frenetic action: hunting the Beasts, killing perhaps six, maybe even seven dozen of the thousands that thundered past. Then the Beasts must be rapidly butchered and cleaned, with most of the meat salted to keep it through the winter months until the return migration in the spring, which would replenish their supplies.
  The very best of the meat would be roasted straight away for the feast that marked the Autumn Passage. The celebrations would last for three days of sheer exuberance, dancing and stories that Old Thrashbarg would tell of


how the hunt had gone, stories that he would have been busy sitting making up in his hut while the rest of the village was out doing the actual hunting.
  And then the very, very best of the meat would be saved from the feast and delivered cold to the Sandwich Maker. And the Sandwich Maker would exercise on it the skills that he had brought to them from the gods, and make the exquisite Sandwiches of the Third Season, of which the whole village would partake before beginning, the next day, to prepare themselves for the rigours of the coming winter.
  Today he was just making ordinary sandwiches, if such delicacies, so lovingly crafted, could ever be called ordinary. Today his assistant was away so the Sandwich Maker was applying his own garnish, which he was happy to do. He was happy with just about everything in fact.
  He sliced, he sang. He flipped each slice of meat neatly onto a slice of bread, trimmed it and assembled all the trimmings into their jigsaw. A little salad, a little sauce, another slice of bread, another sandwich, another verse of 'Yellow Submarine'.
'Hello, Arthur.'
The Sandwich Maker almost sliced his thumb off.


The villagers had watched in consternation as the woman had marched boldly to the hut of the Sandwich Maker. The Sandwich Maker had been sent to them by Almighty Bob in a burning fiery chariot. This, at least, was what Thrashbarg said, and Thrashbarg was the authority on these things. So, at least, Thrashbarg claimed, and Thrashbarg was . . . and so on and so on.
It was hardly worth arguing about.
  A few villagers wondered why Almighty Bob would send his onlie begotten Sandwich Maker in a burning fiery chariot rather than perhaps in one that might have landed quietly without destroying half the forest, filling it with ghosts and also injuring the Sandwich Maker quite badly. Old Thrashbarg said that it was the ineffable will of Bob, and when they asked him what ineffable meant he said look it up.
  This was a problem because Old Thrashbarg had the only dictionary and he wouldn't let them borrow it. They asked him why not and he said that it was not for them to know the will of Almighty Bob, and when they asked him why not again he said because he said so. Anyway, somebody sneaked into Old Thrashbarg's hut one day while he was out having a swim and looked up ineffable. Ineffable apparently meant 'unknowable,


indescribable, unutterable, not to be known or spoken about'. So that cleared that up.
At least they had got the sandwiches.
  One day Old Thrashbarg said that Almighty Bob had decreed that he, Thrashbarg, was to have first pick of the sandwiches. The villagers asked him when this had happened, exactly, and Thrashbarg said it had happened yesterday, when they weren't looking. 'Have faith,' Old Thrashbarg said, 'or burn!'
They let him have first pick of the sandwiches. It seemed easiest.


And now this woman had just arrived out of nowhere, and gone straight for the Sandwich Maker's hut. His fame had obviously spread, though it was hard to know where to since, according to Old Thrashbarg, there wasn't anywhere else. Anyway, wherever it was she had come from, presumably somewhere ineffable, she was here now and was in the Sandwich Maker's hut. Who was she? And who was the strange girl who was hanging around outside the hut moodily and kicking at stones and showing every sign of not wanting to be there? It seemed odd that someone should come all the way from somewhere ineffable in a chariot that was obviously a vast improvement on the burning fiery one which had brought them the Sandwich Maker if she didn't even want to be here.
  They all looked to Thrashbarg, but he was on his knees mumbling and looking very firmly up into the sky and not catching anybody else's eye until he'd thought of something.


'Trillian!' said the Sandwich Maker, sucking his bleeding thumb. 'What . . .
? Who . . . ? When . . . ? Where . . . ?'
  'Exactly the questions I was going to ask you,' said Trillian, looking around Arthur's hut. It was neatly laid out with his kitchen utensils. There were some fairly basic cupboards and shelves, and a basic bed in the corner. A door at the back of the room led to something Trillian couldn't see because the door was closed. 'Nice,' she said, but in an enquiring tone of voice. She couldn't quite make out what the set-up was.
  'Very nice,' said Arthur. 'Wonderfully nice. I don't know when I've ever been anywhere nicer. I'm happy here. They like me, I make sandwiches for them, and . . . er, well that's it really. They like me and I make sandwiches for them.'


'Sounds, er . . .'
  'Idyllic,' said Arthur, firmly. 'It is. It really is. I don't expect you'd like it very much, but for me it's, well, it's perfect. Look, sit down, please, make yourself comfortable. Can I get you anything, er, a sandwich?'
Trillian picked up a sandwich and looked at it. She sniffed it carefully. 'Try it,' said Arthur, 'it's good.'
Trillian took a nibble, then a bite and munched on it thoughtfully. 'It is good,' she said, looking at it.
  'My life's work,' said Arthur, trying to sound proud and hoping he didn't sound like a complete idiot. He was used to being revered a bit, and was having to go through some unexpected mental gear changes.
'What's the meat in it?' asked Trillian.
'Ah yes, that's, um, that's Perfectly Normal Beast.' 'It's what?'
  'Perfectly Normal Beast. It's a bit like a cow, or rather a bull. Kind of like a buffalo in fact. Large, charging sort of animal.'
'So what's odd about it?' 'Nothing, it's Perfectly Normal.' 'I see.'
'It's just a bit odd where it comes from.' Trillian frowned, and stopped chewing.
  'Where does it come from?' she asked with her mouth full. She wasn't going to swallow until she knew.
  'Well, it's not just a matter of where it comes from, it's also where it goes to. It's all right, it's perfectly safe to swallow. I've eaten tons of it. It's great. Very succulent. Very tender. Slightly sweet flavour with a long dark finish.'
Trillian still hadn't swallowed.
'Where,' she said, 'does it come from, and where does it go to?' 'They come from a point just slightly to the east of the Hondo
Mountains. They're the big ones behind us here, you must have seen them as you came in, and then they sweep in their thousands across the great Anhondo Plains and, er, well, that's it really. That's where they come from. That's where they go.'
  Trillian frowned. There was something she wasn't quite getting about this.
  'I probably haven't made it quite clear,' said Arthur. 'When I say they come from a point to the east of the Hondo Mountains, I mean that that's


where they suddenly appear. Then they sweep across the Anhondo Plains and, well, vanish really. We have about six days to catch as many of them as we can before they disappear. In the spring they do it again only the other way round, you see.'
  Reluctantly, Trillian swallowed. It was either that or spit it out, and it did in fact taste pretty good.
  'I see,' she said, once she had reassured herself that she didn't seem to be suffering any ill effects. 'And why are they called Perfectly Normal Beasts?'
  'Well, I think because otherwise people might think it was a bit odd. I think Old Thrashbarg called them that. He says that they come from where they come from and they go to where they go to and that it's Bob's will and that's all there is to it.'
'Who . . . ?'
'Just don't even ask.' 'Well, you look well on it.' 'I feel well. You look well.' 'I'm well. I'm very well.' 'Well, that's good.'
'Yes.'
'Good.'
'Good.'
'Nice of you to drop in.' 'Thanks.'
  'Well,' said Arthur, casting around himself. Astounding how hard it was to think of anything to say to someone after all this time.
'I expect you're wondering how I found you,' said Trillian.
'Yes!' said Arthur. 'I was wondering exactly that. How did you find me?' 'Well, as you may or may not know, I now work for one of the big sub-
etha broadcasting networks that-'
  'I did know that,' said Arthur, suddenly remembering. 'Yes, you've done very well. That's terrific. Very exciting. Well done. Must be a lot of fun.'
'Exhausting.'
'All that rushing around. I expect it must be, yes.'
  'We have access to virtually every kind of information. I found your name on the passenger list of the ship that crashed.'
Arthur was astonished.


'You mean they knew about the crash?'
  'Well, of course they knew. You don't have a whole spaceliner disappear without someone knowing about it.'
  'But you mean they knew where it had happened? They knew I'd survived?'
'Yes.'
  'But nobody's ever been to look or search or rescue. There's been absolutely nothing.'
  'Well, there wouldn't be. It's a whole complicated insurance thing. They just bury the whole thing. Pretend it never happened. The insurance business is completely screwy now. You know they've reintroduced the death penalty for insurance company directors?'
'Really?' said Arthur. 'No, I didn't. For what offence?' Trillian frowned.
'What do you mean, offence?' 'I see.'
  Trillian gave Arthur a long look, and then, in a new tone of voice, said, 'It's time for you to take responsibility, Arthur.'
  Arthur tried to understand this remark. He found it often took a moment or so before he saw exactly what it was that people were driving at, so he let a moment or two pass at a leisurely rate. Life was so pleasant and relaxed these days, there was time to let things sink in. He let it sink in.
  He still didn't quite understand what she meant, though, so in the end he had to say so.
Trillian gave him a cool smile and then turned back to the door of the hut. 'Random?' she called. 'Come in. Come and meet your father.'


14


As the Guide folded itself back into a smooth, dark disc, Ford realized some pretty hectic stuff. Or at least he tried to realize it, but it was too hectic to take in all in one go. His head was hammering, his ankle was hurting, and though he didn't like to be a wimp about his ankle, he always found that intense multi-dimensional logic was something he understood best in the bath. He needed time to think about this. Time, a tall drink, and some kind of rich, foamy oil.


  He had to get out of here. He had to get the Guide out of here. He didn't think they'd make it together.
He glanced wildly round the room.
  Think, think, think. It had to be something simple and obvious. If he was right in his nasty, lurking suspicion that he was dealing with nasty, lurking Vogons, then the more simple and obvious the better.
Suddenly he saw what he needed.
  He wouldn't try to beat the system, he would just use it. The frightening thing about the Vogons was their absolute mindless determination to do whatever mindless thing it was they were determined to do. There was never any point in trying to appeal to their reason because they didn't have any. However, if you kept your nerve you could sometimes exploit their blinkered, bludgeoning insistence on being bludgeoning and blinkered. It wasn't merely that their left hand didn't always know what their right hand was doing, so to speak; quite often their right hand had a pretty hazy notion as well.
Did he dare just post the thing to himself?
  Did he dare just put it in the system and let the Vogons work out how to get the thing to him while at the same time they were busy, as they probably would be, tearing the building apart to find out where he'd hidden it?
Yes.
  Feverishly, he packed it. He wrapped it. He labelled it. With a moment's pause to wonder if he was really doing the right thing, he committed the package to the building's internal mail chute.
  'Colin,' he said, turning to the little hovering ball. 'I am going to abandon you to your fate.'
'I'm so happy,' said Colin.
  'Make the most of it,' said Ford. 'Because what I want you to do is to nursemaid that package out of the building. They'll probably incinerate you when they find you, and I won't be here to help. It will be very, very nasty for you, and that's just too bad. Got it?'
'I gurgle with pleasure,' said Colin. 'Go!' said Ford.
  Colin obediently dived down the mail chute in pursuit of his charge. Now Ford had only himself to worry about, but that was still quite a substantial worry. There were noises of heavy running footsteps outside the door,


which he had taken the precaution of locking and shifting a large filing cabinet in front of.
  He was worried that everything had gone so smoothly. Everything had fitted terribly well. He had hurtled through the day with reckless abandon and yet everything had worked out with uncanny neatness. Except for his shoe. He was bitter about his shoe. That was an account that was going to have to be settled.
  With a deafening roar the door exploded inwards. In the turmoil of smoke and dust he could see large, slug-like creatures hurrying through.
  So everything was going well, was it? Everything was working out as if the most extraordinary luck was on his side? Well, he'd see about that.
  In a spirit of scientific enquiry he hurled himself out of the window again.


15


The first month, getting to know each other, was a little difficult. The second month, trying to come to terms with what they'd got to know about each other in the first month, was much easier.
The third month, when the box arrived, was very tricky indeed.
  At the beginning, it was a problem even trying to explain what a month was. This had been a pleasantly simple matter for Arthur, here on Lamuella. The days were just a little over twenty-five hours long, which basically meant an extra hour in bed every single day and, of course, having regularly to reset his watch, which Arthur rather enjoyed doing.
  He also felt at home with the number of suns and moons which Lamuella had - one of each - as opposed to some of the planets he'd fetched up on from time to time which had had ridiculous numbers of them.
  The planet orbited its single sun every three hundred days, which was a good number because it meant the year didn't drag by. The moon orbited Lamuella just over nine times a year, which meant that a month was a little over thirty days, which was absolutely perfect because it gave you a little more time to get things done in. It was not merely reassuringly like Earth, it was actually rather an improvement.
  Random, on the other hand, thought she was trapped in a recurring nightmare. She would have crying fits and think the moon was out to get


her. Every night it was there, and then, when it went, the sun came out and followed her. Over and over again.
  Trillian had warned Arthur that Random might have some difficulty in adjusting to a more regular lifestyle than she had been used to up till now, but Arthur hadn't been ready for actual howling at the moon.
He hadn't been ready for any of this, of course. His daughter?
  His daughter? He and Trillian had never even - had they? He was absolutely convinced he would have remembered. What about Zaphod?
  'Not the same species, Arthur,' Trillian had answered. 'When I decided I wanted a child they ran all sorts of genetic tests on me and could find only one match anywhere. It was only later that it dawned on me. I double- checked and I was right. They don't usually like to tell you, but I insisted.'
'You mean you went to a DNA bank?' Arthur had asked, pop-eyed. 'Yes. But she wasn't quite as random as her name suggests, because, of
course, you were the only Homo sapiens donor. I must say, though, it seems you were quite a frequent flyer.'
  Arthur had stared wide-eyed at the unhappy-looking girl who was slouching awkwardly in the door-frame looking at him.
'But when . . . how long . . . ?' 'You mean, what age is she?' 'Yes.'
'The wrong one.' 'What do you mean?'
'I mean that I haven't any idea.' 'What?'
  'Well, in my time line I think it's about ten years since I had her, but she's obviously quite a lot older than that. I spend my life going backwards and forwards in time, you see. The job. I used to take her with me when I could, but it just wasn't always possible. Then I used to put her into day care time zones, but you just can't get reliable time tracking now. You leave them there in the morning, you've simply no idea how old they'll be in the evening. You complain till you're blue in the face but it doesn't get you anywhere. I left her at one of the places for a few hours once, and when I came back she'd passed puberty. I've done all I can, Arthur, it's over to you. I've got a war to cover.'


The ten seconds that passed after Trillian left were about the longest of Arthur Dent's life. Time, we know, is relative. You can travel light years through the stars and back, and if you do it at the speed of light then, when you return, you may have aged mere seconds while your twin brother or sister will have aged twenty, thirty, forty or however many years it is, depending on how far you travelled.
  This will come to you as a profound personal shock, particularly if you didn't know you had a twin brother or sister. The seconds that you have been absent for will not have been sufficient time to prepare you for the shock of new and strangely distended family relationships when you return.
  Ten seconds' silence was not enough time for Arthur to reassemble his whole view of himself and his life in a way that suddenly included an entire new daughter of whose merest existence he had had not the slightest inkling of a suspicion when he had woken that morning. Deep, emotional family ties cannot be constructed in ten seconds, however far and fast you travel away from them, and Arthur could only feel helpless, bewildered and numb as he looked at the girl standing in his doorway, staring at his floor.
  He supposed that there was no point in pretending not to be hopeless. He walked over and he hugged her.
  'I don't love you,' he said. 'I'm sorry. I don't even know you yet. But give me a few minutes.'


We live in strange times.
We also live in strange places: each in a universe of our own.
The people with whom we populate our universes are the shadows of whole other universes intersecting with our own. Being able to glance out into this bewildering complexity of infinite recursion and say things like, 'Oh, hi, Ed! Nice tan. How's Carol?' involves a great deal of filtering skill for which all conscious entities have eventually to develop a capacity in order to protect themselves from the contemplation of the chaos through which they seethe and tumble. So give your kid a break, OK?
Extract from Practical Parenting in a Fractally Demented
Universe


'What's this?'


  Arthur had almost given up. That is to say, he was not going to give up. He was absolutely not going to give up. Not now. Not ever. But if he had been the sort of person who was going to give up, this was probably the time he would have done it.
  Not content with being surly, bad-tempered, wanting to go and play in the Palaeozoic era, not seeing why they had to have the gravity on the whole time and shouting at the sun to stop following her, Random had also used his carving knife to dig up stones to throw at the pikka birds for looking at her like that.
Arthur didn't even know if Lamuella had had a Palaeozoic era.
According to Old Thrashbarg the planet had been found fully formed in the navel of a giant earwig at four thirty one Vroonday afternoon, and although Arthur, as a seasoned Galactic traveller with good O-level passes in physics and geography, had fairly serious doubts about this, it was rather a waste of time trying to argue with Old Thrashbarg and there had never been much point before.
  He sighed as he sat nursing the chipped and bent knife. He was going to love her if it killed him, or her, or both. It wasn't easy being a father. He knew that no one had ever said it was going to be easy, but that wasn't the point because he'd never asked about being one in the first place.
  He was doing his best. Every moment that he could wrest away from making sandwiches he was spending with her, talking to her, walking with her, sitting on the hill with her watching the sun go down over the valley in which the village nestled, trying to find out about her life, trying to explain to her about his. It was a tricky business. The common ground between them, apart from the fact that they had almost identical genes, was about the size of a pebble. Or rather, it was about the size of Trillian and of her they had slightly differing views.
'What's this?'
He suddenly realized she had been talking to him and he hadn't noticed.
Or rather he had not recognized her voice.
  Instead of the usual tone of voice in which she spoke to him, which was bitter and truculent, she was just asking him a simple question.
He looked round in surprise.
  She was sitting there on a stool in the corner of the hut in that rather hunched way she had, knees together, feet splayed out, with her dark hair


hanging down over her face as she looked at something she had cradled in her hands.
Arthur went over to her, a little nervously.
  Her mood swings were very unpredictable but so far they'd all been between different types of bad ones. Outbreaks of bitter recrimination would give way without warning to abject self-pity and then long bouts of sullen despair which were punctuated with sudden acts of mindless violence against inanimate objects and demands to go to electric clubs.
  Not only were there no electric clubs on Lamuella, there were no clubs at all and, in fact, no electricity. There was a forge and a bakery, a few carts and a well, but those were the high-water mark of Lamuellan technology, and a fair number of Random's unquenchable rages were directed against the sheer incomprehensible backwardness of the place.
  She could pick up Sub-Etha TV on a small Flex-O-Panel which had been surgically implanted in her wrist, but that didn't cheer her up at all because it was full of news of insanely exciting things happening in every other part of the Galaxy than here. It would also give her frequent news of her mother, who had dumped her to go off and cover some war which now seemed not to have happened, or at least to have gone all wrong in some way because of the absence of any proper intelligence-gathering. It also gave her access to lots of great adventure shows featuring all sorts of fantastically expensive spaceships crashing into each other.
  The villagers were absolutely hypnotized by all these wonderful magic images flashing over her wrist. They had only ever seen one spaceship crash, and it had been so frightening, violent and shocking and had caused so much horrible devastation, fire and death that, stupidly, they had never realized it was entertainment.
  Old Thrashbarg had been so astonished by it that he had instantly seen Random as an emissary from Bob, but had fairly soon afterwards decided that in fact she had been sent as a test of his faith, if not of his patience. He was also alarmed at the number of spaceship crashes he had to start incorporating into his holy stories if he was to hold the attention of the villagers, and not have them rushing off to peer at Random's wrist all the time.
At the moment she was not peering at her wrist. Her wrist was turned off.
Arthur squatted down quietly beside her to see what she was looking at.


  It was his watch. He had taken it off when he'd gone to shower under the local waterfall, and Random had found it and was trying to work it out.
'It's just a watch,' he said. 'It's to tell the time.'
  'I know that,' she said. 'But you keep on fiddling with it, and it still doesn't tell the right time. Or even anything like it.'
  She brought up the display on her wrist panel, which automatically produced a readout of local time. Her wrist panel had quietly got on with the business of measuring the local gravity and orbital momentum, and had noticed where the sun was and tracked its movement in the sky, all within the first few minutes of Random's arrival. It had then quickly picked up clues from its environment as to what the local unit conventions were and reset itself appropriately. It did this sort of thing continually, which was particularly valuable if you did a lot of travelling in time as well as space.
Random frowned at her father's watch, which didn't do any of this.
  Arthur was very fond of it. It was a better one than he would ever have afforded himself. He had been given it on his twenty-second birthday by a rich and guilt-ridden godfather who had forgotten every single birthday he had had up till then, and also his name. It had the day, the date, the phases of the moon; it had 'To Albert on his twenty-first birthday' and the wrong date engraved on the battered and scratched surface of its back in letters that were still just about visible.
  The watch had been through a considerable amount of stuff in the last few years, most of which would fall well outside the warranty. He didn't suppose, of course, that the warranty had especially mentioned that the watch was guaranteed to be accurate only within the very particular gravitational and magnetic fields of the Earth, and so long as the day was twenty-four hours long and the planet didn't explode and so on. These were such basic assumptions that even the lawyers would have missed them.
  Luckily his watch was a wind-up one, or at least a self-winder. Nowhere else in the Galaxy would he have found batteries of precisely the dimensions and power specifications that were perfectly standard on Earth.
'So what are all these numbers?' asked Random. Arthur took it from her.
  'These numbers round the edge mark the hours. In the little window on the right it says THU, which means Thursday, and the number is 14, which means it's the fourteenth day of the month of MAY which is what it says in this window over here.


  'And this sort of crescent-shaped window at the top tells you about the phases of the moon. In other words it tells you how much of the moon is lit up at night by the sun, which depends on the relative positions of the sun and the moon and, well . . . the Earth.'
'The Earth,' said Random. 'Yes.'
'And that's where you came from, and where Mum came from.' 'Yes.'
  Random took the watch back from him and looked at it again, clearly baffled by something. Then she held it up to her ear and listened in puzzlement.
'What's that noise?'
  'It's ticking. That's the mechanism that drives the watch. It's called clockwork. It's all kind of interlocking cogs and springs that work to turn the hands round at exactly the right speed to mark the hours and minutes and days and so on.'
Random carried on peering at it.
'There's something puzzling you,' said Arthur. 'What is it?' 'Yes,' said Random, at last. 'Why's it all in hardware?'


Arthur suggested they went for a walk. He felt there were things they should discuss, and for once Random seemed, if not precisely amenable and willing, then at least not growling.
  From Random's point of view this was also all very weird. It wasn't that she wanted to be difficult, as such, it was just that she didn't know how or what else to be.
  Who was this guy? What was this life she was supposed to lead? What was this world she was supposed to lead it in? And what was this universe that kept coming at her through her eyes and ears? What was it for? What did it want?
  She'd been born in a spaceship that had been going from somewhere to somewhere else, and when it had got to somewhere else, somewhere else had only turned out to be another somewhere that you had to get to somewhere else again from, and so on.
  It was her normal expectation that she was supposed to be somewhere else. It was normal for her to feel that she was in the wrong place.


  Then, constant time travel had only compounded this problem, and had led to the feeling that she was not only always in the wrong place, but she was also almost always there at the wrong time.
  She didn't notice that she felt this, because it was the only way she ever felt, just as it never seemed odd to her that nearly everywhere she went she needed either to wear weights or anti-gravity suits and usually special apparatus for breathing as well. The only places you could ever feel right were worlds you designed for yourself to inhabit - virtual realities in the electric clubs. It had never occurred to her that the real Universe was something you could actually fit into.
And that included this Lamuella place her mother had dumped her in.
And it also included this person who had bestowed on her this precious and magical gift of life in return for a seat upgrade. It was just as well he had turned out to be rather kind and friendly or there would have been trouble. Really. She'd got a specially sharpened stone in her pocket she could cause a lot of trouble with.
  It can be very dangerous to see things from somebody else's point of view without the proper training.


They sat on the spot that Arthur particularly liked, on the side of a hill overlooking the valley. The sun was going down over the village.
  The only thing that Arthur wasn't quite so fond of was being able to see a little way into the next valley, where a deep dark mangled furrow in the forest marked the spot where his ship had crashed. But maybe that was what kept bringing him back here. There were plenty of spots from which you could survey the lush rolling countryside of Lamuella, but this was the one he was drawn to, with its nagging dark spot of fear and pain nestling just on the edge of his vision.
  He had never been there again since he had been pulled out of the wreckage.
Wouldn't.
Couldn't bear it.
  In fact he had gone some of the way back to it the very next day, while he was still numb and spinning with shock. He had a broken leg, a couple of broken ribs, some bad burns and was not really thinking coherently but had insisted that the villagers take him, which, uneasily, they had. He had not


managed to get right to the actual spot where the ground had bubbled and melted, however, and had at last hobbled away from the horror for ever.
  Soon, word had got around that the whole area was haunted and no one had ventured back there ever since. The land was full of beautiful, verdant and delightful valleys - no point in going to a highly worrying one. Let the past hold on to itself and let the present move forward into the future.


Random cradled the watch in her hands, slowly turning it to let the long light of the evening sun shine warmly in the scratches and scuffs of the thick glass. It fascinated her watching the spidery little second hand ticking its way round. Every time it completed a full circle, the longer of the two main hands had moved on exactly to the next of the sixty small divisions round the dial. And when the long hand had made its own full circle, the smaller hand had moved on to the next of the main digits.
'You've been watching it for over an hour,' said Arthur, quietly.
  'I know,' she said. 'An hour is when the big hand has gone all the way round, yes?'
'That's right.'
'Then I've been watching it for an hour and seventeen . . . minutes.'
  She smiled with a deep and mysterious pleasure and moved very slightly so that she was resting just a little against his arm. Arthur felt a small sigh escape from him that had been pent up inside his chest for weeks. He wanted to put his arm around his daughter's shoulders, but felt it was too early yet and that she would shy away from him. But something was working. Something was easing inside her. The watch meant something to her that nothing in her life had so far managed to do. Arthur was not sure that he had really understood what it was yet, but he was profoundly pleased and relieved that something had reached her.
'Explain to me again,' said Random.
  'There's nothing really to it,' said Arthur. 'Clockwork was something that developed over hundreds of years . . .'
'Earth years.'
  'Yes. It became finer and finer and more and more intricate. It was highly skilled and delicate work. It had to be made very small, and it had to carry on working accurately however much you waved it around or dropped it.'
'But only on one planet?'


  'Well, that was where it was made, you see. It was never expected to go anywhere else and deal with different suns and moons and magnetic fields and things. I mean the thing still goes perfectly well, but it doesn't really mean much this far from Switzerland.'
'From where?'
'Switzerland. That's where these were made. Small hilly country.
Tiresomely neat. The people who made them didn't really know there were other worlds.'
'Quite a big thing not to know.' 'Well, yes.'
'So where did they come from?'
'They, that is we . . . we just sort of grew there. We evolved on the Earth.
From, I don't know, some kind of sludge or something.' 'Like this watch.'
'Um. I don't think the watch grew out of sludge.' 'You don't understand!'
Random suddenly leaped to her feet, shouting.
'You don't understand! You don't understand me, you don't understand
anything! I hate you for being so stupid!'
  She started to run hectically down the hill, still clutching the watch and shouting that she hated him.
  Arthur jumped up, startled and at a loss. He started to run after her through the stringy and clumpy grass. It was hard and painful for him. When he had broken his leg in the crash, it had not been a clean break, and it had not healed cleanly. He was stumbling and wincing as he ran.
  Suddenly she turned and faced him, her face dark with anger. She brandished the watch at him. 'You don't understand that there's somewhere this belongs? Somewhere it works? Somewhere that it fits?'
  She turned and ran again. She was fit and fleet-footed and Arthur could not remotely keep up with her.
  It wasn't that he had not expected being a father to be this difficult, it was that he hadn't expected to be a father at all, particularly not suddenly and unexpectedly on an alien planet.
  Random turned to shout at him again. For some reason he stopped each time she did.
  'Who do you think I am?' she demanded angrily. 'Your upgrade? Who do you think Mum thought I was? Some sort of ticket to the life she didn't


have?'
'I don't know what you mean by that,' said Arthur, panting and hurting. 'You don't know what anybody means by anything!'
'What do you mean?'
'Shut up! Shut up! Shut up!'
  'Tell me! Please tell me! What does she mean by saying the life she didn't have?'
  'She wished she'd stayed on Earth! She wished she hadn't gone off with that stupid brain-dead fruit gum, Zaphod! She thinks she would have had a different life!'
  'But,' said Arthur, 'she would have been killed! She would have been killed when the world was destroyed!'
'That's a different life, isn't it?' 'That's . . .'
'She wouldn't have had to have me! She hates me!'
'You can't mean that! How could anyone possibly, er, I mean . . .'
  'She had me because I was meant to make things fit for her. That was my job. But I fitted even worse than she did! So she just shut me off and carried on with her stupid life.'
'What's stupid about her life? She's fantastically successful, isn't she?
She's all over time and space, all over the Sub-Etha TV networks . . .' 'Stupid! Stupid! Stupid! Stupid!'
  Random turned and ran off again. Arthur couldn't keep up with her and at last he had to sit down for a bit and let the pain in his leg subside. The turmoil in his head he didn't know what to do with at all.


He hobbled into the village an hour later. It was getting dark. The villagers he passed said hello, but there was a sense of nervousness and of not quite knowing what was going on or what to do about it in the air. Old Thrashbarg had been seen pulling on his beard a fair bit and looking at the moon, and that was not a good sign either.
Arthur went into his hut.
Random was sitting hunched quietly over the table. 'I'm sorry,' she said. 'I'm so sorry.'
  'That's all right,' said Arthur as gently as he knew how. 'It's good to, well, to have a little chat. There's so much we have to learn and understand about each other, and life isn't, well it isn't all just tea and sandwiches . . .'


'I'm so sorry,' she said again, sobbing.
  Arthur went up to her and put his arm round her shoulder. She didn't resist or pull away. Then Arthur saw what it was she was so sorry about.
In the pool of light thrown by a Lamuellan lantern lay Arthur's watch.
Random had forced the back off it with the back edge of the butter- spreading knife, and all of the minute cogs and springs and levers were lying in a tiny cock-eyed mess where she'd been fiddling with them.
  'I just wanted to see how it worked,' said Random, 'how it all fitted together. I'm so sorry! I can't get it back together. I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I don't know what to do. I'll get it repaired! Really! I'll get it repaired!'


The following day Thrashbarg came round and said all sorts of Bob stuff. He tried to exert a calming influence by inviting Random to let her mind dwell on the ineffable mystery of the giant earwig, and Random said there was no giant earwig and Thrashbarg went very cold and silent and said she would be cast into outer darkness. Random said good, she'd been born there, and the next day the parcel arrived.


This was all getting a bit eventful.
  In fact, when the parcel arrived, delivered by a kind of robot drone that dropped out of the sky making droning robot noises, it brought with it a sense which gradually began to permeate through the whole village, that it was almost one event too many.
  It wasn't the robot drone's fault. All it required was Arthur Dent's signature or thumb print, or just a few scrapings of skin cells from the nape of his neck, and it would be on its way again. It hung around waiting, not quite sure what all this resentment was about. Meanwhile, Kirp had caught another fish with a head at both ends, but on closer inspection it turned out that it was in fact two fish cut in half and sewn together rather badly, so not only had Kirp failed to rekindle any great interest in two-headed fish but he had seriously cast doubt on the authenticity of the first one. Only the pikka birds seemed to feel that everything was exactly normal.
  The robot drone got Arthur's signature and made its escape. Arthur bore the parcel back to his hut and sat and looked at it.
  'Let's open it!' said Random, who was feeling much more cheerful this morning now that everything around her had got thoroughly weird, but


Arthur said no. 'Why not?'
'It's not addressed to me.' 'Yes, it is.'
  'No, it isn't. It's addressed to . . . well, it's addressed to Ford Prefect, in care of me.'
'Ford Prefect? Is he the one who . . . ?' 'Yes,' said Arthur tartly.
'I've heard about him.' 'I expect you have.'
'Let's open it anyway. What else are we going to do?' 'I don't know,' said Arthur, who really wasn't sure.
  He had taken his damaged knives over to the forge bright and early that morning and Strinder had had a look at them and said that he would see what he could do.
  They had tried the usual business of waving the knives through the air, feeling for the point of balance and the point of flex and so on, but the joy was gone from it, and Arthur had a sad feeling that his sandwich-making days were probably numbered.
He hung his head.
  The next appearance of the Perfectly Normal Beasts was imminent, but Arthur felt that the usual festivities of hunting and feasting were going to be rather muted and uncertain. Something had happened here on Lamuella, and Arthur had a horrible feeling that it was him.
  'What do you think it is?' urged Random, turning the parcel over in her hands.
'I don't know,' said Arthur. 'Something bad and worrying, though.' 'How do you know?' Random protested.
  'Because anything to do with Ford Prefect is bound to be worse and more worrying than something that isn't,' said Arthur. 'Believe me.'
'You're upset about something, aren't you?' said Random. Arthur sighed.
'I'm just feeling a little jumpy and unsettled, I think,' said Arthur.
  'I'm sorry,' said Random, and put the package down again. She could see that it really would upset him if she opened it. She would just have to do it when he wasn't looking.


16


Arthur wasn't quite certain which he noticed as being missing first. When he noticed that the one wasn't there his mind instantly leapt to the other and he knew immediately that they were both gone and that something insanely bad and difficult to deal with would happen as a result.
Random was not there. And neither was the parcel.
  He had left it up on a shelf all day, in plain view. It was an exercise in trust.
  He knew that one of the things he was supposed to do as a parent was to show trust in his child, to build a sense of trust and confidence into the bedrock of relationship between them. He had had a nasty feeling that that might be an idiotic thing to do, but he did it anyway, and sure enough it had turned out to be an idiotic thing to do. You live and learn. At any rate, you live.
You also panic.
  Arthur ran out of the hut. It was the middle of the evening. The light was getting dim and a storm was brewing. He could not see her anywhere, nor any sign of her. He asked. No one had seen her. He asked again. No one else had seen her. They were going home for the night. A little wind was whipping round the edge of the village, picking things up and tossing them around in a dangerously casual manner.
  He found Old Thrashbarg and asked him. Thrashbarg looked at him stonily, and then pointed in the one direction that Arthur had dreaded, and had therefore instinctively known was the way she would have gone.
So now he knew the worst.
She had gone where she thought he would not follow her.
  He looked up at the sky, which was sullen, streaked and livid, and reflected that it was the sort of sky that the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse wouldn't feel like a bunch of complete idiots riding out of.
  With a heavy sense of the utmost foreboding he set off on the track that led to the forest in the next valley. The first heavy blobs of rain began to hit the ground as Arthur tried to drag himself to some sort of run.


Random reached the crest of the hill and looked down into the next valley. It had been a longer and harder climb than she had anticipated. She was a


little worried that doing the trip at night was not that great an idea, but her father had been mooching around near the hut all day trying to pretend to either her or himself that he wasn't guarding the parcel. At last he'd had to go over to the forge to talk with Strinder about the knives, and Random had seized her opportunity and done a runner with the parcel.
  It was perfectly clear that she couldn't just open the thing there, in the hut, or even in the village. He might have come across her at any moment. Which meant that she had to go where she wouldn't be followed.
  She could stop where she was now. She had gone this way in the hope that he wouldn't follow her, and even if he did he would never find her up in the wooded parts of the hill with night drawing in and the rain starting.
  All the way up, the parcel had been jiggling under her arm. It was a satisfyingly hunky sort of thing: a box with a square top about the length of her forearm on each side, and about the length of her hand deep, wrapped up in brown plasper with an ingenious new form of self-knotting string. It didn't rattle as she shook it, but she sensed that its weight was concentrated excitingly at the centre.
  Having come so far, though, there was a certain satisfaction in not stopping here, but carrying on down into what seemed to be almost a forbidden area - where her father's ship had come down. She wasn't exactly certain what the word 'haunted' meant, but it might be fun to find out. She would keep going and save the parcel up for when she got there.
  It was getting darker, though. She hadn't used her tiny electric torch yet, because she didn't want to be visible from a distance. She would have to use it now, but it probably didn't matter since she would be on the other side of the hill which divided the valleys from each other.
  She turned her torch on. Almost at the same moment a fork of lightning ripped across the valley into which she was heading and startled her considerably. As the darkness shuddered back around her and a clap of thunder rolled out across the land she felt suddenly rather small and lost with just a feeble pencil of light bobbing in her hand. Perhaps she should stop after all and open the parcel here. Or maybe she should go back and come out again tomorrow. It was only a momentary hesitation, though. She knew there was no going back tonight, and sensed that there was no going back ever.
  She headed on down the side of the hill. The rain was beginning to pick up now. Where a short while ago it had been a few heavy blobs it was


settling in for a good pour now, hissing in the trees, and the ground was getting slippery under her feet.
  At least she thought it was the rain hissing in the trees. Shadows were leaping and leering at her as her light bobbed through the trees. Onwards and downwards.
  She hurried on for another ten or fifteen minutes, soaked to the skin now and shivering, and gradually became aware that there seemed to be some other light somewhere ahead of her. It was very faint and she wasn't certain if she was imagining it or not. She turned off her torch to see. There did seem to be some sort of dim glow ahead. She couldn't tell what it was. She turned her torch back on and continued down the hill, towards whatever it was.
  There was something wrong with the woods, though. She couldn't immediately say what it was, but they didn't seem like sprightly healthy woods looking forward to a good spring. The trees were lolling at sickly angles and had a sort of pallid, blighted look about them. Random more than once had the worrying sensation that they were trying to reach towards her as she passed them, but it was just a trick of the way that her light caused their shadows to flicker and lurch.
  Suddenly something fell out of a tree in front of her. She leapt backwards with alarm, dropping both the torch and the box as she did so. She went down into a crouch, pulling the specially sharpened rock out of her pocket.
  The thing that had fallen out of the tree was moving. The torch was lying on the ground and pointing towards it, and a vast, grotesque shadow was slowly lurching through the light towards her. She could hear faint rustling and screeching noises over the steady hiss of the rain. She scrabbled on the ground for the torch, found it, and shone it directly at the creature.
At the same moment another dropped from a tree just a few feet away.
She swung the torch wildly from one to another. She held her rock up, ready to throw.
  They were quite small in fact. It was the angle of the light that had made them loom so large. Not only small, but small, furry and cuddly. And there was another, dropping from the trees. It fell through the beam of light, so she saw it quite clearly.
  It fell neatly and precisely, turned, and then, like the other two, started slowly and purposefully to advance on Random.


  She stayed rooted to the spot. She still had her rock poised and ready to throw, but was increasingly conscious of the fact that the things she had it poised and ready to throw at were squirrels. Or at least, squirrel-like things. Soft, warm, cuddly squirrel-like things advancing on her in a way she wasn't at all certain she liked.
  She shone her torch directly on the first of them. It was making aggressive, hectoring, screeching noises, and carrying in one of its little fists a small tattered piece of wet, pink rag. Random hefted her rock menacingly in her hand, but it made no impression at all on the squirrel advancing on her with its wet piece of rag.
  She backed away. She didn't know at all how to deal with this. If they had been vicious snarling slavering beasts with glistening fangs she would have pitched into them with a will, but squirrels behaving like this she couldn't quite handle.
  She backed away again. The second squirrel was starting to make a flanking manoeuvre round to her right. Carrying a cup. Some kind of acorn thing. The third was right behind it and making its own advance. What was it carrying? Some little scrap of soggy paper, Random thought.
  She stepped back again, caught her ankle against the root of a tree and fell over backwards.
  Instantly the first squirrel darted forward and was on top of her, advancing along her stomach with cold purpose in its eyes, and a piece of wet rag in its fist.
  Random tried to jump up, but only managed to jump about an inch. The startled movement of the squirrel on her stomach startled her in return. The squirrel froze, gripping her skin through her soaking shirt with its tiny claws. Then slowly, inch by inch, it made its way up her, stopped, and proffered her the rag.
  She felt almost hypnotized by the strangeness of the thing and its tiny glinting eyes. It proffered her the rag again. It pushed it at her repeatedly, screeching insistently, till at last, nervously, hesitantly, she took the thing from it. It continued to watch her intently, its eyes darting all over her face. She had no idea what to do. Rain and mud were streaming down her face and she had a squirrel sitting on her. She wiped some mud out of her eyes with the rag.
  The squirrel shrieked triumphantly, grabbed the rag back, leapt off her, ran scampering into the dark, enclosing night, darted up into a tree, dived


into a hole in the trunk, settled back and lit a cigarette.
  Meanwhile Random was trying to fend off the squirrel with the acorn cup full of rain and the one with the paper. She shuffled backwards on her bottom.
'No!' she shouted. 'Go away!'
  They darted back, in fright, and then darted right forward again with their gifts. She brandished her rock at them. 'Go!' she yelled.
  The squirrels scampered round in consternation. Then one darted straight at her, dropped the acorn cup in her lap, turned and ran off into the night.
The other stood quivering for a moment, then put its scrap of paper neatly down in front of her and disappeared as well.
  She was alone again, but trembling with confusion. She got unsteadily to her feet, picked up her rock and her parcel, then paused and picked up the scrap of paper as well. It was so soggy and dilapidated it was hard to make out what it was. It seemed just to be a fragment of an in-flight magazine.
  Just as Random was trying to understand exactly what it was that this all meant, a man walked out into the clearing in which she was standing, raised a vicious-looking gun and shot her.


Arthur was thrashing around hopelessly two or three miles behind her, on the upward side of the hill.
  Within minutes of setting out he had gone back again and equipped himself with a lamp. Not an electric one. The only electric light in the place was the one that Random had brought with her. This was a kind of dim hurricane lamp: a perforated metal canister from Strinder's forge, which contained a reservoir of inflammable fish oil, a wick of knotted dried grass and was wrapped in a translucent film made from dried membranes from the gut of a Perfectly Normal Beast.
It had now gone out.
  Arthur jiggled around with it in a thoroughly pointless kind of a way for a few seconds. There was clearly no way he was going to get the thing suddenly to burst into flame again in the middle of a rainstorm, but it's impossible not to make a token effort. Reluctantly he threw the thing aside.
  What to do? This was hopeless. He was absolutely sodden, his clothes heavy and billowing with the rain, and now he was lost in the dark as well.
  For a brief second he was lost in the blinding light, and then he was lost in the dark again.


  The sheet of lightning had at least shown him that he was very close to the brow of the hill. Once he had breasted that he would . . . well, he wasn't certain what he would do. He'd have to work that out when he got there.
He limped forward and upwards.
  A few minutes later he knew that he was standing panting at the top. There was some kind of dim glow in the distance below him. He had no idea what it was, and indeed he hardly liked to think. It was the only thing he had to make towards, though, so he started to make his way, stumbling, lost and frightened, towards it.


The flash of lethal light passed straight through Random and, about two seconds later, so did the man who had shot it. Other than that he paid her no attention whatsoever. He had shot someone standing behind her, and when she turned to look, he was kneeling over the body and going through its pockets.
  The tableau froze and vanished. It was replaced a second later by a giant pair of teeth framed by immense and perfectly glossed red lips. A huge blue brush appeared out of nowhere and started foamily to scrub at the teeth, which continued to hang there gleaming in the shimmering curtain of rain.
Random blinked at it twice before she got it.
  It was a commercial. The guy who had shot her was part of a holographic in-flight movie. She must now be very close to where the ship had crashed. Obviously some of its systems were more indestructible than others.
  The next half-mile of the journey was particularly troublesome. Not only did she have the cold and the rain and the night to contend with, but also the fractured and thrashing remains of the ship's on-board entertainment system. Spaceships and jetcars and helipods crashed and exploded continuously around her, illuminating the night; villainous people in strange hats smuggled dangerous drugs through her; and the combined orchestra and chorus of the Hallapolis State Opera performed the closing March of the AnjaQantine Star Guard from Act IV of Rizgar's Blamwellamum of Woont in a little glade somewhere off to her left.
  And then she was standing on the lip of a very nasty-looking and bubbly- edged crater. There was still a faint warm glow coming from what would otherwise have looked like an enormous piece of caramelized chewing gum in the centre of the pit: the melted remains of a great spaceship.


  She stood looking at it for a longish while, and then at last started to walk along and around the edge of the crater. She was no longer certain what she was looking for, but kept moving anyway, keeping the horror of the pit to her left.
  The rain was beginning to ease off a little, but it was still extremely wet, and since she didn't know what it was that was in the box, whether it was perhaps something delicate or damageable, she thought she ought to find somewhere reasonably dry to open it. She hoped she hadn't already damaged it by dropping it.
  She played her torch around the surrounding trees, which were thin on the ground here, and mostly charred and broken. In the middle distance she thought she could see a jumbled outcrop of rock which might provide some shelter, and she started to pick her way towards it. All around she found the detritus that had been ejected from the ship as it broke up before the final fireball.
  After she had moved two or three hundred yards from the edge of the crater she came across the tattered fragments of some fluffy pink material, sodden, muddied and drooping amongst the broken trees. She guessed, correctly, that this must be the remains of the escape cocoon that had saved her father's life. She went and looked at it more closely, and then noticed something close to it on the ground, half covered in mud.
  She picked it up and wiped the mud off it. It was some kind of electronic device the size of a small book. Feebly glowing on its cover, in response to her touch, were some large friendly letters. They said DON'T PANIC. She knew what this was. It was her father's copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
  She felt instantly reassured by it, turned her head up to the thundery sky and let some rain wash over her face and into her mouth.
  She shook her head and hurried on towards the rocks. Clambering up and over them she almost immediately found the perfect thing. The mouth of a cave. She played her torch into its interior. It seemed to be dry and safe.
Picking her way carefully, she walked in. It was quite spacious, but didn't go that deep. Exhausted and relieved she sat on a convenient rock, put the box down in front of her and started immediately to open it.


17


For a long period of time there was much speculation and controversy about where the so-called 'missing matter' of the Universe had got to. All over the Galaxy the science departments of all the major universities were acquiring more and more elaborate equipment to probe and search the hearts of distant galaxies, and then the very centre and the very edges of the whole Universe, but when eventually it was tracked down it turned out in fact to be all the stuff which the equipment had been packed in.
  There was quite a large quantity of missing matter in the box, little soft round white pellets of missing matter, which Random discarded for future generations of physicists to track down and discover all over again once the findings of the current generation of physicists had been lost and forgotten about.
Out of the pellets of missing matter she lifted the featureless black disc.
She put it down on a rock beside her and sifted amongst all the missing matter to see if there was anything else, a manual or some attachments or something, but there was nothing else at all. Just the black disc.
She shone the torch on it.
  As she did so, cracks began to appear along its apparently featureless surface. Random backed away nervously, but then saw that the thing, whatever it was, was merely unfolding itself.
  The process was wonderfully beautiful. It was extraordinarily elaborate but also simple and elegant. It was like a piece of self-opening origami, or a rosebud blooming into a rose in just a few seconds.
  Where just a few moments earlier there had been a smoothly curved black disc there was now a bird. A bird, hovering there.
Random continued to back away from it, carefully and watchfully.
  It was a little like a pikka bird, only rather smaller. That is to say, in fact it was larger, or to be more exact, precisely the same size, or, at least, not less than twice the size. It was also both a lot bluer and a lot pinker than pikka birds, while at the same time being perfectly black.
  There was also something very odd about it, which Random couldn't immediately make out.
  It certainly shared with pikka birds the impression it gave that it was watching something that you couldn't see.
Suddenly it vanished.
  Then, just as suddenly, everything went black. Random dropped into a tense crouch, feeling for the specially sharpened rock in her pocket again.


Then the blackness receded and rolled itself up into a ball and then the blackness was the bird again. It hung in the air in front of her, beating its wings slowly and staring at her.
  'Excuse me,' it said suddenly, 'I just have to calibrate myself. Can you hear me when I say this?'
'When you say what?' demanded Random.
  'Good,' said the bird. 'And can you hear me when I say this?' It spoke this time at a much higher pitch.
'Yes, of course I can!' said Random.
  'And can you hear me when I say this?' it said, this time in a sepulchrally deep voice.
'Yes!'
There was then a pause.
  'No, obviously not,' said the bird after a few seconds. 'Good, well your hearing range is obviously between 20 and 16 KHz. So. Is this comfortable for you?' it said in a pleasant light tenor. 'No uncomfortable harmonics screeching away in the upper register? Obviously not. Good. I can use those as data channels. Now. How many of me can you see?'
  Suddenly the air was full of nothing but interlocking birds. Random was well used to spending time in virtual realities, but this was something far weirder than anything she had previously encountered. It was as if the whole geometry of space was redefined in seamless bird shapes.
  Random gasped and flung her arms round her face, her arms moving through bird-shaped space.
'Hmmm, obviously way too many,' said the bird. 'How about now?'
  It concertina-ed into a tunnel of birds, as if it was a bird caught between parallel mirrors, reflecting infinitely into the distance.
'What are you?' shouted Random.
'We'll come to that in a minute,' said the bird. 'Just how many, please?' 'Well, you're sort of . . .' Random gestured helplessly off into the
distance.
  'I see, still infinite in extent, but at least we're homing in on the right dimensional matrix. Good. No, the answer is an orange and two lemons.'
'Lemons?'
  'If I have three lemons and three oranges and I lose two oranges and a lemon what do I have left?'
'Huh?'


  'OK, so you think that time flows that way, do you? Interesting. Am I still infinite?' it asked, ballooning this way and that in space. 'Am I infinite now? How yellow am I?'
  Moment by moment the bird was going through mind-mangling transformations of shape and extent.
'I can't . . .' said Random, bewildered.
  'You don't have to answer, I can tell from watching you now. So. Am I your mother? Am I a rock? Do I seem huge, squishy and sinuously intertwined? No? How about now? Am I going backwards?'
For once the bird was perfectly still and steady. 'No,' said Random.
  'Well, I was in fact, I was moving backwards in time. Hmmm. Well, I think we've sorted all that out now. If you'd like to know, I can tell you that in your universe you move freely in three dimensions that you call space.
You move in a straight line in a fourth, which you call time, and stay rooted to one place in a fifth, which is the first fundamental of probability. After that it gets a bit complicated, and there's all sorts of stuff going on in dimensions thirteen to twenty-two that you really wouldn't want to know about. All you really need to know for the moment is that the Universe is a lot more complicated than you might think, even if you start from a position of thinking it's pretty damn complicated in the first place. I can easily not say words like "damn" if it offends you.'
'Say what you damn well like.' 'I will.'
'What the hell are you?' demanded Random.
  'I am the Guide. In your universe I am your Guide. In fact I inhabit what is technically known as the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash, which means . . . well, let me show you.'
  It turned in mid-air and swooped out of the cave, and then perched on a rock, just beneath an overhang, out of the rain, which was getting heavier again.
'Come on,' it said, 'watch this.'
  Random didn't like being bossed around by a bird, but she followed it to the mouth of the cave anyway, still fingering the rock in her pocket.
'Rain,' said the bird. 'You see? Just rain.' 'I know what rain is.'


  Sheets of the stuff were sweeping through the night, moonlight sifting through it.
'So what is it?'
  'What do you mean, what is it? Look, who are you? What were you doing in that box? Why have I spent a night running through the forest fending off demented squirrels to find that all I've got at the end of it is a bird asking me what rain is? It's just water falling through the bloody air, that's what it is. Anything else you want to know or can we go home now?'
  There was a long pause before the bird answered, 'You want to go home?'
  'I haven't got a home!' Random almost shocked herself, she screamed the words so loudly.
'Look into the rain . . .' said the bird Guide.
'I'm looking into the rain! What else is there to look at?' 'What do you see?'
  'What do you mean, you stupid bird? I just see a load of rain. It's just water, falling.'
'What shapes do you see in the water?'
'Shapes? There aren't any shapes. It's just, just . . .' 'Just a mish mash,' said the bird Guide.
'Yes . . .'
'Now what do you see?'
  Just on the very edge of visibility a thin faint beam fanned out of the bird's eyes. In the dry air beneath the overhang there was nothing to see. Where the beam hit the drops of rain as they fell through it, there was a flat sheet of light, so bright and vivid it seemed solid.
'Oh great. A laser show,' said Random fractiously. 'Never seen one of
those before, of course, except at about five million rock concerts.' 'Tell me what you see!'
'Just a flat sheet! Stupid bird.'
  'There's nothing there that wasn't there before. I'm just using light to draw your attention to certain drops at certain moments. Now what do you see?'
The light shut off. 'Nothing.'
  'I'm doing exactly the same thing, but with ultraviolet light. You can't see it.'


'So what's the point of showing me something I can't see?'
  'So that you understand that just because you see something, it doesn't mean to say it's there. And if you don't see something it doesn't mean to say it's not there, it's only what your senses bring to your attention.'
'I'm bored with this,' said Random, and then gasped.
  Hanging in the rain was a giant and very vivid three-dimensional image of her father looking startled about something.


About two miles away behind Random, her father, struggling his way through the woods, suddenly stopped. He was startled to see an image of himself looking startled about something hanging brightly in the rain-filled air about two miles away. About two miles away some distance to the right of the direction in which he was heading.
  He was almost completely lost, convinced he was going to die of cold and wet and exhaustion and beginning to wish he could just get on with it. He had just been brought an entire golfing magazine by a squirrel, as well, and his brain was beginning to howl and gibber.
  Seeing a huge bright image of himself light up in the sky told him that, on balance, he was probably right to howl and gibber but probably wrong as far as the direction he was heading was concerned.
  Taking a deep breath, he turned and headed off towards the inexplicable light show.


'OK, so what's that supposed to prove?' demanded Random. It was the fact that the image was her father that had startled her rather than the appearance of the image itself. She had seen her first hologram when she was two months old and had been put in it to play. She had seen her most recent one about half an hour ago playing the March of the AnjaQantine Star Guard.
  'Only that it's no more there or not there than the sheet was,' said the bird. 'It's just the interaction of water from the sky moving in one direction, with light at frequencies your senses can detect moving in another. It makes an apparently solid image in your mind. But it's all just images in the Mish Mash. Here's another one for you.'
'My mother!' said Random. 'No,' said the bird.
'I know my mother when I see her!'


  The image was of a woman emerging from a spacecraft inside a large, grey hangar-like building. She was being escorted by a group of tall, thin purplish-green creatures. It was definitely Random's mother. Well, almost definitely. Trillian wouldn't have been walking quite so uncertainly in low gravity, or looking around her at a boring old life-support environment with quite such a disbelieving look on her face, or carrying such a quaint old camera.
'So who is it?' demanded Random.
  'She is part of the extent of your mother on the probability axis,' said the bird Guide.
'I haven't the faintest idea what you mean.'
  'Space, time and probability all have axes along which it is possible to move.'
'Still dunno. Though I think . . . No. Explain.' 'I thought you wanted to go home.' 'Explain!'
'Would you like to see your home?' 'See it? It was destroyed!'
'It is discontinuous along the probability axis. Look!'
  Something very strange and wonderful now swam into view in the rain. It was a huge, bluish-greenish globe, misty and cloud-covered, turning with majestic slowness against a black, starry background.
'Now you see it,' said the bird. 'Now you don't.'


A little less than two miles away now, Arthur Dent stood still in his tracks. He could not believe what he could see, hanging there, shrouded in rain, but brilliant and vividly real against the night sky - the Earth. He gasped at the sight of it. Then, at the moment he gasped, it disappeared again. Then it appeared again. Then, and this was the bit that made him give up and stick straws in his hair, it turned into a sausage.


Random was also startled by the sight of this huge, blue and green and watery and misty sausage hanging above her. And now it was a string of sausages, or rather it was a string of sausages in which many of the sausages were missing. The whole brilliant string turned and span in a bewildering dance in the air and then gradually slowed, grew insubstantial and faded into the glistening darkness of the night.


'What was that?' asked Random, in a small voice.
  'A glimpse along the probability axis of a discontinuously probable object.'
'I see.'
  'Most objects mutate and change along their axis of probability, but the world of your origin does something slightly different. It lies on what you might call a fault line in the landscape of probability, which means that at many probability coordinates the whole of it simply ceases to exist. It has an inherent instability, which is typical of anything that lies within what are usually designated the Plural sectors. Make sense?'
'No.'
'Want to go and see for yourself?' 'To . . . Earth?'
'Yes.'
'Is that possible?'
  The bird Guide did not answer at once. It spread its wings and, with an easy grace, ascended into the air and flew out into the rain which, once again, was beginning to lighten.
  It soared ecstatically up into the night sky, lights flashed around it, dimensions dithered in its wake. It swooped and turned and looped and turned again and came at last to rest two feet in front of Random's face, its wings beating slowly and silently.
It spoke to her again.
  'Your universe is vast to you. Vast in time, vast in space. That's because of the filters through which you perceive it. But I was built with no filters at all, which means I perceive the Mish Mash which contains all possible universes but which has, itself, no size at all. For me, anything is possible. I am omniscient and omnipotent, extremely vain, and, what is more, I come in a handy self-carrying package. You have to work out how much of the above is true.'
A slow smile spread over Random's face.
'You bloody little thing. You've been winding me up!' 'As I said, anything is possible.'
  Random laughed. 'OK,' she said. 'Let's try and go to Earth. Let's go to Earth at some point on its, er . . .'
'Probability axis?'


  'Yes. Where it hasn't been blown up. OK. So you're the Guide. How do we get a lift?'
'Reverse engineering.' 'What?'
  'Reverse engineering. To me the flow of time is irrelevant. You decide what you want. I then merely make sure that it has already happened.'
'You're joking.' 'Anything is possible.'
Random frowned. 'You are joking, aren't you?'
  'Let me put it another way,' said the bird. 'Reverse engineering enables us to shortcut all the business of waiting for one of the horribly few spaceships that passes through your Galactic sector every year or so to make up its mind about whether or not it feels like giving you a lift. You want a lift, a ship arrives and gives you one. The pilot may think he has any one of a million reasons why he has decided to stop and pick you up. The real reason is that I have determined that he will.'
'This is you being extremely vain isn't it, little bird?' The bird was silent.
'OK,' said Random. 'I want a ship to take me to Earth.' 'Will this one do?'
  It was so silent that Random had not noticed the descending spaceship until it was nearly on top of her.


Arthur had noticed it. He was a mile away now and closing. Just after the illuminated sausage display had drawn to its conclusion he had noticed the faint glimmerings of further lights coming down out of the clouds and had, to begin with, assumed it to be another piece of flashy son et lumiËre.
  It took a moment or so for it to dawn on him that it was an actual spaceship, and a moment or two longer for him to realize that it was dropping directly down to where he assumed his daughter to be. That was when, rain or no rain, leg injury or no leg injury, darkness or no darkness, he suddenly started really to run.
He fell almost immediately, slid and hurt his knee quite badly on a rock.
He slithered back up to his feet and tried again. He had a horrible cold feeling that he was about to lose Random for ever. Limping and cursing, he ran. He didn't know what it was that had been in the box, but the name on it had been Ford Prefect, and that was the name he cursed as he ran.


The ship was one of the sexiest and most beautiful ones that Random had ever seen.
It was astounding. Silver, sleek, ineffable.
  If she didn't know better she would have said it was an RW6. As it settled silently beside her she realized that it actually was an RW6 and she could scarcely breathe for excitement. An RW6 was the sort of thing you only saw in the sort of magazines that were designed to provoke civil unrest.
  She was also extremely nervous. The manner and timing of its arrival was deeply unsettling. Either it was the most bizarre coincidence or something very peculiar and worrying was going on. She waited a little tensely for the ship's hatch to open. Her Guide - she thought of it as hers now - was hovering lightly over her right shoulder, its wings barely fluttering.
  The hatch opened. Just a little dim light escaped. A moment or two passed and a figure emerged. He stood still for a moment or so, obviously trying to accustom his eyes to the darkness. Then he caught sight of Random standing there, and seemed a little surprised. He started to walk towards her. Then suddenly he shouted in surprise and started to run at her.
  Random was not a good person to take a run at on a dark night when she was feeling a little strung out. She had unconsciously been fingering the rock in her pocket from the moment she saw the craft coming down.


Still running, slithering, hurtling, bumping into trees, Arthur saw at last that he was too late. The ship had only been on the ground for about three minutes, and now, silently, gracefully, it was rising up above the trees again, turning smoothly in the fine speckle of rain to which the storm had now abated, climbing, climbing, tipping up its nose and, suddenly, effortlessly, hurtling up through the clouds.
  Gone. Random was in it. It was impossible for Arthur to know this, but he just went ahead and knew it anyway. She was gone. He had had his stint at being a parent and could scarcely believe how badly he had done at it. He tried to continue running, but his feet were dragging, his knee was hurting like fury and he knew that he was too late.
  He could not conceive that he could feel more wretched and awful than this, but he was wrong.


  He limped his way at last to the cave where Random had sheltered and opened the box. The ground bore the indentations of the spacecraft that had landed there only minutes before, but of Random there was no sign. He wandered disconsolately into the cave, found the empty box and piles of missing matter pellets strewn around the place. He felt a little cross about that. He'd tried to teach her about cleaning up after herself. Feeling a bit cross with her about something like that helped him feel less desolate about her leaving. He knew he had no means of finding her.
  His foot knocked against something unexpected. He bent down to pick it up, and was thoroughly surprised to discover what it was. It was his old Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. How did that come to be in the cave? He had never returned to collect it from the scene of the crash. He had not wanted to revisit the crash and he had not wanted the Guide again. He had reckoned he was here on Lamuella, making sandwiches, for good. How did it come to be in the cave? It was active. The words on the cover flashed DON'T PANIC at him.
  He went out of the cave again into the dim and damp moonlight. He sat on a rock to have a look through the old Guide, and then discovered it wasn't a rock, it was a person.


18


Arthur leapt to his feet with a start of fear. It would be hard to say which he was more frightened of: that he might have hurt the person he had inadvertently sat on or that the person he had inadvertently sat on would hurt him back.
  There seemed, on inspection, to be little immediate cause for alarm on the second count. Whoever it was he had sat on was unconscious. That would probably go a great deal of the way towards explaining what he was doing lying there. He seemed to be breathing OK, though. Arthur felt his pulse. That was OK as well.
  He was lying on his side, half curled up. It was so long ago and far away when Arthur had last done first aid that he really couldn't remember what it was he was supposed to do. The first thing he was supposed to do, he remembered, was to have a first-aid kit about his person. Damn.


  Should he roll him on to his back or not? Suppose he had any broken bones? Suppose he swallowed his tongue? Suppose he sued him? Who, apart from anything else, was he?
  At that moment the unconscious man groaned loudly and rolled himself over.
Arthur wondered if he should- He looked at him.
He looked at him again.
He looked at him again, just to make absolutely sure.
  Despite the fact that he had been thinking he was feeling about as low as he possibly could, he experienced a terrible sinking feeling.
  The figure groaned again and slowly opened his eyes. It took him a while to focus, then he blinked and stiffened.
'You!' said Ford Prefect. 'You!' said Arthur Dent. Ford groaned again.
  'What do you need to have explained this time?' he said, and closed his eyes in some kind of despair.


Five minutes later he was sitting up and rubbing the side of his head, where he had quite a large swelling.
  'Who the hell was that woman?' he said. 'Why are we surrounded by squirrels, and what do they want?'
  'I've been pestered by squirrels all night,' said Arthur. 'They keep on trying to give me magazines and stuff.'
Ford frowned. 'Really?' he said. 'And bits of rag.'
Ford thought.
'Oh,' he said. 'Is this near where your ship crashed?' 'Yes,' said Arthur. He said it a little tightly.
  'That's probably it. Can happen. Ship's cabin robots get destroyed. The cyberminds that control them survive and start infesting the local wildlife. Can turn a whole ecosystem into some kind of helpless thrashing service industry, handing out hot towels and drinks to passers-by. Should be a law against it. Probably is. Probably also a law against there being a law against it so everybody can get nice and worked up. Hey ho. What did you say?'
'I said, and the woman is my daughter.'


Ford stopped rubbing his head. 'Say that one more time.'
'I said,' said Arthur huffily, 'the woman is my daughter.' 'I didn't know,' said Ford, 'that you had a daughter.'
  'Well, there's probably a lot you don't know about me,' said Arthur. 'Come to mention it, there's probably a lot I don't know about me either.'
'Well, well, well. When did this happen, then?' 'I'm not quite sure.'
  'That sounds like more familiar territory,' said Ford. 'Is there a mother involved?'
'Trillian.'
'Trillian? I didn't think that . . .' 'No. Look, it's a bit embarrassing.'
'I remember she told me once she had a kid but only, sort of, in passing.
I'm in touch with her from time to time. Never seen her with the kid.' Arthur said nothing.
Ford started to feel the side of his head again in some bemusement. 'Are you sure this was your daughter?' he said.
'Tell me what happened.'
  'Phroo. Long story. I was coming to pick up this parcel I'd sent to myself here care of you . . .'
'Well, what was that all about?'
'I think it may be something unimaginably dangerous.' 'And you sent it to me?' protested Arthur.
  'Safest place I could think of. I thought I could rely on you to be absolutely boring and not open it. Anyway, coming in at night I couldn't find this village place. I was going by pretty basic information. I couldn't find any signal of any kind. I guess you don't have signals and stuff here.'
'That's what I like about it.'
  'Then I did pick up a faint signal from your old copy of the Guide, so I homed in on that, thinking that would take me to you. I found I'd landed in some kind of wood. Couldn't figure out what was going on. I get out, and then see this woman standing there. I go up to say hello, then suddenly I see that she's got this thing!'
'What thing?'
  'The thing I sent you! The new Guide! The bird thing! You were meant to keep it safe, you idiot, but this woman had the thing right there by her


shoulder. I ran forward and she hit me with a rock.' 'I see,' said Arthur. 'What did you do?'
  'Well, I fell over, of course. I was very badly hurt. She and the bird started to make off towards my ship. And when I say my ship, I mean an RW6.'
'A what?'
  'An RW6, for zark's sake. I've got this great relationship going now between my credit card and the Guide's central computer. You would not believe that ship, Arthur, it's . . .'
'So an RW6 is a spaceship, then?'
  'Yes! It's - oh, never mind. Look, just get some kind of grip, will you, Arthur? Or at least get some kind of catalogue. At this point I was very worried. And, I think, semi-concussed. I was down on my knees and bleeding profusely, so I did the only thing I could think of, which was to beg. I said, please, for zark's sake don't take my ship. And don't leave me stranded in the middle of some primitive zarking forest with no medical help and a head injury. I could be in serious trouble and so could she.'
'What did she say?'
'She hit me on the head with the rock again.'
'I think I can confirm that that was my daughter.' 'Sweet kid.'
'You have to get to know her,' said Arthur. 'She eases up, does she?'
'No,' said Arthur, 'but you get a better sense of when to duck.' Ford held his head and tried to see straight.
  The sky was beginning to lighten in the west, which was where the sun rose. Arthur didn't particularly want to see it. The last thing he wanted after a hellish night like this one was some blasted day coming along and barging about the place.
'What are you doing in a place like this, Arthur?' demanded Ford. 'Well,' said Arthur, 'making sandwiches mostly.'
'What?'
  'I am, probably was, the Sandwich Maker for a small tribe. It was a bit embarrassing really. When I first arrived, that is, when they rescued me from the wreckage of this super-high-technology spacecraft which had crashed on their planet, they were very nice to me and I thought I should help them out a bit. You know, I'm an educated chap from a high-


technology culture, I could show them a thing or two. And of course I couldn't. I haven't got the faintest idea, when it comes down to it, of how anything actually works. I don't mean like video recorders, nobody knows how to work those. I mean just something like a pen or an artesian well or something. Not the foggiest. I couldn't help at all. One day I got glum and made myself a sandwich. That suddenly got them all excited. They'd never seen one before. It was just an idea that had never occurred to them, and I happen to quite like making sandwiches, so it all sort of developed from there.'
'And you enjoyed that?'
  'Well, yes, I think I sort of did, really. Getting a good set of knives, that sort of thing.'
  'You didn't, for instance, find it mind-witheringly, explosively, astoundingly, blisteringly dull?'
'Well, er, no. Not as such. Not actually blisteringly.' 'Odd. I would.'
'Well, I suppose we have a different outlook.' 'Yes.'
'Like the pikka birds.'
  Ford had no idea what he was talking about and couldn't be bothered to ask. Instead he said, 'So how the hell do we get out of this place?'
  'Well, I think the simplest way from here is just to follow the way down the valley to the plains, probably take an hour, and then walk round from there. I don't think I could face going back up and over the way I came.'
'Walk round where from there?'
'Well, back to the village. I suppose.' Arthur sighed a little forlornly.
  'I don't want to go to any blasted village!' snapped Ford. 'We've got to get out of here!'
'Where? How?'
  'I don't know, you tell me. You live here! There must be some way off this zarking planet.'
  'I don't know. What do you usually do? Sit around and wait for a passing spacecraft, I suppose.'
  'Oh yes? And how many spacecraft have visited this zarkforsaken little fleapit recently?'
  'Well, a few years ago there was mine that crashed here by mistake. Then there was, er, Trillian, then the parcel delivery, and now you, and . . .'


'Yes, but apart from the usual suspects?'
  'Well, er, I think pretty much none, so far as I know. Pretty quiet round here.'
  As if deliberately to prove him wrong, there was a long, low distant roll of thunder.
  Ford leapt to his feet fretfully and started pacing backwards and forwards in the feeble, painful light of the early dawn which lay streaked against the sky as if someone had dragged a piece of liver across it.
'You don't understand how important this is,' he said.
  'What? You mean my daughter out there all alone in the Galaxy? You think I don't-'
  'Can we feel sorry for the Galaxy later?' said Ford. 'This is very, very serious indeed. The Guide has been taken over. It's been bought out.'
  Arthur leapt up. 'Oh very serious,' he shouted. 'Please fill me in straight away on some corporate publishing politics! I can't tell you how much it's been on my mind of late!'
'You don't understand! There's a whole new Guide!'
  'Oh!' shouted Arthur again. 'Oh! Oh! Oh! I'm incoherent with excitement! I can hardly wait for it to come out to find out which are the most exciting spaceports to get bored hanging about in in some globular cluster I've never heard of. Please, can we rush to a store that's got it right this very instant?'
Ford narrowed his eyes.
'This is that thing you call sarcasm, isn't it?'
  'Do you know,' bellowed Arthur, 'I think it is. I really think it might just be a crazy little thing called sarcasm seeping in at the edges of my manner of speech! Ford, I have had a fucking bad night! Will you please try and take that into account while you consider what fascinating bits of badger- sputumly inconsequential trivia to assail me with next?'
'Try to rest,' said Ford. 'I need to think.'
  'Why do you need to think? Can't we just sit and go budumbudumbudum with our lips for a bit? Couldn't we just dribble gently and loll a little bit to the left for a few minutes? I can't stand it, Ford! I can't stand all this thinking and trying to work things out any more. You may think that I am just standing here barking . . .'
'Hadn't occurred to me, in fact.'


  '. . . but I mean it! What is the point? We assume that every time we do anything we know what the consequences will be, i.e. more or less what we intend them to be. This is not only not always correct. It is wildly, crazily, stupidly cross-eyed-blithering-insectly wrong!'
'Which is exactly my point.'
'Thank you,' said Arthur, sitting down again. 'What?' 'Temporal reverse engineering.'
Arthur put his head in his hands and shook it gently from side to side.
  'Is there any humane way,' he moaned, 'in which I can prevent you from telling me what temporary reverse bloody-whatsiting is?'
  'No,' said Ford, 'because your daughter is caught up in the middle of it and it is deadly, deadly serious.'
Thunder rolled in the pause.
'All right,' said Arthur. 'Tell me.'
'I leaped out of a high-rise office window.' This cheered Arthur up.
'Oh!' he said. 'Why don't you do it again?' 'I did.'
'Hmmm,' said Arthur, disappointed. 'Obviously no good came of it.' 'The first time I managed to save myself by the most astonishing and - I
say this in all modesty - fabulous piece of ingenious quick-thinking, agility, fancy footwork and self-sacrifice.'
'What was the self-sacrifice?'
'I jettisoned half of a much-loved and I think irreplaceable pair of shoes.' 'Why was that self-sacrifice?'
'Because they were mine!' said Ford crossly. 'I think we have different value systems.' 'Well, mine's better.'
  'That's according to your . . . oh never mind. So having saved yourself very cleverly once you very sensibly went and jumped again. Please don't tell me why. Just tell me what happened if you must.'
  'I fell straight into the open cockpit of a passing jet towncar whose pilot had just accidentally pushed the eject button when he meant only to change tracks on the stereo. Now, even I couldn't think that that was particularly clever of me.'
  'Oh, I don't know,' said Arthur wearily. 'I expect you probably sneaked into his jetcar the previous night and set the pilot's least favourite track to


play or something.'
'No, I didn't,' said Ford. 'Just checking.'
  'Though oddly enough, somebody else did. And this is the nub. You could trace the chain and branches of crucial events and coincidences back and back. Turned out the new Guide had done it. That bird.'
'What bird?'
'You haven't seen it?' 'No.'
  'Oh. It's a lethal little thing. Looks pretty, talks big, collapses waveforms selectively at will.'
'What does that mean?' 'Temporal reverse engineering.' 'Oh,' said Arthur. 'Oh yes.'
'The question is, who is it really doing it for?'
  'I've actually got a sandwich in my pocket,' said Arthur, delving. 'Would you like a bit?'
'Yeah, OK.'
'It's a bit squished and sodden, I'm afraid.' 'Never mind.'
They munched for a bit.
'It's quite good, in fact,' said Ford. 'What's the meat in it?' 'Perfectly Normal Beast.'
  'Not come across that one. So, the question is,' Ford continued, 'who is the bird really doing it for? What's the real game here?'
'Mmm,' ate Arthur.
  'When I found the bird,' continued Ford, 'which I did by a series of coincidences that are interesting in themselves, it put on the most fantastic multi-dimensional display of pyrotechnics I've ever seen. It then said that it would put its services at my disposal in my universe. I said, thanks but no thanks. It said that it would anyway, whether I liked it or not. I said just try it, and it said it would and, indeed, already had done. I said we'd see about that and it said that we would. That's when I decided to pack the thing up and get it out of there. So I sent it to you for safety.'
'Oh yes? Whose?'
  'Never you mind. Then, what with one thing and another, I thought it prudent to jump out of the window again, being fresh out of other options at


the time. Luckily for me the jetcar was there otherwise I would have had to fall back on ingenious quick-thinking, agility, maybe another shoe or, failing all else, the ground. But it meant that, whether I liked it or not, the Guide was, well, working for me, and that was deeply worrying.'
'Why?'
  'Because if you've got the Guide you think that you are the one it's working for. Everything went swimmingly smoothly for me from then on, up to the very moment that I come up against the totty with the rock, then, bang, I'm history. I'm out of the loop.'
'Are you referring to my daughter?'
  'As politely as I can. She's the next one in the chain who will think that everything is going fabulously for her. She can beat whoever she likes around the head with bits of the landscape; everything will just swim for her until she's done whatever she's supposed to do and then it will be all up for her too. It's reverse temporal engineering, and clearly nobody understood what was being unleashed!'
'Like me, for instance.'
  'What? Oh, wake up, Arthur. Look, let me try it again. The new Guide came out of the research labs. It made use of this new technology of Unfiltered Perception. Do you know what that means?'
'Look, I've been making sandwiches, for Bob's sake!' 'Who's Bob?'
'Never mind. Just carry on.'
  'Unfiltered Perception means it perceives everything. Got that? I don't perceive everything. You don't perceive everything. We have filters. The new Guide doesn't have any sense filters. It perceives everything. It wasn't a complicated technological idea. It was just a question of leaving a bit out. Got it?'
  'Why don't I just say that I've got it, and then you can carry on regardless.'
  'Right. Now because the bird can perceive every possible universe, it is present in every possible universe. Yes?'
'Y . . . e . . . e . . . s. Ish.'
  'So what happens is, the bozos in the marketing and accounting departments say, oh that sounds good, doesn't that mean we only have to make one of them and then sell it an infinite number of times? Don't squint at me like that, Arthur, this is how accountants think!'


'That's quite clever, isn't it?'
'No! It is fantastically stupid. Look. The machine's only a little Guide.
It's got some quite clever cybertechnology in it, but because it has Unfiltered Perception, any smallest move it makes has the power of a virus. It can propagate throughout space, time and a million other dimensions.
Anything can be focused anywhere in any of the universes that you and I move in. Its power is recursive. Think of a computer program. Somewhere, there is one key instruction, and everything else is just functions, or brackets billowing out endlessly through an infinite address space. What happens when the brackets collapse? Where's the final "and if"? Is any of this making sense? Arthur?'
  'Sorry, I was nodding off for a moment. Something about the Universe, yes?'
  'Something about the Universe, yes,' said Ford, wearily. He sat down again.
'All right,' he said. 'Think about this. You know who I think I saw at the
Guide offices? Vogons. Ah, I see I've said a word you understand at last.' Arthur leapt to his feet.
'That noise,' he said. 'What noise?'
'The thunder.' 'What about it?'
'It isn't thunder. It's the spring migration of the Perfectly Normal Beasts.
It's started.'
'What are these animals you keep on about?'
'I don't keep on about them. I just put bits of them in sandwiches.' 'Why are they called Perfectly Normal Beasts?'
Arthur told him.
  It wasn't often that Arthur had the pleasure of seeing Ford's eyes open wide with astonishment.


19


It was a sight that Arthur never quite got used to, or tired of. He and Ford had tracked their way swiftly along the side of the small river that flowed down along the bed of the valley, and when at last they reached the margin


of the plains they pulled themselves up into the branches of a large tree to get a better view of one of the stranger and more wonderful visions that the Galaxy has to offer.
  The great thunderous herd of thousands upon thousands of Perfectly Normal Beasts was sweeping in magnificent array across the Anhondo Plain. In the early pale light of the morning, as the great animals charged through the fine steam of the sweat of their bodies mingled with the muddy mist churned up by their pounding hooves, their appearance seemed a little unreal and ghostly anyway, but what was heart-stopping about them was where they came from and where they went to, which appeared to be, simply, nowhere.
  They formed a solid, charging phalanx roughly a hundred yards wide and half a mile long. The phalanx never moved, except that it exhibited a slight gradual drift sideways and backwards for the eight or nine days that it regularly appeared for. But though the phalanx stayed more or less constant, the great beasts of which it was composed charged steadily at upwards of twenty miles an hour, appearing suddenly from thin air at one end of the plain, and disappearing equally abruptly at the other end.
No one knew where they came from, no one knew where they went.
They were so important to the lives of the Lamuellans, it was almost as if nobody liked to ask. Old Thrashbarg had said on one occasion that sometimes if you received an answer, the question might be taken away. Some of the villagers had privately said that this was the only properly wise thing they'd ever heard Thrashbarg say, and after a short debate on the matter, had put it down to chance.
  The noise of the pounding of the hooves was so intense that it was hard to hear anything else above it.
'What did you say?' shouted Arthur.
  'I said,' shouted Ford, 'this looks like it might be some kind of evidence of dimensional drift.'
'Which is what?' shouted Arthur back.
  'Well, a lot of people are beginning to worry that space-time is showing signs of cracking up with everything that's happening to it. There are quite a lot of worlds where you can see how the land masses have cracked up and moved around just from the weirdly long or meandering routes that migrating animals take. This might be something like that. We live in twisted times. Still, in the absence of a decent spaceport . . .'


Arthur looked at him in a kind of frozen way. 'What do you mean?' he said.
  'What do you mean, what do I mean?' shouted Ford. 'You know perfectly well what I mean. We're going to ride our way out of here.'
'Are you seriously suggesting we try to ride a Perfectly Normal Beast?' 'Yeah. See where it goes to.'
  'We'll be killed! No,' said Arthur, suddenly. 'We won't be killed. At least I won't. Ford, have you ever heard of a planet called Stavromula Beta?'
  Ford frowned. 'Don't think so,' he said. He pulled out his own battered old copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and accessed it. 'Any funny spelling?' he said.
  'Don't know. I've only ever heard it said, and that was by someone who had a mouthful of other people's teeth. You remember I told you about Agrajag?'
  Ford thought for a moment. 'You mean the guy who was convinced you were getting him killed over and over again?'
  'Yes. One of the places he claimed I'd got him killed was Stavromula Beta. Someone tries to shoot me, it seems. I duck and Agrajag, or at least one of his many reincarnations, gets hit. It seems that this has definitely happened at some point in time so, I suppose, I can't get killed at least until after I've ducked on Stavromula Beta. Only no one's ever heard of it.'
  'Hmm.' Ford tried a few other searches of the Hitchhiker's Guide, but drew a blank.
'Nothing,' he said.
  'I was just . . . No, I've never heard of it,' said Ford finally. He wondered why it was ringing a very, very faint bell, though.
  'OK,' said Arthur. 'I've seen the way the Lamuellan hunters trap Perfectly Normal Beasts. If you spear one in the herd it just gets trampled, so they have to lure them out one at a time for the kill. It's very like the way a matador works, you know, with a brightly coloured cape. You get one to charge at you and then step aside and execute a rather elegant swing through with the cape. Have you got anything like a brightly coloured cape about you?'
'This do?' said Ford, handing him his towel.


20


Leaping onto the back of a one-and-a-half-ton Perfectly Normal Beast migrating through your world at a thundering thirty miles an hour is not as easy as it might at first seem. Certainly it is not as easy as the Lamuellan hunters made it seem, and Arthur Dent was prepared to discover that this might turn out to be the difficult bit.
  What he hadn't been prepared to discover, however, was how difficult it was even getting to the difficult bit. It was the bit that was supposed to be the easy bit which turned out to be practically impossible.
  They couldn't even catch the attention of a single animal. The Perfectly Normal Beasts were so intent on working up a good thunder with their hooves, heads down, shoulders forward, back legs pounding the ground into porridge, that it would have taken something not merely startling but actually geological to disturb them.
  The sheer amount of thundering and pounding was, in the end, more than Arthur and Ford could deal with. After they had spent nearly two hours prancing about doing increasingly foolish things with a medium-sized floral-patterned bath towel, they had not managed to get even one of the great beasts thundering and pounding past them to do so much as glance casually in their direction.
  They were within three feet of the horizontal avalanche of sweating bodies. To have been much nearer would have been to risk instant death, chrono-logic or no chrono-logic. Arthur had seen what remained of any Perfectly Normal Beast which, as the result of a clumsy mis-throw by a young and inexperienced Lamuellan hunter, got speared while still thundering and pounding with the herd.
  One stumble was all it took. No prior appointment with death on Stavromula Beta, wherever the hell Stavromula Beta was, would save you or anybody else from the thunderous, mangling pounding of those hooves.
  At last, Arthur and Ford staggered back. They sat down, exhausted and defeated, and started to criticize each other's technique with the towel.
  'You've got to flick it more,' complained Ford. 'You need more follow- through from the elbow if you're going to get those blasted creatures to notice anything at all.'
  'Follow-through?' protested Arthur. 'You need more suppleness in the wrist.'
'You need more after-flourish,' countered Ford. 'You need a bigger towel.'


'You need,' said another voice, 'a pikka bird.' 'You what?'
  The voice had come from behind them. They turned, and there, standing behind them in the early morning sun, was Old Thrashbarg.
  'To attract the attention of a Perfectly Normal Beast,' he said, as he walked forward towards them, 'you need a pikka bird. Like this.'
  From under the rough, cassocky robe-like thing he wore he drew a small pikka bird. It sat restlessly on Old Thrashbarg's hand and peered intently at Bob knows what darting around about three feet six inches in front of it.
  Ford instantly went into the sort of alert crouch he liked to do when he wasn't quite sure what was going on or what he ought to do about it. He waved his arms around very slowly in what he hoped was an ominous manner.
'Who is this?' he hissed.
  'It's just Old Thrashbarg,' said Arthur quietly. 'And I wouldn't bother with all the fancy movements. He's just as experienced a bluffer as you are. You could end up dancing around each other all day.'
'The bird,' hissed Ford again. 'What's the bird?'
  'It's just a bird!' said Arthur impatiently. 'It's like any other bird. It lays eggs and goes ark at things you can't see. Or kar or rit or something.'
'Have you seen one lay eggs?' said Ford, suspiciously.
  'For Heaven's sake, of course I have,' said Arthur. 'And I've eaten hundreds of them. Make rather a good omelette. The secret is little cubes of cold butter and then whipping it lightly with . . .'
  'I don't want a zarking recipe,' said Ford. 'I just want to be sure it's a real bird and not some kind of multi-dimensional cybernight-mare.'
  He slowly stood up from his crouched position and started to brush himself down. He was still watching the bird, though.
  'So,' said Old Thrashbarg to Arthur. 'Is it written that Bob shall once more take back unto himself the benediction of his once-given Sandwich Maker?'
Ford almost went back into his crouch.
  'It's all right,' muttered Arthur, 'he always talks like that.' Aloud, he said, 'Ah, venerable Thrashbarg. Um, yes. I'm afraid I think I'm going to have to be popping off now. But young Drimple, my apprentice, will be a fine Sandwich Maker in my stead. He has the aptitude, a deep love of sandwiches, and the skills he has acquired so far, though rudimentary as yet,


will, in time mature and, er, well, I think he'll work out OK is what I'm trying to say.'
  Old Thrashbarg regarded him gravely. His old grey eyes moved sadly. He held his arms aloft, one still carrying the bobbing pikka bird, the other his staff.
  'O Sandwich Maker from Bob!' he pronounced. He paused, furrowed his brow, and sighed as he closed his eyes in pious contemplation. 'Life,' he said, 'will be a very great deal less weird without you!'
Arthur was stunned.
  'Do you know,' he said, 'I think that's the nicest thing anybody's ever said to me.'
'Can we get on, please?' said Ford.
  Something was already happening. The presence of the pikka bird at the end of Thrashbarg's outstretched arm was sending tremors of interest through the thundering herd. The odd head flicked momentarily in their direction. Arthur began to remember some of the Perfectly Normal Beast hunts he had witnessed. He recalled that as well as the hunter-matadors brandishing their capes there were always others standing behind them holding pikka birds. He had always assumed that, like him, they had just come along to watch.
  Old Thrashbarg moved forward, a little closer to the rolling herd. Some of the Beasts were now tossing their heads back with interest at the sight of the pikka bird.
Old Thrashbarg's outstretched arms were trembling.
  Only the pikka bird itself seemed to show no interest in what was going on. A few anonymous molecules of air nowhere in particular engaged all of its perky attention.
  'Now!' exclaimed Old Thrashbarg at last. 'Now you may work them with the towel!'
  Arthur advanced with Ford's towel, moving the way the hunter-matadors did, with a kind of elegant strut that did not come at all naturally to him.
But now he knew what to do and that it was right. He brandished and flicked the towel a few times, to be ready for the moment, and then he watched.
  Some distance away he spotted the Beast he wanted. Head down, it was galloping towards him, right on the very edge of the herd. Old Thrashbarg twitched the bird, the Beast looked up, tossed its head, and then, just as its


head was coming down again, Arthur flourished the towel in the Beast's line of sight. It tossed its head again in bemusement, and its eyes followed the movement of the towel.
He had got the Beast's attention.
  From that moment on, it seemed the most natural thing to coax and draw the animal towards him. Its head was up, cocked slightly to one side. It was slowing to a canter and then a trot. A few seconds later the huge thing was standing there amongst them, snorting, panting, sweating, and sniffing excitedly at the pikka bird, which appeared not to have noticed its arrival at all. With strange sort of sweeping movements of his arms Old Thrashbarg kept the pikka bird in front of the Beast, but always out of its reach and always downwards. With strange sort of sweeping movements of the towel, Arthur kept drawing the Beast's attention this way and that - always downwards.
  'I don't think I've ever seen anything quite so stupid in my life,' muttered Ford to himself.
At last, the Beast dropped, bemused but docile, to its knees.
'Go!' whispered Old Thrashbarg urgently, to Ford. 'Go! Go now!'
  Ford leapt up onto the great creature's back, scrabbling amongst its thick knotty fur for purchase, grasping great handfuls of the stuff to hold him steady once he was in position.
  'Now, Sandwich Maker! Go!' He performed some elaborate sign and ritual handshake which Arthur couldn't quite get the hang of because Old Thrashbarg had obviously made it up on the spur of the moment, then he pushed Arthur forward. Taking a deep breath, he clambered up behind Ford onto the great, hot, heaving back of the beast and held on tight. Huge muscles the size of sea lions rippled and flexed beneath him.
  Old Thrashbarg held the bird suddenly aloft. The Beast's head swivelled up to follow it. Thrashbarg pushed upwards and upwards repeatedly with his arms and with the pikka bird; and slowly, heavily the Perfectly Normal Beast lurched up off its knees and stood, at last, swaying slightly. Its two riders held on fiercely and nervously.
  Arthur gazed out over the sea of hurtling animals, straining in an attempt to see where it was they were going, but there was nothing but heat haze.
'Can you see anything?' he said to Ford.
  'No.' Ford twisted round to glance back, trying to see if there was any clue as to where they had come from. Still, nothing.


Arthur shouted down at Thrashbarg.
  'Do you know where they come from?' he called. 'Or where they're going?'
'The domain of the King!' shouted Old Thrashbarg back.
  'King?' shouted Arthur in surprise. 'What King?' The Perfectly Normal Beast was swaying and rocking restlessly under him.
'What do you mean, what King?' shouted Old Thrashbarg. 'The King.' 'It's just that you never mentioned a King,' shouted Arthur back, in some
consternation.
  'What?' shouted Old Thrashbarg. The thrumming of a thousand hooves was very hard to hear over, and the old man was concentrating on what he was doing.
  Still holding the bird aloft, he led the Beast slowly round till it was once more parallel with the motion of its great herd. He moved forward. The Beast followed. He moved forward again. The Beast followed again. At last, the Beast was lumbering forward with a little momentum.
'I said you never mentioned a King!' shouted Arthur again.
'I didn't say a King,' shouted Old Thrashbarg, 'I said the King.'
  He drew back his arm and then hurled it forward with all his strength, casting the pikka bird up into the air above the herd. This seemed to catch the pikka bird completely by surprise as it had obviously not been paying any attention at all to what was going on. It took it a moment or two to work out what was happening, then it unfurled its little wings, spread them out, and flew.
'Go!' shouted Thrashbarg. 'Go and meet your destiny, Sandwich Maker!'
  Arthur wasn't so sure about wanting to meet his destiny as such. He just wanted to get to wherever it was they were going so he could get back off this creature again. He didn't feel at all safe up there. The Beast was gathering speed as it followed in the wake of the pikka bird. And then it was in at the fringes of the great tide of animals, and in a moment or two, with its head down, the pikka bird forgotten, it was running with the herd again and rapidly approaching the point at which the herd was vanishing into thin air. Arthur and Ford held on to the great monster for dear life, surrounded on all sides by hurtling mountains of bodies.
  'Go! Ride that Beast!' shouted Thrashbarg. His distant voice reverberated faintly in their ears. 'Ride that Perfectly Normal Beast! Ride it, ride it!'
Ford shouted in Arthur's ear, 'Where did he say we were going?'


  'He said something about a King,' shouted Arthur in return, holding on desperately.
'What King?'
'That's what I said. He just said the King.'
'I didn't know there was a the King,' shouted Ford. 'Nor did I,' shouted Arthur back.
  'Except of course for the King,' shouted Ford. 'And I don't suppose he meant him.'
'What King?' shouted Arthur.
  The point of exit was almost upon them. Just ahead of them, Perfectly Normal Beasts were galloping into nothingness and vanishing.
  'What do you mean, what King?' shouted Ford. 'I don't know what King. I'm only saying that he couldn't possibly mean the King, so I don't know what he means.'
'Ford, I don't know what you're talking about.'
  'So?' said Ford. Then with a sudden rush, the stars came on, turned and twisted around their heads, and then, just as suddenly, turned off again.


21


Misty grey buildings loomed and flickered. They bounced up and down in a highly embarrassing way.
What sort of buildings were they?
What were they for? What did they remind her of?
  It's so difficult to know what things are supposed to be when you suddenly turn up unexpectedly on a different world which has a different culture, a different set of the most basic assumptions about life, and also incredibly dull and meaningless architecture.
  The sky above the buildings was a cold and hostile black. The stars, which should have been blindingly brilliant points of light this far from the sun, were blurred and dulled by the thickness of the huge shielding bubble. Perspex or something like it. Something dull and heavy anyway.
Tricia wound the tape back again to the beginning. She knew there was something slightly odd about it.
  Well, in fact, there were about a million things that were slightly odd about it, but there was one that was nagging at her and she hadn't quite got


it.




She sighed and yawned.
As she waited for the tape to rewind she cleared away some of the dirty


polystyrene coffee cups that had accumulated on the editing desk and tipped them into the bin.
  She was sitting in a small editing suite at a video production company in Soho. She had 'Do not disturb' notices plastered all over the door, and a block on all incoming calls at the switchboard. This was originally to protect her astonishing scoop, but now it was to protect her from embarrassment.
She would watch the tape all the way through again from the beginning.
If she could bear to. She might do some fast-forwarding here and there.
  It was about four o'clock on Monday afternoon, and she had a kind of sick feeling. She was trying to work out what the cause of this slightly sick feeling was, and there was no shortage of candidates.
First of all, it had all come on top of the overnight flight from New York.
The red-eye. Always a killer, that.
  Then being accosted by aliens on her lawn and flown to the planet Rupert. She was not sufficiently experienced in that sort of thing to be able to say for sure that that was always a killer, but she would be prepared to bet that those who went through it regularly cursed it. There were always stress charts being published in magazines. Fifty stress points for losing your job. Seventy-five points for a divorce or changing your hairstyle and so on. None of them ever mentioned being accosted on your lawn by aliens and then being flown to the planet Rupert, but she was sure it was worth a few dozen points.
  It wasn't that the journey had been particularly stressful. It had been extremely dull, in fact. Certainly it had been no more stressful than the trip she had just taken across the Atlantic and it had taken roughly the same time, about seven hours.
  Well, that was pretty astounding, wasn't it? Flying to the outer limits of the solar system in the same time that it took to fly to New York meant they must have some fantastic unheard-of form of propulsion in the ship. She quizzed her hosts about it and they agreed that it was pretty good.
  'But how does it work?' she had demanded excitedly. She was still quite excited at the beginning of the trip.


  She found that part of the tape and played it through to herself. The Grebulons, which is what they called themselves, were politely showing her which buttons they pressed to make the ship go.
  'Yes, but what principle does it work on?' she heard herself demand, from behind the camera.
  'Oh, you mean is it something like a warp drive or something like that?' they said.
'Yes,' persisted Tricia. 'What is it?'
'It probably is something of the kind,' they said. 'Like what?'
  'Warp drive, photon drive, something like that. You'd have to ask the Flight Engineer.'
'Which one is he?'
'We don't know. We have all lost our minds, you see.'
  'Oh yes,' said Tricia, a little faintly. 'So you said. Um, how did you lose your minds, exactly, then?'
'We don't know,' they said, patiently.
'Because you've lost your minds,' echoed Tricia, glumly. 'Would you like to watch television? It is a long flight. We watch
television. It is something we enjoy.'
  All of this riveting stuff was on the tape, and fine viewing it made. First of all the picture quality was extremely poor. Tricia didn't know why this was, exactly. She had a feeling that the Grebulons responded to a slightly different range of light frequencies, and that there had been a lot of ultra- violet around which was mucking up the video camera. There were a lot of interference patterns and video snow as well. Probably something to do with the warp drive that none of them knew the first thing about.
  So what she had on tape, essentially, was a bunch of slightly thin and discoloured people sitting around watching televisions that were showing network broadcasts. She had also pointed the camera out of the very tiny viewport near her seat and got a nice, slightly streaky effect of stars. She knew it was real, but it would have taken a good three or four minutes to fake.
  In the end she had decided to save her precious videotape for Rupert itself and had simply sat back and watched television with them. She had even dozed off for a while.


  So part of her sick feeling came from the sense that she had had all that time in an alien spacecraft of astounding technological design, and had spent most of it dozing in front of reruns of M*A*S*H and Cagney and Lacey. But what else was there to do? She had taken some photos as well, of course, all of which had subsequently turned out to be badly fogged when she got them back from the chemist.
  Another part of her sick feeling probably came from the landing on Rupert. This at least had been dramatic and hair-raising. The ship had come sweeping in over a dark and sombre landscape, a terrain so desperately far removed from the heat and light of its parent sun that it seemed like a map of the psychological scars on the mind of an abandoned child.
  Lights blazed through the frozen darkness and guided the ship into the mouth of some kind of cave that seemed to bend itself open to accept the small craft.
  Unfortunately, because of the angle of their approach, and the depth at which the small thick viewport was set into the craft's skin, it hadn't been possible to get the video camera to point directly at any of it. She ran through that bit of the tape.
The camera was pointing directly at the sun.
  This is normally very bad for a video camera. But when the sun is roughly a third of a billion miles away it doesn't do any harm. In fact it hardly makes any impression at all. You just get a small point of light right in the middle of the frame, which could be just about anything. It was just one star in a multitude.
Tricia fast-forwarded.
  Ah. Now, the next bit had been quite promising. They had emerged out of the ship into a vast grey hangar-like structure. This was clearly alien technology on a dramatic scale. Huge grey buildings under the dark canopy of the Perspex bubble. These were the same buildings that she had been looking at at the end of the tape. She had taken more footage of them while leaving Rupert a few hours later, just as she was about to reboard the spacecraft for the journey home. What did they remind her of?
  Well, as much as anything else they reminded her of a film set from just about any low-budget science-fiction movie of the last twenty years. A lot larger, of course, but it all looked thoroughly tawdry and unconvincing on the video screen. Apart from the dreadful picture quality she had been struggling with the unexpected effects of gravity, which was appreciably


lower than that on Earth, and she had found it very hard to keep the camera from bouncing around in an embarrassingly unprofessional way. It was therefore impossible to make out any detail.
  And now here was the Leader coming forward to greet her, smiling and sticking his hand out.
That was all he was called. The Leader.
  None of the Grebulons had names, largely because they couldn't think of any. Tricia discovered that some of them had thought of calling themselves after characters from television programmes they had picked up from Earth, but hard as they had tried to call each other Wayne and Bobby and Chuck, some remnant of something lurking deep in the cultural subconscious they had brought with them from the distant stars which were their homes must have told them that this really wasn't right and wouldn't do.
  The Leader had looked pretty much like all the others. Possibly a bit less thin. He said how much he enjoyed her shows on TV, that he was her greatest fan, how glad he was that she had been able to come along and visit them on Rupert and how much everybody had been looking forward to her coming, how he hoped the flight had been comfortable and so on. There was no particular sense she could detect of being any kind of emissary from the stars or anything.
  Certainly, watching it now on videotape, he just looked like some guy in costume and make-up, standing in front of a set that wouldn't hold up too well if you leant against it.
  She sat staring at the screen with her face cradled in her hands, and shaking her head in slow bewilderment.
This was awful.
  Not only was this bit awful but she knew what was coming next. It was the bit where the Leader asked if she was hungry after the flight, and would she perhaps like to come and have something to eat? They could discuss things over a little dinner.
She could remember what she was thinking at this point. Alien food.
How was she going to deal with it?
  Would she actually have to eat it? Would she have access to some sort of paper napkin she could spit stuff out into? Wouldn't there be all sorts of differential immunity problems?
It turned out to be hamburgers.


  Not only did it turn out to be hamburgers, but the hamburgers it turned out to be were very clearly and obviously McDonald's hamburgers which had been reheated in a microwave. It wasn't just the look of them. It wasn't just the smell. It was the polystyrene clamshell packages they came in which had 'McDonald's' printed all over them.
  'Eat! Enjoy!' said the Leader. 'Nothing is too good for our honoured guest!'
  This was in his private apartment. Tricia had looked around it in bewilderment that had bordered on fear but had nevertheless got it all on videotape.
  The apartment had a waterbed in it. And a midi hi-fi. And one of those tall electrically illuminated glass things which sit on table tops and appear to have large globules of sperm floating about in them. The walls were covered in velvet.
  The Leader lounged against a brown corduroy bean bag and squirted breath-freshener into his mouth.
  Tricia began to feel very scared, suddenly. She was further from Earth than any human being, to her knowledge, had ever been, and she was with an alien creature who was lounging against a brown corduroy bean bag and squirting breath-freshener into his mouth.
She didn't want to make any false moves. She didn't want to alarm him.
But there were things she had to know.
  'How did you . . . Where did you get . . . this?' she asked, gesturing around the room, nervously.
'The decor?' asked the Leader. 'Do you like it? It is very sophisticated.
We are a sophisticated people, we Grebulons. We buy sophisticated consumer durables . . . by mail order.'
Tricia had nodded tremendously slowly at this point. 'Mail order . . .' she had said.
  The Leader chuckled. It was one of those dark chocolate reassuring silky chuckles.
  'I think you think they ship it here. No! Ha ha! We have arranged a special box number in New Hampshire. We make regular pick-up visits. Ha ha!' He lounged back in a relaxed fashion on his bean bag, reached for a reheated French fry and nibbled the end of it, an amused smile playing across his lips.


  Tricia could feel her brain beginning to bubble very slightly. She kept the video camera going.
'How do you, well, er, how do you pay for these wonderful . . . things?' The Leader chuckled again.
'American Express,' he said with a nonchalant shrug.
  Tricia nodded slowly again. She knew that they gave cards exclusively to just about anybody.
  'And these?' she said, holding up the hamburger he had presented her with.
'It is very easy,' said the Leader. 'We stand in line.'
  Again, Tricia realized with a cold, trickling feeling going down her spine, that explained an awful lot.
  She hit the fast-forward button again. There was nothing of any use here at all. It was all nightmarish madness. She could have faked something that would have looked more convincing.
  Another sick feeling began to creep over her as she watched this hopeless awful tape, and she began, with slow horror, to realize that it must be the answer.
She must be . . .
She shook her head and tried to get a grip.
  An overnight flight going east . . . The sleeping pills she had taken to get her through it. The vodka she'd had to set the sleeping pills going.
  What else? Well. There was seventeen years of obsession that a glamorous man with two heads, one of which was disguised as a parrot in a cage, had tried to pick her up at a party but had then impatiently flown off to another planet in a flying saucer. There suddenly seemed to be all sorts of bothersome aspects to that idea that had never really occurred to her. Never occurred to her. In seventeen years.
She stuffed her fist into her mouth. She must get help.
  Then there had been Eric Bartlett banging on about alien spacecraft landing on her lawn. And before that . . . New York had been, well, very hot and stressful. The high hopes and the bitter disappointment. The astrology stuff.
She must have had a nervous breakdown.
  That was it. She was exhausted and she had had a nervous breakdown and had started hallucinating some time after she got home. She had dreamt


the whole story. An alien race of people dispossessed of their own lives and histories, stuck on a remote outpost of our solar system and filling their cultural vacuum with our cultural junk. Ha! It was nature's way of telling her to check into an expensive medical establishment very quickly.
  She was very, very sick. She looked at how many large coffees she'd got through as well, and realized how heavily she was breathing and how fast.
  Part of solving any problem, she told herself, was realizing that you had it. She started to bring her breathing under control. She had caught herself in time. She had seen where she was. She was on the way back from whatever psychological precipice she had been on the brink of. She started to calm down, to calm down, to calm down. She sat back in the chair and closed her eyes.
  After a while, now that she was breathing normally again, she opened them again.
So where had she got this tape from, then? It was still running.
All right. It was a fake.
She had faked it herself, that was it.
  It must have been her who had faked it because her voice was all over the soundtrack, asking questions. Every now and then the camera would swing down at the end of a shot and she would see her own feet in her own shoes. She had faked it and she had no recollection of faking it or any idea of why she had done it.
  Her breathing was getting hectic again as she watched the snowy, flickering screen.
She must still be hallucinating.
  She shook her head, trying to make it go away. She had no memory of faking any of this very obviously fake stuff. On the other hand she did seem to have memories that were very like the faked stuff. She continued to watch in a bewildered trance.
  The person she imagined to be called the Leader was questioning her about astrology and she was answering smoothly and calmly. Only she could detect the well-disguised rising panic in her own voice.
  The Leader pushed a button, and a maroon velvet wall slid aside, revealing a large bank of flat TV monitors.
  Each of the monitors was showing a kaleidoscope of different images: a few seconds from a game show, a few seconds from a cop show, a few


seconds from a supermarket warehouse security system, a few seconds from somebody's holiday movies, a few seconds of sex, a few seconds of news, a few seconds of comedy. It was clear that the Leader was very proud of all this stuff and he was waving his hands like a conductor while continuing at the same time to talk complete gibberish.
  Another wave of his hands, and all the screens cleared to form one giant computer screen showing in diagrammatic form all the planets of the solar system and mapped out against a background of the stars in their constellations. The display was completely static.
  'We have great skills,' the Leader was saying. 'Great skills in computation, in cosmological trigonometry, in three-dimensional navigational calculus. Great skills. Great, great skills. Only we have lost them. It is too bad. We like to have skills only they have gone. They are in space somewhere, hurtling. With our names and the details of our homes and loved ones. Please,' he said, gesturing her forward to sit at the computer's console, 'be skilful for us.'
  Obviously what happened next was that Tricia quickly set the video camera up on its tripod to capture the whole scene. She then walked into shot herself and sat down calmly in front of the giant computer display, spent a few moments familiarizing herself with the interface and then started smoothly and competently to pretend that she had the faintest idea what she was doing.
It hadn't been that difficult, in fact.
  She was, after all, a mathematician and astrophysicist by training and a television presenter by experience, and what science she had forgotten over the years she was more than capable of making up by bluffing.
  The computer she was working on was clear evidence that the Grebulons came from a far more advanced and sophisticated culture than their current vacuous state suggested, and with its aid she was able, within about half an hour, to cobble together a rough working model of the solar system.
  It wasn't particularly accurate or anything, but it looked good. The planets were whizzing around in reasonably good simulations of their orbits, and you could watch the movement of the whole piece of virtual cosmological clockwork from any point within the system - very roughly. You could watch from Earth, you could watch from Mars, etc. You could watch from the surface of the planet Rupert. Tricia had been quite impressed with herself, but also very impressed with the computer system


she was working on. Using a computer workstation on Earth the task would probably have taken a year or so of programming.
  When she was finished, the Leader came up behind her and watched. He was very pleased and delighted with what she had achieved.
  'Good,' he said. 'And now, please, I would like you to demonstrate how to use the system you have just designed to translate the information in this book for me.'
Quietly he put a book down in front of her.
It was You and Your Planets by Gail Andrews.


Tricia stopped the tape again.
  She was definitely feeling very wobbly indeed. The feeling that she was hallucinating had now receded, but had not left anything any easier or clearer in her head.
  She pushed her seat back from the editing desk and wondered what to do. Years ago she had left the field of astronomical research because she knew, without any doubt whatsoever, that she had met a being from another planet. At a party. And she had also known, without any doubt whatsoever, that she would have made herself a laughing stock if she had ever said so.
But how could she study cosmology and not say anything about the single most important thing she knew about it? She had done the only thing she could do. She had left.
Now she worked in television and the same thing had happened again.
  She had videotape, actual videotape of the most astounding story in the history of, well anything: a forgotten outpost of an alien civilization marooned on the outermost planet of our own solar system.
She had the story. She had been there. She had seen it.
She had the videotape, for God's sake.
And if she ever showed it to anybody, she would be a laughing stock.


How could she prove any of this? It wasn't even worth thinking about. The whole thing was a nightmare from virtually any angle she cared to look at it. Her head was beginning to throb.
  She had some aspirin in her bag. She went out of the little editing suite to the water dispenser down the corridor. She took the aspirin and drank


several cups of water.
  The place seemed to be very quiet. Usually there were more people bustling about the place, or at least some people bustling around the place. She popped her head round the door of the editing suite next to hers but there was no one there.
  She had gone rather overboard keeping people out of her own suite. 'DO NOT DISTURB,' the notice read. 'DO NOT EVEN THINK OF ENTERING. I DON'T CARE WHAT IT IS. GO AWAY. I'M BUSY!'
  When she went back in she noticed that the message light on her phone extension was winking, and wondered how long it had been on.
'Hello?' she said to the receptionist.
  'Oh, Miss McMillan, I'm so glad you called. Everybody's been trying to reach you. Your TV company. They're desperate to reach you. Can you call them?'
'Why didn't you put them through?' said Tricia.
  'You said I wasn't to put anybody through for anything. You said I was to deny that you were even here. I didn't know what to do. I came up to give you a message, but . . .'
'OK,' said Tricia, cursing herself. She phoned her office. 'Tricia! Where the haemorrhaging fuck are you?'
'At the editing-' 'They said-'
'I know. What's up?'
'What's up? Only a bloody alien spaceship!' 'What? Where?'
  'Regent's Park. Big silver job. Some girl with a bird. She speaks English and throws rocks at people and wants someone to repair her watch. Just get there.'


Tricia stared at it.
  It wasn't a Grebulon ship. Not that she was suddenly an expert on extra- terrestrial craft, but this was a sleek and beautiful silver and white thing about the size of a large ocean-going yacht, which is what it most resembled. Next to this, the structures of the huge half-dismantled Grebulon ship looked like gun turrets on a battleship. Gun turrets. That's what those blank grey buildings had looked like. And what was odd about them was that by the time she passed them again on her way to reboarding the small


Grebulon craft, they had moved. These things flitted briefly through her head as she ran from the taxi to meet her camera crew.
  'Where's the girl?' she shouted above the noise of helicopters and police sirens.
  'There!' shouted the producer while the sound engineer hurried to clip a radio mike to her. 'She says her mother and father came from here in some parallel dimension or something like that, and she's got her father's watch, and . . . I don't know. What can I tell you? Busk it. Ask her what it feels like to be from outer space.'
  'Thanks a lot, Ted,' muttered Tricia, checked that her mike was securely clipped, gave the engineer some level, took a deep breath, tossed her hair back and switched into her role of professional reporter, on home ground, ready for anything.
At least, nearly anything.
  She turned to look for the girl. That must be her, with the wild hair and wild eyes. The girl turned towards her. And stared.
'Mother!' she screamed, and started to hurl rocks at Tricia.


22


Daylight exploded around them. Hot, heavy sun. A desert plain stretched out ahead in a haze of heat. They thundered out into it.
'Jump!' shouted Ford Prefect.
'What?' shouted Arthur Dent, holding on for dear life. There was no reply.
  'What did you say?' shouted Arthur again, and then realized that Ford Prefect was no longer there. He looked around in panic and started to slip. Realizing he couldn't hold on any longer he pushed himself sideways as hard as he could and rolled into a ball as he hit the ground, rolling, rolling away from the pounding hooves.
  What a day, he thought, as he started furiously coughing dust up out of his lungs. He hadn't had a day as bad as this since the Earth had been blown up. He staggered up to his knees, and then up to his feet and started to run away. He didn't know what from or what to, but running away seemed a prudent move.


  He ran straight into Ford Prefect, who was standing there surveying the scene.
'Look,' said Ford. 'That is precisely what we need.'
  Arthur coughed up some more dust, and wiped some other dust out of his hair and eyes. He turned, panting, to look at what Ford was looking at.
  It didn't look much like the domain of a King, or the King, or any kind of King. It looked quite inviting, though.
  First, the context. This was a desert world. The dusty earth was packed hard and had neatly bruised every last bit of Arthur that hadn't already been bruised by the festivities of the previous night. Some way ahead of them were great cliffs that looked like sandstone, eroded by the wind and what little rain presumably fell in those parts into wild and fantastic shapes, which matched the fantastic shapes of the giant cacti that sprouted here and there from the arid orange landscape.
  For a moment Arthur dared to hope they had unexpectedly arrived in Arizona or New Mexico or maybe South Dakota, but there was plenty of evidence that this was not the case.
  The Perfectly Normal Beasts were, for a start, still thundering, still pounding. They swept up in their tens of thousands from the far horizon, disappeared completely for about half a mile, then swept off, thundering and pounding to the distant horizon opposite.
Then there were the spaceships parked in front of the Bar & Grill. Ah.
The Domain of the King Bar & Grill. Bit of an anti-climax, thought Arthur to himself.
  In fact only one of the spaceships was parked in front of the Domain of the King Bar & Grill. The other three were in a parking lot by the side of the Bar & Grill. It was the one in front that caught the eye, though.
Wonderful-looking thing. Wild fins all over it, far, far too much chrome all over the fins and most of the actual bodywork painted in a shocking pink. It crouched there like an immense brooding insect and looked as if it was at any moment about to jump on something about a mile away.
  The Domain of the King Bar & Grill was slap bang in the middle of where the Perfectly Normal Beasts would be charging if they didn't take a minor transdimensional diversion on the way. It stood on its own, undisturbed. An ordinary Bar & Grill. A truckstop diner. Somewhere in the middle of nowhere. Quiet. The Domain of the King.
'Gonna buy that spaceship,' said Ford quietly.


  'Buy it?' said Arthur. 'That's not like you. I thought you usually pinched them.'
'Sometimes you have to show a little respect,' said Ford.
  'Probably have to show a little cash as well,' said Arthur. 'How the hell much is that thing worth?'
  With a tiny movement, Ford brought his Dine-O-Charge credit card up out of his pocket. Arthur noticed that the hand holding it was trembling very slightly.
'I'll teach them to make me the restaurant critic . . .' breathed Ford. 'What do you mean?' asked Arthur.
  'I'll show you,' said Ford with a nasty glint in his eye. 'Let's go and run up a few expenses, shall we?'


'Couple beers,' said Ford, 'and, I dunno, a couple bacon rolls, whatever you got, oh and that pink thing outside.'
He flipped his card on the top of the bar and looked around casually. There was a kind of silence.
  There hadn't been a lot of noise before, but there was definitely a kind of silence now. Even the distant thunder of the Perfectly Normal Beasts carefully avoiding the Domain of the King seemed suddenly a little muted.
  'Just rode into town,' said Ford as if nothing was odd about that or about anything else. He was leaning against the bar at an extravagantly relaxed angle.
  There were about three other customers in the place, sitting at tables, nursing beers. About three. Some people would say there were exactly three, but it wasn't that kind of a place, not the kind of a place that you felt like being that specific in. There was some big guy setting up some stuff on the little stage as well. Old drum kit. Couple guitars. Country and Western kind of stuff.
  The barman was not moving very swiftly to get in Ford's order. In fact he wasn't moving at all.
  'Not sure that the pink thing's for sale,' he said at last in the kind of accent that went on for quite a long time.
'Sure it is,' said Ford. 'How much you want?' 'Well . . .'
'Think of a number, I'll double it.' ''T'ain't mine to sell,' said the barman.


'So, whose?'
  The barman nodded at the big guy setting up on the stage. Big fat guy, moving slow, balding.
Ford nodded. He grinned.
'OK,' he said. 'Get the beers, get the rolls. Keep the tab open.'


Arthur sat at the bar and rested. He was used to not knowing what was going on. He felt comfortable with it. The beer was pretty good and made him a little sleepy, which he didn't mind at all. The bacon rolls were not bacon rolls. They were Perfectly Normal Beast rolls. He exchanged a few professional roll-making remarks with the barman and just let Ford get on with whatever Ford wanted to do.
'OK,' said Ford, returning to his stool. 'It's cool. We got the pink thing.' The barman was very surprised. 'He's selling it to you?'
  'He's giving it to us for free,' said Ford, taking a gnaw at his roll. 'Hey, no, keep the tab open, though. We have some items to add to it. Good roll.'
He took a deep pull of beer.
  'Good beer,' he added. 'Good ship, too,' he said, eyeing the big pink and chrome insect-like thing, bits of which could be seen through the windows of the bar. 'Good everything, pretty much. You know,' he said, sitting back reflectively, 'it's at times like this that you kind of wonder if it's worth worrying about the fabric of space-time and the causal integrity of the multi-dimensional probability matrix and the potential collapse of all wave forms in the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash and all that sort of stuff that's been bugging me. Maybe I feel that what the big guy says is right.
Just let it all go. What does it matter? Let it go.' 'Which big guy?' said Arthur.
  Ford just nodded towards the stage. The big guy was saying 'one two' into the mike a couple of times. Couple other guys were on the stage now. Drums. Guitar.
  The barman, who had been silent for a moment or two, said, 'You say he's letting you have his ship?'
  'Yeah,' said Ford. 'Let it all go, is what he said. Take the ship. Take it with my blessing. Be good to her. I will be good to her.'
He took a pull at his beer again.
  'Like I was saying,' he went on. 'It's at times like this that you kind of think, let it all go. But then you think of guys like InfiniDim Enterprises and


you think, they are not going to get away with it. They are going to suffer. It is my sacred and holy duty to see those guys suffer. Here, let me put something on the tab for the singer. I asked for a special request and we agreed. It's to go on the tab. OK?'
  'OK,' said the barman, cautiously. Then he shrugged. 'OK, however you want to do it. How much?'
  Ford named a figure. The barman fell over amongst the bottles and glasses. Ford vaulted quickly over the bar to check that he was all right and help him back up to his feet. He'd cut his finger and his elbow a bit and was feeling a little woozy but was otherwise fine. The big guy started to sing.
The barman hobbled off with Ford's credit card to get authorization. 'Is there stuff going on here that I don't know about?' said Arthur to
Ford.
'Isn't there usually?' said Ford.
  'No need to be like that,' said Arthur. He began to wake up. 'Shouldn't we be going?' he said suddenly. 'Will that ship get us to Earth?'
'Sure will,' said Ford.
  'That's where Random will be going!' said Arthur with a start. 'We can follow her! But . . . er . . .'
  Ford let Arthur get on with thinking things out for himself while he got out his old edition of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
  'But where are we on the probability axis thing?' said Arthur. 'Will the Earth be there or not there? I spent so much time looking for it. All I found was planets that were a bit like it or not at all like it, though it was clearly the right place because of the continents. The worst version was called NowWhat where I got bitten by some wretched little animal. That's how they communicated, you know, by biting each other. Bloody painful. Then half the time, of course, the Earth isn't even there because it's been blown up by the bloody Vogons. How much sense am I making?'
  Ford didn't comment. He was listening to something. He passed the Guide over to Arthur and pointed at the screen. The active entry read: 'Earth. Mostly harmless.'
  'You mean it's there!' said Arthur excitedly. 'The Earth is there! That's where Random will be going! The bird was showing her the Earth in the rainstorm!'
Ford motioned Arthur to shout a little less loudly. He was listening.


  Arthur was growing impatient. He'd heard bar singers sing 'Love Me Tender' before. He was a bit surprised to hear it here, right in the middle of wherever the hell this was, certainly not Earth, but then things tended not to surprise him these days as much as formerly. The singer was quite good, as bar singers went, if you liked that sort of thing, but Arthur was getting fretful.
  He glanced at his watch. This only served to remind him that he didn't have his watch any more. Random had it, or at least the remains of it.
'Don't you think we should be going?' he said, insistently.
  'Shhh!' said Ford. 'I paid to hear this song.' He seemed to have tears in his eyes, which Arthur found a bit disturbing. He'd never seen Ford moved by anything other than very, very strong drink. Probably the dust. He waited, tapping his fingers irritably, out of time with the music.
The song ended. The singer went on to do 'Heartbreak Hotel'. 'Anyway,' Ford whispered, 'I've got to review the restaurant.' 'What?'
'I have to write a review.' 'Write a review? Of this place?'
  'Filing the review validates the expenses claim. I've fixed it so that it happens completely automatically and untraceably. This bill is going to need some validation,' he added quietly, staring into his beer with a nasty smirk.
'For a couple of beers and a roll?' 'And a tip for the singer.'
'Why, how much did you tip him?' Ford named a figure again.
  'I don't know how much that is,' said Arthur. 'What's it worth in pounds sterling? What would it buy you?'
  'It would probably buy you, roughly . . . er . . .' Ford screwed his eyes up as he did some calculations in his head. 'Switzerland,' he said at last. He picked up his Hitchhiker's Guide and started to type.
  Arthur nodded intelligently. There were times when he wished he understood what on earth Ford was talking about, and other times, like now, when he felt it was probably safer not even to try. He looked over Ford's shoulder. 'This isn't going to take long, is it?' he said.
  'Nah,' said Ford. 'Piece of piss. Just mention that the rolls were quite good, the beer good and cold, local wildlife nicely eccentric, the bar singer


the best in the known Universe, and that's about it. Doesn't need much. Just a validation.'
  He touched an area on the screen marked ENTER and the message vanished into the sub-etha.
'You thought the singer was pretty good, then?'
  'Yeah,' said Ford. The barman was returning with a piece of paper, which seemed to be trembling in his hand.
He pushed it over to Ford with a kind of nervous, reverential twitch. 'Funny thing,' said the barman. 'The system rejected it first couple times.
Can't say it surprised me.' Beads of sweat were standing on his brow. 'Then suddenly it's, oh yeah, that's OK, and the system . . . er, validates it. Just like that. You wanna . . . sign it?'
  Ford scanned the form quickly. He sucked his teeth. 'This is going to hurt InfiniDim a lot,' he said, with an appearance of concern. 'Oh well,' he added softly, 'screw 'em.'
He signed with a flourish and handed it back to the barman.
  'More money,' he said, 'than the Colonel made for him in an entire career of doing crap movies and casino gigs. Just for doing what he does best. Standing up and singing in a bar. And he negotiated it himself. I think this is a good moment for him. Tell him I said thanks and buy him a drink.' He tossed a few coins on the bar. The barman pushed them away.
'I don't think that's necessary,' he said, slightly hoarsely. ''Tis to me,' said Ford. 'OK, we are outta here.'


They stood out in the heat and the dust and looked at the big pink and chrome thing with amazement and admiration. Or at least, Ford looked at it with amazement and admiration.
Arthur just looked at it. 'You don't think it's a bit overdone, do you?'
  He said it again when they climbed inside it. The seats and quite a lot of the controls were covered in fine fur, skin or suede. There was a big gold monogram on the main control panel which just read 'EP'.
  'You know,' said Ford as he fired up the ship's engines, 'I asked him if it was true that he had been abducted by aliens, and you know what he said?'
'Who?' said Arthur. 'The King.'
'Which King? Oh, we've had this conversation, haven't we?'


  'Never mind,' said Ford. 'For what it's worth, he said no. He went of his own accord.'
'I'm still not sure who we're talking about,' said Arthur.
  Ford shook his head. 'Look,' he said, 'there are some tapes over in the compartment to your left. Why don't you choose some music and put it on?'
  'OK,' said Arthur, and flipped through the cartons. 'Do you like Elvis Presley?' he said.
  'Yeah I do, as a matter of fact,' said Ford. 'Now. I hope this machine can leap like it looks like it can.' He engaged the main drive.
'Yeeehaah!' shouted Ford as they shot upwards at face-tearing speed. It could.


23


The news networks don't like this kind of thing. They regard it as a waste. An incontrovertible spaceship arrives out of nowhere in the middle of London and it is sensational news of the highest magnitude. Another completely different one arrives three and a half hours later and somehow it isn't.
  'ANOTHER SPACECRAFT!' said the headlines and news-stand billboards. 'THIS ONE'S PINK.' A couple of months later they could have made a lot more of it. The third spacecraft, half an hour after that, the little four-berth Hrundi runabout, only made it onto the local news.
  Ford and Arthur had come screaming down out of the stratosphere and parked neatly on Portland Place. It was just after six thirty in the evening and there were spaces free. They mingled briefly with the crowd that gathered round to ogle, then said loudly that if no one else was going to call the police they would, and made good their escape.
  'Home . . .' said Arthur, a husky tone creeping into his voice as he gazed, misty-eyed, around him.
  'Oh, don't get all maudlin on me,' snapped Ford. 'We have to find your daughter and we have to find that bird thing.'
'How?' said Arthur. 'This is a planet of five and a half billion people, and
. . .'


  'Yes,' said Ford. 'But only one of them has just arrived from outer space in a large silver spaceship accompanied by a mechanical bird. I suggest we just find a television and something to drink while we watch it. We need some serious room service.'


They checked into a large two-bedroomed suite at the Langham. Mysteriously, Ford's Dine-O-Charge card, issued on a planet over five thousand light years away, seemed to present the hotel's computer with no problems.
  Ford hit the phones straight away while Arthur attempted to locate the television.
  'OK,' said Ford. 'I want to order up some margaritas, please. Couple of pitchers. Couple of chef's salads. And as much foie gras as you've got. And also London Zoo.'
'She's on the news!' shouted Arthur from the next room.
  'That's what I said,' said Ford into the phone. 'London Zoo. Just charge it to the room.'
  'She's . . . Good God!' shouted Arthur. 'Do you know who she's being interviewed by?'
  'Are you having difficulty understanding the English language?' continued Ford. 'It's the zoo just up the road from here. I don't care if it's closed this evening. I don't want to buy a ticket, I just want to buy the zoo. I don't care if you're busy. This is room service, I'm in a room and I want some service. Got a piece of paper? OK. Here's what I want you to do. All the animals that can be safely returned to the wild, return them. Set up some good teams of people to monitor their progress in the wild, see that they're doing OK.'
  'It's Trillian!' shouted Arthur. 'Or is it . . . er . . . God, I can't stand all this parallel-universe stuff. It's so bloody confusing. It seems to be a different Trillian. It's Tricia McMillan, which is what Trillian used to be called before . . . er . . . Why don't you come and watch, see if you can figure it out?'
  'Just a second,' Ford shouted, and returned to his negotiations with room service. 'Then we'll need some natural reserves for the animals that can't hack it in the wild,' he said. 'Set up a team to work out the best places to do that. We might need to buy somewhere like ZaÔre and maybe some islands. Madagascar. Baffin. Sumatra. Those kind of places. We'll need a wide


variety of habitats. Look, I don't see why you're seeing this as a problem. Learn to delegate. Hire whoever you want. Get on to it. I think you'll find my credit is good. And blue-cheese dressing on the salad. Thank you.'
  He put the phone down and went through to Arthur, who was sitting on the edge of his bed watching television.
'I ordered us some foie gras,' said Ford.
  'What?' said Arthur, whose attention was entirely focused on the television.
'I said I ordered us some foie gras.'
'Oh,' said Arthur, vaguely. 'Um, I always feel a bit bad about foie gras.
Bit cruel to the geese, isn't it?'
  'Fuck 'em,' said Ford, slumping on the bed. 'You can't care about every damn thing.'
'Well, that's all very well for you to say, but . . .'
  'Drop it!' said Ford. 'If you don't like it I'll have yours. What's happening?'
  'Chaos!' said Arthur. 'Complete chaos! Random keeps on screaming at Trillian, or Tricia or whoever it is, that she abandoned her and then demanding to go to a good nightclub. Tricia's broken down in tears and says she's never even met Random let alone given birth to her. Then she suddenly started howling about someone called Rupert and said that he had lost his mind or something. I didn't quite follow that bit, to be honest. Then Random started throwing stuff and they've cut to a commercial break while they try and sort it all out. Oh! They've just cut back to the studio! Shut up and watch.'
  A rather shaken anchorman appeared on the screen and apologized to viewers for the disruption of the previous item. He said he didn't have any very clear news to report, only that the mysterious girl, who called herself Random Frequent Flyer Dent, had left the studio to, er, rest. Tricia McMillan would be, he hoped, back tomorrow. Meanwhile, fresh reports of UFO activity were coming in . . .
  Ford leaped up off the bed, grabbed the nearest phone and jabbed at a number.
  'Concierge? You want to own the hotel? It's yours if you can find out for me in five minutes which clubs Tricia McMillan belongs to. Just charge the whole thing to this room.'


24


Away in the inky depths of space invisible movements were being made.
  Invisible to any of the inhabitants of the strange and temperamental Plural zone at the focus of which lay the infinitely multitudinous possibilities of the planet called Earth, but not inconsequential to them.
  At the very edge of the solar system, hunkered down on a green leatherette sofa, staring fretfully at a range of TV and computer screens, sat a very worried Grebulon leader. He was fiddling with stuff. Fiddling with his book on astrology. Fiddling with the console of his computer. Fiddling with the displays being fed through to him constantly from all of the Grebulons' monitoring devices, all of them focused on the planet Earth.
  He was distressed. Their mission was to monitor. But to monitor secretly. He was a bit fed up with his mission, to be honest. He was fairly certain that his mission must have been to do more than sit around watching TV for years on end. They certainly had a lot of other equipment with them that must have had some purpose if only they hadn't accidentally lost all trace of their purpose. He needed a sense of purpose in life, which was why he had turned to astrology to fill the yawning gulf that existed in the middle of his mind and soul. That would tell him something, surely.
Well, it was telling him something.
  It was telling him, as far as he could make out, that he was about to have a very bad month, that things were going to go from bad to worse if he didn't get a grip on things and start making some positive moves and thinking things out for himself.
  It was true. It was very clear from his star chart, which he had worked out using his astrology book and the computer program which that nice Tricia McMillan had designed for him to retriangulate all the appropriate astronomical data. Earth-based astrology had to be entirely recalculated to yield results that were meaningful to the Grebulons here on the tenth planet out on the frozen edges of the solar system.
  The recalculations showed absolutely clearly and unambiguously that he was going to have a very bad month indeed, starting with today. Because today Earth was starting to rise into Capricorn, and that, for the Grebulon leader, who showed all the character signs of being a classic Taurus, was very bad indeed.


  Now was the time, his horoscope said, for taking positive actions, making tough decisions, seeing what needed to be done and doing it. This was all very difficult for him, but he knew that nobody ever said that doing tough stuff wasn't tough. The computer was already tracking and predicting the second-by-second location of the planet Earth. He ordered the great grey turrets to swivel.


Because all of the Grebulon surveillance equipment was focused on the planet Earth, it failed to spot that there was now another source of data in the solar system.
  Its chances of spotting this other source of data - a massive yellow constructor ship - accidentally were practically nil. It was as far from the sun as Rupert was, but almost diametrically opposite, almost hidden by the sun.
Almost.
  The massive yellow constructor ship wanted to be able to monitor events on Planet Ten without being spotted itself. It had managed this very successfully.
  There were all sorts of other ways in which this ship was diametrically opposite to the Grebulons.
  Its leader, its captain, had a very clear idea of what his purpose was. It was a very simple and plain one and he had been pursuing it in his simple, plain way for a considerable period of time now.
  Anyone who knew of his purpose might have said that it was a pointless and ugly one, that it wasn't the sort of purpose that enhanced a life, put a spring in a person's step, made birds sing and flowers bloom. Rather the reverse, in fact. Absolutely the reverse.
  It wasn't his job to worry about that, though. It was his job to do his job, which was to do his job. If that led to a certain narrowness of vision and circularity of thought then it wasn't his job to worry about such things. Any such things that came his way were referred to others who had, in turn, other people to refer such things to.
  Many, many light years from here, indeed from anywhere, lies the grim and long-abandoned planet Vogsphere. Somewhere on a fetid, fog-bound mud bank on this planet there stands, surrounded by the dirty, broken and empty carapaces of the last few jewelled scuttling crabs, a small stone monument which marks the place where, it is thought, the species Vogon


vogonblurtus first arose. On the monument there is carved an arrow which points away into the fog, under which are inscribed in plain, simple letters the words 'The buck stops there.'
  Deep in the bowels of his unsightly yellow ship, the Vogon captain grunted as he reached for a slightly faded and dog-eared piece of paper that lay in front of him. A demolition order.
  If you were to unravel exactly where the captain's job, which was to do his job which was to do his job, actually began, then it all came down at last to this piece of paper that had been issued to him by his immediate superior long ago. The piece of paper had an instruction on it, and his purpose was to carry out that instruction and put a little tick mark in the adjacent box when he had carried it out.
  He had carried out the instruction once before, but a number of troublesome circumstances had prevented him from being able to put the tick in the little box.
  One of the troublesome circumstances was the Plural nature of this Galactic sector, where the possible continually interfered with the probable. Simple demolition didn't get you any further than pushing down a bubble under a badly hung strip of wallpaper. Anything you demolished kept on popping up again. That would soon be taken care of.
  Another was a small bunch of people who continually refused to be where they were supposed to be when they were supposed to be there. That, also, would soon be taken care of.
  The third was an irritating and anarchic little device called The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. That was now well and truly taken care of and, in fact, through the phenomenal power of temporal reverse engineering, it was now itself the agency through which everything else would be taken care of. The captain had merely come to watch the final act of this drama. He himself did not have to lift a finger.
'Show me,' he said.
  The shadowy shape of a bird spread its wings and rose into the air near him. Darkness engulfed the bridge. Dim lights danced briefly in the black eyes of the bird as, deep in its instructional address space, bracket after bracket was finally closing, if-clauses were finally ending, repeat loops halting, recursive functions calling themselves for the last few times.
  A brilliant vision lit up in the darkness, a watery blue and green vision, a tube flowing through the air, shaped like a chopped-up string of sausages.


  With a flatulent noise of satisfaction, the Vogon captain sat back to watch.


25


'Just there, number forty-two,' shouted Ford Prefect to the taxi driver. 'Right here!'
  The taxi lurched to a halt, and Ford and Arthur jumped out. They had stopped at quite a number of cash dispensers on the way, and Ford chucked a fistful of money through the window at the driver.
  The entrance to the club was dark, smart and severe. Only the smallest little plaque bore its name. Members knew where it was, and if you weren't a member then knowing where it was wasn't any help to you.
  Ford Prefect was not a member of Stavro's, though he had once been to Stavro's other club in New York. He had a very simple method of dealing with establishments of which he was not a member. He simply swept in as soon as the door was opened, pointed back at Arthur and said, 'It's OK, he's with me.'
  He bounded down the dark glossy stairs, feeling very froody in his new shoes. They were suede and they were blue, and he was very pleased that in spite of everything else going on he had been sharp-eyed enough to spot them in a shop window from the back of a speeding taxi.
'I thought I told you not to come here.' 'What?' said Ford.
  A thin, ill-looking man wearing something baggy and Italian was walking up the stairs past them, lighting a cigarette, and had stopped, suddenly.
'Not you,' he said. 'Him.'
He looked straight at Arthur, then seemed to become a little confused. 'Excuse me,' he said. 'I think I must have mistaken you for someone
else.' He started on up the stairs again, but almost immediately turned round once more, even more puzzled. He stared at Arthur.
'Now what?' said Ford. 'What did you say?'
'I said, now what?' repeated Ford irritably.


  'Yes, I think so,' said the man and swayed slightly and dropped the book of matches he'd been carrying. His mouth moved weakly. Then he put his hand to his forehead.
  'Excuse me,' he said, 'I'm trying desperately to remember which drug I've just taken, but it must be one of those ones which mean you can't remember.'
  He shook his head and turned away again, and went up towards the men's room.
  'Come on,' said Ford. He hurried on downstairs, with Arthur following nervously in his wake. The encounter had shaken him badly and he didn't know why.
  He didn't like places like this. For all of the dreams of Earth and home he had had for years, he now badly missed his hut on Lamuella with his knives and his sandwiches. He even missed Old Thrashbarg.
'Arthur!'
It was the most astounding effect. His name was being shouted in stereo.
  He twisted to look one way. Up the stairs behind him he saw Trillian hurrying down towards him in her wonderfully rumpled RymplonTM. She was looking suddenly aghast.
He twisted the other way to see what she was looking suddenly aghast at.
At the bottom of the stairs was Trillian, wearing . . . No - this was Tricia.
Tricia that he had just seen, hysterical with confusion, on television. And behind her was Random, looking more wild-eyed than ever. Behind her in the recesses of the smart, dimly lit club, the other clientele of the evening formed a frozen tableau, staring anxiously up at the confrontation on the stairs.
  For a few seconds everyone stood stock still. Only the music from behind the bar didn't know to stop throbbing.
  'The gun she is holding,' said Ford quietly, nodding slightly towards Random, 'is a Wabanatta 3. It was in the ship she stole from me. It's quite dangerous, in fact. Just don't move for a moment. Let's just everybody stay calm and find out what's upsetting her.'
  'Where do I fit?' screamed Random suddenly. The hand holding the gun was trembling fiercely. Her other hand delved into her pocket and pulled out the remains of Arthur's watch. She shook it at them.
  'I thought I would fit here,' she cried, 'on the world that made me! But it turns out that even my mother doesn't know who I am!' She flung the


watch violently aside, and it smashed into the glasses behind the bar, scattering its innards.
Everyone was very quiet for a moment or two longer. 'Random,' said Trillian quietly from up on the stairs. 'Shut up!' shouted Random. 'You abandoned me!'
  'Random, it is very important that you listen to me and understand,' persisted Trillian quietly. 'There isn't very much time. We must leave. We must all leave.'
  'What are you talking about? We're always leaving!' She had both hands on the gun now, and both were shaking. There was no one in particular she was pointing it at. She was just pointing it at the world in general.
  'Listen,' said Trillian again. 'I left you because I went to cover a war for the network. It was extremely dangerous. At least, I thought it was going to be. I arrived and the war had suddenly ceased to happen. There was a time anomaly and . . . Listen! Please listen! A reconnaissance battleship had failed to turn up, the rest of the fleet was scattered in some farcical disarray. It's happening all the time now.'
  'I don't care! I don't want to hear about your bloody job!' shouted Random. 'I want a home! I want to fit somewhere!'
  'This is not your home,' said Trillian, still keeping her voice calm. 'You don't have one. We none of us have one. Hardly anybody has one any more. The missing ship I was just talking about. The people of that ship don't have a home. They don't know where they are from. They don't even have any memory of who they are or what they are for. They are very lost and very confused and very frightened. They are here in this solar system, and they are about to do something very . . . misguided because they are so lost and confused. We . . . must . . . leave . . . now. I can't tell you where there is to go to. Perhaps there isn't anywhere. But here is not the place to be.
Please. One more time. Can we go?'
Random was wavering in panic and confusion.
  'It's all right,' said Arthur gently. 'If I'm here, we're safe. Don't ask me to explain just now, but I am safe, so you are safe. OK?'
'What are you saying?' said Trillian.
  'Let's all just relax,' said Arthur. He was feeling very tranquil. His life was charmed and none of this seemed real.
  Slowly, gradually, Random began to relax, and to let the gun down, inch by inch.


Two things happened simultaneously.
  The door to the men's room at the top of the stairs opened, and the man who had accosted Arthur came out, sniffing.
  Startled at the sudden movement, Random lifted the gun again just as a man standing behind her made a grab for it.
  Arthur threw himself forward. There was a deafening explosion. He fell awkwardly as Trillian threw herself down over him. The noise died away. Arthur looked up to see the man at the top of the stairs gazing down at him with a look of utter stupefaction.
'You . . .' he said. Then slowly, horribly, he fell apart.
  Random threw the gun down and fell to her knees, sobbing. 'I'm sorry!' she said. 'I'm so sorry! I'm so, so sorry . . .'
Tricia went to her. Trillian went to her.
  Arthur sat on the stairs with his head between his hands and had not the faintest idea what to do. Ford was sitting on the stair beneath him. He picked something up, looked at it with interest, and passed it up to Arthur.
'This mean anything to you?' he said.
  Arthur took it. It was the book of matches which the dead man had dropped. It had the name of the club on it. It had the name of the proprietor of the club on it. It looked like this:


STAVRO MUELLER BETA


He stared at it for some time as things began slowly to reassemble themselves in his mind. He wondered what he should do, but he only wondered it idly. Around him people were beginning to rush and shout a lot, but it was suddenly very clear to him that there was nothing to be done, not now or ever. Through the new strangeness of noise and light he could just make out the shape of Ford Prefect sitting back and laughing wildly.
  A tremendous feeling of peace came over him. He knew that at last, for once and for ever, it was now all, finally, over.


In the darkness of the bridge at the heart of the Vogon ship, Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz sat alone. Lights flared briefly across the external vision screens that lined one wall. In the air above him the discontinuities in the blue and green watery sausage shape resolved themselves. Options


collapsed, possibilities folded into each other, and the whole at last resolved itself out of existence.
  A very deep darkness descended. The Vogon captain sat immersed in it for a few seconds.
'Light,' he said.
There was no response. The bird, too, had crumpled out of all possibility.
  The Vogon turned on the light himself. He picked up the piece of paper again and placed a little tick in the little box.
Well, that was done. His ship slunk off into the inky void.


In spite of having taken what he regarded as an extremely positive piece of action, the Grebulon Leader ended up having a very bad month after all. It was pretty much the same as all the previous months except that there was now nothing on the television any more. He put on a little light music instead.
OceanofPDF.com






Young Zaphod Plays It Safe




A large flying craft moved swiftly across the surface of an astoundingly beautiful sea. From midmorning onward it plied back and forth in great widening arcs, and at last attracted the attention of the local islanders, a peaceful, seafood-loving people who gathered on the beach and squinted up into the blinding sun, trying to see what was there.
  Any sophisticated, knowledgeable person who had knocked about, seen a few things, would probably have remarked on how much the craft looked like a filing cabinet - a large and recently burgled filing cabinet lying on its back with its drawers in the air and flying. The islanders, whose experience was of a different kind, were instead struck by how little it looked like a lobster.
  They chattered excitedly about its total lack of claws, its stiff, unbendy back, and the fact that it seemed to experience the greatest difficulty staying on the ground. This last feature seemed particularly funny to them. They jumped up and down on the spot a lot to demonstrate to the stupid thing that they themselves found staying on the ground the easiest thing in the world. But soon this entertainment began to pall for them. After all, since it was perfectly clear to them that the thing was not a lobster, and since their world was blessed with an abundance of things that were lobsters (a good half a dozen of which were now marching succulently up the beach towards them), they saw no reason to waste any more time on the thing, but decided instead to adjourn immediately for a late lobster lunch.
  At that exact moment the craft stopped suddenly in midair, then upended itself and plunged headlong into the ocean with a great crash of spray that sent the islanders shouting into the trees. When they re-emerged, nervously, a few minutes later, all they were able to see was a smoothly scarred circle of water and a few gulping bubbles.
  That's odd, they said to each other between mouthfuls of the best lobster to be had anywhere in the Western Galaxy, that's the second time that's


happened in a year.


The craft that wasn't a lobster dived directly to a depth of two hundred feet, and hung there in the heavy blueness, while vast masses of water swayed about it. High above, where the water was magically clear, a brilliant formation of fish flashed away. Below, where the light had difficulty reaching, the colour of the water sank to a dark and savage blue.
  Here, at two hundred feet, the sun streamed feebly. A large, silk-skinned sea mammal rolled idly by, inspecting the craft with a kind of half-interest, as if it had half expected to find something of this kind round about here, and then it slid on up and away towards the rippling light.
  The craft waited here for a minute or two, taking readings, and then descended another hundred feet. At this depth it was becoming seriously dark. After a moment or two the internal lights of the craft shut down, and in the second or so that passed before the main external beams suddenly stabbed out, the only visible light came from a small, hazily illuminated pink sign that read, THE BEEBLEBROX SALVAGE AND REALLY WILD STUFF CORPORATION.
  The huge beams switched downwards, catching a vast shoal of silver fish, which swivelled away in silent panic.
  In the dim control room that extended in a broad bow from the craft's blunt prow, four heads were gathered round a computer display that was analysing the very, very faint and intermittent signals that were emanating from deep on the seabed.
'That's it,' said the owner of one of the heads finally.
'Can we be quite sure?' said the owner of another of the heads. 'One hundred per cent positive,' replied the owner of the first head.
  'You're one hundred per cent positive that the ship which is crashed on the bottom of this ocean is the ship which you said you were one hundred per cent positive could one hundred per cent positively never crash?' said the owner of the two remaining heads. 'Hey' - he put up two of his hands - 'I'm only asking.'
  The two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration responded to this with a very cold stare, but the man with the odd, or rather the even number of heads, missed it. He flung himself back on the pilot couch, opened a couple of beers - one for himself and the other also for


himself - stuck his feet on the console, and said, 'Hey, baby,' through the ultra-glass at a passing fish.
  'Mr Beeblebrox . . .' began the shorter and less reassuring of the two officials in a low voice.
  'Yup?' said Zaphod, rapping a suddenly empty can down on some of the more sensitive instruments. 'You ready to dive? Let's go.'
'Mr Beeblebrox, let us make one thing perfectly clear . . .'
  'Yeah, let's,' said Zaphod. 'How about this for a start. Why don't you just tell me what's really on this ship.'
'We have told you,' said the official. 'By-products.' Zaphod exchanged weary glances with himself. 'By-products,' he said. 'By-products of what?' 'Processes,' said the official.
'What processes?'
'Processes that are perfectly safe.'
  'Santa Zarquana Voostra!' exclaimed both of Zaphod's heads in chorus. 'So safe that you have to build a zarking fortress ship to take the by- products to the nearest black hole and tip them in! Only it doesn't get there because the pilot does a detour - is this right? - to pick up some lobster?
OK, so the guy is cool, but . . . I mean own up, this is barking time, this is major lunch, this is stool approaching critical mass, this is . . . this is . . . total vocabulary failure!'
'Shut up!' his right head yelled at his left. 'We're flanging!' He got a good calming grip on the remaining beer can.
'Listen, guys,' he resumed after a moment's peace and contemplation.
The two officials had said nothing. Conversation at this level was not something to which they felt they could aspire. 'I just want to know,' insisted Zaphod, 'what you're getting me into here.'
  He stabbed a finger at the intermittent readings trickling over the computer screen. They meant nothing to him, but he didn't like the look of them at all. They were all squiggly, with lots of long numbers and things.
  'It's breaking up, is that it?' he shouted. 'It's got a hold full of epsilonic radiating aorist rods or something that'll fry this whole space sector for zillions of years back, and it's breaking up. Is that the story? Is that what we're going down to find? Am I going to come out of that wreck with even more heads?'


  'It cannot possibly be a wreck, Mr. Beeblebrox,' insisted the official. 'The ship is guaranteed to be perfectly safe. It cannot possibly break up.'
'Then why are you so keen to go and look at it?' 'We like to look at things that are perfectly safe.' 'Freeeooow!'
  'Mr Beeblebrox,' said the official patiently, 'may I remind you that you have a job to do?'
  'Yeah, well maybe I don't feel so keen on doing it all of a sudden. What do you think I am, completely without any moral whatsits, what are they called, those moral things?'
'Scruples?'
'Scruples, thank you, whatsoever? Well?'
  The two officials waited calmly. They coughed slightly to help pass the time.
  Zaphod sighed a what-is-the-world-coming-to sort of sigh to absolve himself from all blame, and swung himself round in his seat.
'Ship?' he called. 'Yup?' said the ship. 'Do what I do.'
  The ship thought about this for a few milliseconds and then, after double- checking all the seals on its heavy-duty bulkheads, it began slowly, inexorably, in the hazy blaze of its lights, to sink to the lowest depths.


Five hundred feet.
A thousand.
Two thousand.
  Here, at a pressure of nearly seventy atmospheres, in the chilling depths where no light reaches, nature keeps its most heated imaginings. Two-foot- long nightmares loomed wildly into the bleaching light, yawned, and vanished back into the blackness.
Two and a half thousand feet.
  At the dim edges of the ship's lights, guilty secrets flitted by with their eyes on stalks.
  Gradually the topography of the distantly approaching ocean bed resolved with greater and greater clarity on the computer displays until at last a shape could be made out that was separate and distinct from its surroundings. It was like a huge, lopsided, cylindrical fortress that widened


sharply halfway along its length to accommodate the heavy ultra-plating with which the crucial storage holds were clad, and which were supposed by its builders to have made this the most secure and impregnable spaceship ever built. Before launch, the material structure of this section had been battered, rammed, blasted, and subjected to every assault its builders knew it could withstand, in order to demonstrate that it could withstand them.
  The tense silence in the cockpit tightened perceptibly as it became clear that it was this section that had broken rather neatly in two.
  'In fact it's perfectly safe,' said one of the officials. 'It's built so that even if the ship does break up, the storage holds cannot possibly be breached.'


Three thousand eight hundred and twenty-five feet.
  Four Hi-Presh-A SmartSuits moved slowly out of the open hatchway of the salvage craft and waded through the barrage of its lights towards the monstrous shape that loomed darkly out of the sea night. They moved with a sort of clumsy grace, near weightless though weighed on by a world of water.
  With his right-hand head, Zaphod peered up into the black immensities above him, and for a moment his mind sang with a silent roar of horror. He glanced to his left and was relieved to see that his other head was busy watching the Brockian Ultra-Cricket broadcasts on the helmet vid without concern. Slightly behind him to his left walked the two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration, and slightly in front of him to his right walked the empty suit, carrying their implements and testing the way for them.
  They passed the huge rift in the broken-backed starship Billion Year Bunker, and played their flashlights up into it. Mangled machinery loomed between torn and twisted bulkheads two feet thick. A family of large transparent eels lived in there now and seemed to like it. The empty suit preceded them along the length of the ship's gigantic, murky hull, trying the airlocks. The third one it tested ground open uneasily. They crowded inside it and waited for several long minutes while the pump mechanisms dealt with the hideous pressure that the ocean exerted, and slowly replaced it with an equally hideous pressure of air and inert gases. At last the inner door slid open and they were admitted to a dark outer holding area of the starship Billion Year Bunker.


  Several more high-security Titan-O-Hold doors had to be passed through, each of which the officials opened with a selection of quark keys. Soon they were so deep within the heavy security fields that the Ultra-Cricket broadcasts were beginning to fade, and Zaphod had to switch to one of the rock video stations, since there was nowhere that they were not able to reach.
  A final doorway slid open, and they emerged into a large, sepulchral space. Zaphod played his flashlight against the opposite wall and it fell full on a wild-eyed, screaming face.
  Zaphod screamed a diminished fifth himself, dropped his light, and sat heavily on the floor, or rather on a body that had been lying there undisturbed for around six months, and that reacted to being sat on by exploding with great violence. Zaphod wondered what to do about all this and, after a brief but hectic internal debate, decided that passing out would be the very thing.
  He came to a few minutes later, and pretended not to know who he was, where he was, or how he had got there, but was not able to convince anybody. He then pretended that his memory suddenly returned with a rush and that the shock caused him to pass out again, but he was helped unwillingly to his feet by the empty suit - which he was beginning to take a serious dislike to - and forced to come to terms with his surroundings.
  They were dimly and fitfully lit and unpleasant in a number of respects, the most obvious of which was the colourful arrangement of parts of the ship's late lamented navigation officer over the floor, walls, and ceiling, and especially over the lower half of his, Zaphod's, suit. The effect of this was so astoundingly nasty that we shall not be referring to it again at any point in this narrative - other than to record briefly the fact that it caused Zaphod to throw up inside his suit, which he therefore removed and swapped, after suitable headgear modifications, with the empty one. Unfortunately the stench of the fetid air in the ship, followed by the sight of his own suit walking around casually draped in rotting intestines, was enough to make him throw up in the other suit as well, which was a problem that he and the suit would simply have to live with.
There. All done. No more nastiness.
At least, no more of that particular nastiness.
  The owner of the screaming face had calmed down very slightly now and was bubbling away incoherently in a large tank of yellow liquid - an


emergency suspension tank.
  'It was crazy,' he babbled, 'crazy! I told him we could always try the lobster on the way back, but he was crazy. Obsessed! Do you ever get like that about lobster? Because I don't. Seems to me it's all rubbery and fiddly to eat, and not that much taste, well, I mean is there? I infinitely prefer scallops, and said so. Oh Zarquon, I said so!'
  Zaphod stared at this extraordinary apparition, flailing in its tank. The man was attached to all kinds of life-support tubes, and his voice was bubbling out of speakers that echoed insanely round the ship, returning as haunting echoes from deep and distant corridors.
  'That was where I went wrong,' the madman yelled. 'I actually said that I preferred scallops and he said it was because I hadn't had real lobster like they did where his ancestors came from, which was here, and he'd prove it. He said it was no problem, he said the lobster here was worth a whole journey, let alone the small diversion it would take to get here, and he swore he could handle the ship in the atmosphere, but it was madness, madness!' he screamed, and paused with his eyes rolling, as if the word had rung some kind of bell in his mind. 'The ship went right out of control! I couldn't believe what we were doing and just to prove a point about lobster, which is really so overrated as a food, I'm sorry to go on about lobsters so much, I'll try and stop in a minute, but they've been on my mind so much for the months I've been in this tank, can you imagine what it's like to be stuck in a ship with the same guys for months eating junk food when all one guy will talk about is lobster, and then spend six months floating by yourself in a tank thinking about it. I promise I will try and shut up about the lobsters, I really will. Lobsters, lobsters, lobsters - enough! I think I'm the only survivor. I'm the only one who managed to get to an emergency tank before we went down. I sent out the mayday and then we hit. It's a disaster, isn't it? A total disaster, and all because the guy liked lobsters. How much sense am I making? It's really hard for me to tell.'
  He gazed at them beseechingly, and his mind seemed to sway slowly back down to earth like a falling leaf. He blinked and looked at them oddly, like a monkey peering at a strange fish.
  He scrabbled curiously with his wrinkled-up fingers at the glass side of the tank. Tiny, thick yellow bubbles loosed themselves from his mouth and nose, caught briefly in his swab of hair, and strayed on upwards.


  'Oh Zarquon, oh heavens,' he mumbled pathetically to himself, 'I've been found. I've been rescued . . .'
  'Well,' said one of the officials, briskly, 'you've been found at least.' He strode over to the main computer bank in the middle of the chamber and started checking quickly through the ship's main monitor circuits for damage reports.
'The aorist rod chambers are intact,' he said.
'Holy dingo's dos,' snarled Zaphod, 'there are aorist rods on board!'
  Aorist rods were devices used in a now happily abandoned form of energy production. When the hunt for new sources of energy had at one point got particularly frantic, one bright young chap suddenly spotted that one place which had never used up all its available energy was - the past. And with the sudden rush of blood to the head that such insights tend to induce, he invented a way of mining it that very same night, and within a year huge tracts of the past were being drained of all their energy and simply wasting away. Those who claimed that the past should be left unspoilt were accused of indulging in an extremely expensive form of sentimentality. The past provided a very cheap, plentiful, and clean source of energy, there could always be a few Natural Past Reserves set up if anyone wanted to pay for their upkeep, and as for the claim that draining the past impoverished the present, well, maybe it did, slightly, but the effects were immeasurable and you really had to keep a sense of proportion.
  It was only when it was realized that the present really was being impoverished, and that the reason for it was that those selfish plundering wastrel bastards up in the future were doing exactly the same thing, that everyone realized that every single aorist rod, and the terrible secret of how they were made, would have to be utterly and for ever destroyed. They claimed it was for the sake of their grand-parents and grandchildren, but it was of course for the sake of their grandparents' grandchildren, and their grandchildren's grandparents.
  The official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration gave a dismissive shrug. 'They're perfectly safe,' he said. He glanced up at Zaphod and suddenly said with uncharacteristic frankness, 'There's worse than that on board. At least,' he added, tapping at one of the computer screens, 'I hope it's on board.'
The other official rounded on him sharply.
'What the hell do you think you're saying?' he snapped.


  The first shrugged again. He said, 'It doesn't matter. He can say what he likes. No one would believe him. It's why we chose to use him rather than do anything official, isn't it? The more wild the story he tells, the more it'll sound like he's some hippy adventurer making it up. He can even say that we said this and it'll make him sound like a paranoid.' He smiled pleasantly at Zaphod, who was seething in a suit full of sick. 'You may accompany us,' he told him, 'if you wish.'


'You see?' said the official, examining the ultra-titanium outer seals of the aorist rod hold. 'Perfectly secure, perfectly safe.'
  He said the same thing as they passed holds containing chemical weapons so powerful that a teaspoonful could fatally infect an entire planet.
  He said the same thing as they passed holds containing zeta-active compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could blow up a whole planet.
  He said the same thing as they passed holds containing theta-active compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could irradiate a whole planet.
'I'm glad I'm not a planet,' muttered Zaphod.
  'You'd have nothing to fear,' assured the official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration.
'Planets are very safe. Provided,' he added - and paused.
  They were approaching the hold nearest to the point where the back of the starship Billion Year Bunker was broken. The corridor here was twisted and deformed, and the floor was damp and sticky in patches.
'Ho-hum,' he said, 'ho very much hum.' 'What's in this hold?' demanded Zaphod.
'By-products,' said the official, clamming up again. 'By-products . . .' insisted Zaphod, quietly, 'of what?'
  Neither official answered. Instead they examined the hold door very carefully and saw that its seals were twisted apart by the forces that had deformed the whole corridor. One of them touched the door lightly. It swung open to his touch. There was darkness inside, with just a couple of dim yellow lights deep within it.
'Of what?' hissed Zaphod.
The leading official turned to the other.
  'There's an escape capsule,' he said, 'that the crew were to use to abandon ship before jettisoning it into the black hole,' he said. 'I think it


would be good to know that it's still there.' The other official nodded and left without a word.
  The first official quietly beckoned Zaphod in. The large dim yellow lights glowed about twenty feet from them.
  'The reason,' he said quietly, 'why everything else in this ship is, I maintain, safe, is that no one is really crazy enough to use them. No one. At least no one that crazy would ever get near them. Anyone that mad or dangerous rings very deep alarm bells. People may be stupid, but they're not that stupid.'
  'By-products,' hissed Zaphod again - he had to hiss in order that his voice shouldn't be heard to tremble - 'of what?'
'Er, Designer People.' 'What?'
  'The Sirius Cybernetics Corporation were awarded a huge research grant to design and produce synthetic personalities to order. The results were uniformly disastrous. All the "people" and "personalities" turned out to be amalgams of characteristics which simply could not coexist in naturally occurring life forms. Most of them were just poor pathetic misfits, but some were deeply, deeply dangerous. Dangerous because they didn't ring alarm bells in other people. They could walk through situations the way that ghosts walk through walls, because no one spotted the danger.
  'The most dangerous of all were three identical ones - they were put in this hold, to be blasted, with this ship, right out of this universe. They are not evil, in fact they are rather simple and charming. But they are the most dangerous creatures that ever lived because there is nothing they will not do if allowed, and nothing they will not be allowed to do . . .'
  Zaphod looked at the dim yellow lights, the two dim yellow lights. As his eyes became accustomed to the light, he saw that the two lights framed a third space where something was broken. Wet, sticky patches gleamed dully on the floor.
  Zaphod and the official walked cautiously toward the lights. At that moment, four words came crashing into the helmet headsets from the other official.
'The capsule has gone,' he said tersely.
'Trace it,' snapped Zaphod's companion. 'Find exactly where it has gone.
We must know where it has gone!'


  Zaphod approached the two remaining tanks. A quick glance showed him that each contained an identical floating body. He examined one more carefully. The body, that of an elderly man, was floating in a thick yellow liquid. The man was kindly looking, with lots of pleasant laugh lines round his face. His hair seemed unnaturally thick and dark for someone of his age, and his right hand seemed continually to be weaving forward and back, up and down, as if shaking hands with an endless succession of unseen ghosts. He smiled genially, babbled and burbled like a half-sleeping baby, and occasionally seemed to rock very slightly with little tremors of laughter, as if he had just told himself a joke he hadn't heard before, or didn't remember properly. Waving, smiling, chortling, with little yellow bubbles beading on his lips, he seemed to inhabit a distant world of simple dreams.
  Another terse message suddenly came through his helmet headset. The planet toward which the escape capsule had headed had already been identified. It was in Galactic Sector ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha.
  Zaphod found a small speaker by the tank, and turned it on. The man in the yellow liquid was babbling gently about a shining city on a hill.
  He also heard the Official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration issue instructions to the effect that the missing escape capsule contained a 'Reagan' and that the planet in ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha must be made 'perfectly safe'.


From The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book, 1986
OceanofPDF.com






The Most Gratuitous Use of the Word 'Belgium' in a Serious Screenplay: an Undeleted Scene




The following passage comes from the American edition of Life, the Universe and Everything, where it replaces two lines of dialogue concerning the word 'fuck' (p. 391 of this omnibus). Douglas Adams's original US publishers insisted on removing the swear words - along with two instances of 'asshole' and one use of 'shit'. And lo, 'shit' became 'swut', 'asshole' became the delightfully whimsical 'kneebiter', and two lines on the word 'fuck' became an entire conversation in which 'Belgium' is revealed as the Galaxy's most award-winningly obscene expression. The conversation re-purposes a similar exchange from the Hitchhiker radio series (Fit the Tenth, recorded 1979), and has remained in US editions of the novel ever since. It is reproduced here for the enjoyment and edification of UK readers.
OceanofPDF.com






UK Edition
  'What was that about?' said Arthur to a girl he found standing beside him. 'Why did he tell me to win awards?'
  'Just showbiz talk,' shrugged the girl. 'He's just won an award at the Annual Ursa Minor Alpha Recreational Illusions Institute Awards Ceremony, and was hoping to be able to pass it off lightly, only you didn't mention it, so he couldn't.'
'Oh,' said Arthur, 'oh, well I'm sorry I didn't. What was it for?'
'The Most Gratuitous Use of the Word "Fuck" in a Serious Screenplay.
It's very prestigious.'
'I see,' said Arthur, 'yes, and what do you get for that?'
OceanofPDF.com






US Edition
  "What was that about?" said Arthur to a girl he found standing beside him. "Why did he tell me to win awards?"
  "Just showbiz talk," shrugged the girl. "He's just won an award at the Annual Ursa Minor Alpha Recreational Illusions Institute Awards Ceremony, and was hoping to be able to pass it off lightly, only you didn't mention it, so he couldn't."
"Oh," said Arthur, "oh, well I'm sorry I didn't. What was it for?" "The Most Gratuitous Use of the Word 'Belgium' in a Serious
Screenplay. It's very prestigious."
  "The most gratuitous use of which word?" asked Arthur, with a determined attempt to keep his brain in neutral.
"Belgium," said the girl, "I hardly like to say it." "Belgium?" exclaimed Arthur.
  A drunken seven-toed sloth staggered past, gawked at the word and threw itself backward at a blurry-eyed pterodactyl, roaring with displeasure.
  "Are we talking," said Arthur, "about the very flat country, with all the EEC and the fog?"
"What?" said the girl. "Belgium," said Arthur.
"Raaaaaarrrchchchchch!" screeched the pterodactyl. "Grrruuuuuurrrghhhh," agreed the seven-toed sloth.
  "They must be thinking of Ostend Hoverport," muttered Arthur. He turned back to the girl.
  "Have you ever been to Belgium in fact?" he asked brightly and she nearly hit him.
  "I think," she said, restraining herself, "that you should restrict that sort of remark to something artistic."
"You sound as if I just said something unspeakably rude." "You did."
  In today's modern Galaxy there is of course very little still held to be unspeakable. Many words and expressions which only a matter of decades ago were considered so distastefully explicit that, were they merely to be


breathed in public, the perpetrator would be shunned, barred from polite society, and in extreme cases shot through the lungs, are now thought to be very healthy and proper, and their use in everyday speech and writing is seen as evidence of a well-adjusted, relaxed and totally un****ed-up personality.
  So, for instance, when in a recent national speech the Financial Minister of the Royal World Estate of Quarlvista actually dared to say that due to one thing and another and the fact that no one had made any food for a while and the king seemed to have died and most of the population had been on holiday now for over three years, the economy was now in what he called "one whole joojooflop situation," everyone was so pleased that he felt able to come out and say it that they quite failed to note that their entire five- thousand-year-old civilization had just collapsed overnight.
  But even though words like "joojooflop," "swut," and "turlingdrome" are now perfectly acceptable in common usage there is one word that is still beyond the pale. The concept it embodies is so revolting that the publication or broadcast of the word is utterly forbidden in all parts of the Galaxy except for use in Serious Screenplays. There is also, or was, one planet where they didn't know what it meant, the stupid turlingdromes.
  "I see," said Arthur, who didn't, "so what do you get for using the name of a perfectly innocent if slightly dull European country gratuitously in a Serious Screenplay?"
OceanofPDF.com








Enclosed here are samples of original material sourced from the Douglas Adams archives










Original Press release for
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy






Typed up quotes from the Monty Python team






Press release about The Golden Pan Award




















Reviews for THE HITCH HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY were ecstatic:




"It is indispensable reading for mental hitch-hikers who want to thumb a lift out of the ruts of orthodox thought. Douglas Adams is not the first man to write intelligent science fiction. But he is only the second to write science fiction that is very intelligently amusing, or very amusingly intelligent. The first, of course, was Kurt Vonnegut.11        Peter Lewis - The Daily Mail




"I shied away from THE HITCH HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY simply because
it was so heartily and indiscriminately recommended. But having succumbed, I am half way through it again. There have been hundreds of dismal attempts at a funny Science Fiction novel, but this is the only one which
comes off."        John Kenyon, choosing THE HITCH HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE
GALAXY as his book of the year in The Observer, 1979




"It is funny and funny in every way ... it is the sort of humour which crops up from time to time and immediately finds its own level, its own audience."        Gillian Reynolds - The Daily Telegraph




"Douglas Adams has a dry, wry sense of humour which acts as a perfect foil to the madness of his imagination ... I approve."        Richard Cox -
Critics Forum-




"It's humour is cool and downbeat and it appeals unashamedly to those of us who feel that life is too short to be taken seriously"        Observer
Colour Magazine




"A modern fairy-story, a parable, a masterpiece of comedy." Television
Today






Publicity clippings for
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy






Fax from Douglas Adams to US editor Byron Preiss








FAX from Douglas Adams        Monday, January 13, 1992, 5:26 pm Page 2


are English (but make it twenty pounds rather than five - inflation) o why suddenly '::--Jewark' instead of 'Rickmanmorth'? And 'Bloomingdales' instead of 'Marks & Spencer'? The fact that Rickmansworth is not within the continental United States doesn't mean that it doesn't exist! American audiences do not need to feel disturbed by the notion that places do exist outside the "CS or that people might suddenly refer to them in works of fiction. You
\\'Ouldn't, presumably, replace l!rsa IIIinor Beta with 'Des '.\foines'. There is no Bloomingdales in England, and Bloomingdales is not a generic term for large department stores. If you feel that refen'iug to ''.\[arks & Spencer' might seriously freak out ,-\mericans because they haven't heard of it (or because (arks and Spencer owns Brooks Brothers) we could either put warning stickers on the co,∑er (''The text of this book contains references to places and institutions outside the continental "Cnited States and may cause offence to people who haven't heard of them") or you could, I suppose, put 'Han:ods', which most people will have heard of. Or we could e,∑en take the appalling risk of just recklessly mentioning things that people won't have heard of and see if they survi\'e the experience. They probably will - when people are bom they hal'en't heard of anything or anywhere, but seem to get through the first few years of their lives without ill-effects.


.Another point is something I'm less concerned about, but which I thought I'd mention and then leave to your judgment. You've replaced the joke about 'digital watches' with a reference to 'cellular phones' instead. Obviously, I understand that this is an attempt to update the joke, but there are two points to raise in defence of the original. One is that it's a ,∑et}, very well known line in Hitch Hiker, and one that is






















Note from Douglas Adams










Press release for The Restaurant at the End of the Universe




If you ha" read THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY and 1111ree with Tom Baker {alim Ot-. Who) that 'It chanpd
my whole life. It's literally out of this world' ... DON'T PANICI


For THE RESTAURANT AT THE END DF THE UNIVERSE is not merelyï sequel to HITCH-HIKER. In Douglas Adam,ï inimitable style, it extends the infinite improbability of the galaxy and incredibly - is even more hilarious and extraordinary than the first book.
As most people now know. THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY wa, launched without fanfare - indeed almost surreptitiously - by BBC Radio 4 onto an unsuspecting public over two years ago. It quickly attrilctcd a devoted audience and soon grew to have a cult following.


The PAN Original paperback of HITCH-HIKER was published in October 1979. went straight to Number One in the bestseller lists. staved in that position for many weeks and remained 1n the best-seller llsts for six months. Sales are now approaching half a million copies.


THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY has also been made into a highly successful double LP. a stage show under the direction of Ken Campbell. which played to packed houses at the ICA and. then last July, opened as a stage spectacular at the Rainbow Theatre. A further LP is released in November. A six-part television series starts on BBC 2 in January and a film is being discussed...


The tremendous cult following of HITCH-HIKER may possibly alienate some people. But as John Kenyon said, in choosing his 'Book of the Year' in the Observt1r: 'I shied away from THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUJDE TO THE GALAXY simply because it was so heartily and indiscr1minately recommended. But having succumbed, I am half way through it again. There have been hundreds of dismal attempts at a funny Science Fiction
novel, but this is the only one which come$ off.' He is not alone in his endorsement:
"It ;. indill}llnubltt rt!adlng for mt!fltal hltt'h-llilr. N wf'IO want ro thumb a lift our al thïruu of orthodo111 thought. DouO(as Adam, ,, nor thï firtt m-, to write mtelligeM aci.,-,cï ficrion. Bur IN 11 on/I( ti• s"ond ro write Kienc.
f,coon that 11 Yl!',Y mtellfgentlyam,aing, or ,y amullng/a, intïllil'fflt. Thïflnr of COUIN,  Kurt Vonnegutï:
Pttïr Ltw,a, DAILY MAIL
-it i, funny Md funna, in ..,.ty w.,.. ... It I f'h UJnof humc,ur which crops up from timï to timïand immtld,.rr,ly finds iu own 1ï11111. its own wd,ence".
G1lhan Reynolds. DAILY TELEGRAPH
"'/ ,m ly        ond forevtr gr,relul ro Doug/,s Ad.wns for THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY-.
Ph1l1ppa Toomey, TIMES BOOKS OF THE YEAR


''Doug/at Adami ha,ï dry, w,y sense of humour whic/1 acts
,s , ,,_rt"r foil ro titï mlldnHE of hi1 imagination .ï. I
111PPrO "
Richard Cox, CRITICS FORUM


"A modlm fa,,v-,ro,y, a parab/11, ï mïfflrplttee of com"ly ...
TELEVISION TODAY


'11'1 humour n cool attd doi.,,,bfrltr .a"d it Is un∑ mham":lly ro lhOSII of UI Mo'ho thït Ilk Is fOD fflort tr, 1>,i.lt.-nffnoc,1/y':
OBSERVER COLOUR MAGAZINE


Douglas Adams' work has been compared to Monty Python - with whom he worked for I time - Kurt Vonnetut, Tom Stoppard and ewen Lewis Carroll and Jonathan Swift!


From thcso illustrious names. we asked Monty Python for some quotes, as they know Douglas Adams and his work rather better than .the others:


'R l/y 6nt6rtaining and fun' -John Cleese
'Much funni11r than anything John Ot!ese has ever
written' - Terry Jones
'I know for II fact John OHStJ hasn't rtJed it' - Graham Chapman
Who is John C/,eul'- Eric Idle
'Really enr rta,ning and fun' - Michael Palin






Memo about cover design








Letter from Douglas to editor Sonny Mehta






Original synopsis from Douglas for Life, the Universe and Everything
















"The History of the Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy
is one of idealism, espair, struggle, passion, success, failure, and enormously long lumrh breaks."
Quoted from interview with Hurling Frootmig, 17th acting editor of the Guide.




"There is an art to flying, or rather a knack. The knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground and miss,"
Extract from the Guide, chfpter 973a, on "l!ecreational Impossibilities."


"The point is, you see, that there is no point in driving yourself mad trying to stop yourself goin' mad, You might as well give
in and save your sanity for later."
Ford Prefect, confronted with some of the awful truths about Life,the Universe and Everything.


"Why stop now, just when IIm hating it?" MarTin the Paranoid Andr1tild.
























Letter from Douglas to editor Sonny Mehta








Extracts from Douglas








Extracts from Douglas








Extracts from Douglas






Original press release for
So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish






Douglas Adams' original synopsis for So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish










  
Reluctant.ly, he sets out on his travels again, taking Fenchurch with him.
If he's to help her, he has to find out:


what really happened the day the Earth got demolished?


why have all the dolphins vanished?


and        what        is        0        W mi.@11
lm  @ @ It@ Irnn tlr"@@ll@mi.1
























Page 3










Promotional material for
So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish








Letter explaining how Hitchhikers should be spelled.






Advert for Mostly Harmless






Piece by Douglas Adams about the series










5
off the effects of thinking up the Babel Fish (six slices of toast and peanut butter, a packet or crisps and a shower). Marvin was...
          Marvin was different. Marvin was actually based on a real person, but the person concerned tends to get annoyed if I go around telling people it was him. However he gets even more annoyed if I don∑t go around telling people it was him becasue then he has to tell people himself before he can tell them how annoyed he is about it, and I think he finds that particularly irritating.
          There ls a rumour to the et!ect that the person rm referring to here is the comedy writer Andrew Marshall, who co-wrote The 8urt.iss Way, End of Part One, and Wboops, Apocalypse, but l WOUid like to emphasise that it is only a rumour. I know that tor a fact beeause I started it.
          Is there any evidence to support the rumour? Well, it is true that When I used to know Andrew well, he was the sort of person you would feel rather nervous about introducing to people. Suppose you were with a group of people in a pub and he joined you. You would say "Andrew, meet..." whoever it was, and everyone would say hello to him. There would be a slight pause, and then Andrew would say something so devastatingly rude to them that they would be absolutely stunned rigid. In the silence that followed Andrew would then wander off into a corner and sit hunched over a pint of beer. I would go over and say "Andrew, what on earth was the point of saying that?" and Andrew would say "What"s the point of not saying it? What"s the point or being here? What's the point of anything? Including being alive at all? That seems particularly pointless to me:








7
you have t.o start work. all over again When It's finished. However, this did in the end have a lot t.o do with now Hitch Hiker was actually produced.
         Though it was now ten years since Sergeant Pepper had revolutionised the way that people in the rock world thought about sound production, it seemed t.o me, listening t.o radio comedy at the time, that we still hadn't progressed much beyond Door Slam A, Door Slam B, Footsteps On a Gravel Path and the odd Comic Boing. This wasn't so much lack. of imagination, as a perfectly reasonable worry that an overindulgence in sound effects easily creates an irritating mish mash Which detracts from a strong script and fails t.o disguise a weak one. Also it t.ook time, Which, it was felt, could be better used making more programmes.
        However, long-standing rules are made t.o be broken, and I wanted Hitch Hiker t.o sound like a rock album. I wanted the voices and the effects and the music t.o be so seamlessly orchestrated as t.o create a coherent sound picture of a Whole other world - and I said this and many simllar sorts or things and waved my hands around a lot, While people nodded patiently and said -Yes, Douglas, but What's it actually ,fflt?ut.r
          We never did clear that one up, of course, but I think we can fairly claim t.o have made some good noises. In fact recording these sho.        s
was some of the best and most nerve-rack.ing fun I've ever had. Were we doing something extraordinary, or were we simply gomg mad? It was mostly very hard t.o tell. Because the BBC Light Entertainment Department had simply nev&r attempted anything like this before, we were largely having t.o invent the process by Which we worked as we went along.
Geoffrey Perkins has explained a lot of how the production techniques












Email from Douglas for an article






FW: Sorry lo bother ..on ¶rtlcl¶        01 Nov 2000  16:40
of a baton being passed. I think George Harrison once said something similar. But nowadays everybody's a comedian, even the weather girls and continuity announcers. We laugh at everything. Not intelligently any more, not with sudden shock, astonishment or revelation, just relentlessly and meaninglessly. No more
rainshowers in the desert, just mud and drizzle everywhere, occasionally illuminated by the flash of paparazzis.
Creative excitement has gone el ewhere - to science and technology: new ways of seeing things, new understandings of the universe, continual new revelations about how life works, how we think, how we perceive how we communicate. So this is my second point. Where, thirty years ago we used lo tart up rock bands, we now start up
Start-Ups and experiment with new ways of communicating with each other and playing with the information we exchange. And when one idea fails there's another better one right behind it, and another and another, cascading out as fast as rock albums used to in the sixties.
There's always a moment when you start to fall out of love, whether it's with a person or an idea or a cause, even if it's one you only narrate to yourself years after the event: a tiny thing, a wrong word, a false note, which means that things can never be quite the same again. For me it was hearing a stand-up comedian make the following observation. 'These scientists eh? They're so stupid! You know those black box flight recorders they put on aeroplanes? And you know they're meant to be indestructible?
It's always the thing that doesn't get smashed? So why don't they make the planes out of the same stuff?' The audience roared with laughter at how stupid scientists were, couldn't think their way out of a paper bag, but I sat feeling uncomfortable. Was I just
being pedantic to feel that the joke didn't really work because flight recorders are made out titanium and that if you made planes out of titanium rather than aluminium they'd be far too heavy to get off the ground in the first place? I began to pick away at the joke. Supposing Eric Morecambe had said it? Would it be funny then? Well, not quite, because that would have relied on the audience seeing that Eric was being dumb, in other words they would have had to know as a matter of common knowledge about the relative weights of titanium and aluminium. There was no way of deconstructing the joke (if you think this is obsessive behaviour you hould try living with it) that didn't rely on the teller and the audience complacently conspiring together to jeer at someone who knew more than they did. It sent a chill down my spine and still does. I felt betrayed by comedy in the same way that gangsta rap now makes me feel betrayed by rock music. I also began to wonder how many of the jokes I was making were just, well, ignorant.


My tum towards science came one day in about 1985 when I was walking through a forest in Madagascar. My companion on the walk was the zoologist Mark Carwardine (with whom I later collaborated on the book Last Chance to See), and I asked him 'So come on then, what's so special about the rain forest that we're supposed to care about it so much?'
And he told me. Took about two minutes. He explained the difference between temperate forest and rain forest and how it came to be that the latter produced such bewildering diversity of life but was at the same time so terribly fragile. l fell silent
for a few moments as r began to realize that one simple piece of new understanding had just changed the way I saw the world. r had just been handed a single thread T could
now follow into the tangled ball of a bewilderingly complex world. For the next few
Page 2 of 3






OceanofPDF.com








Turn over for previously unseen samples of original material sourced from the Douglas Adams archives exclusive to this 42nd anniversary edition.








Douglas Adams receiving a Golden Pan Award for The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy on 12 January 1984. He was the youngest author to receive a Golden Pan and it was the first Pan original to reach sales of one million copies






Advertisement in Radio Times, 1978


THE HIT.CH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY was launched without fanfare by BBC Radio 4 onto an unsuspecting public in 1978. It quickly attracted a cult following of such dimensions that the series was repeated numerous times and a second radio series was transmitted. There have been three stage shows and a six-part television series shown originally on BBC2 in January 1981 and repeated soon after ori BB Cl. There have been two long-playing records and a video game based on the book and a major film, scripted by Douglas Adams, is in development in the United States.
Douglas Adams is also the co-author, with John Lloyd, of THE MEANING OF LIFF which Pan published jointly with Faber & Faber last November.
Douglas Adams was born in Cambridge in 1952. He was educated at Brentwood School, Essex, and St John's College, Cambridge, where he read English.
After graduation he spent several years contributing material to radio and television shows as well as writing, performing and sometimes directing stage revues in Lon≠ don, Cambridge and on the Edinburgh Fringe. He has also worked at various times as a hospital porter, barn builder, chicken-shed cleaner, bodyguard, radio pro≠ ducer and script editor of Doctor Who.
He has not married, has no children, and does not wish to hear from any more Surrey estate agents.














Reviews for
THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY
'It is indispensable reading for mental hitch-hikers who wantto thumb a lift out of the ruts of orthodox thought. Douglas Adams is not the first man to write intelligent science fiction. But he is only the second to write science fiction that is very intelligently amusing, or very amusingly intelligent. The first, of course; was Kurt Vonnegut'
Peter Lewis - The Daily Mail
'I shied away from THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY simply because it was so heartily and indiscriminately recommended. But having succumbed, I am halfway through it again. There have been hundreds of dismal attempts at a funny Science Fiction novel, but this is the only one which comes off'
John Kenyon, choosing THE HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY as his book of the year in The Observer, 1979
'It is funny and funny in every way ... it is the sort of humour which crops up from time to time and immediately finds its own level, its own audience'
Gillian Reynolds - The Daily Telegraph
'Douglas Adams has a dry, wry sense of humour which acts as a perfect foil to the madness of his imagination        I approve'
Richard Cox - Critics Forum
'Its humour is cool and downbeat and it appeals unashamedly to those of us who feel that life to too short to be taken seriously'
Observer Colour Magazine
'A modern fairy-story, a parable, a masterpiece of comedy'
Television Today






The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy flyer, 1979






Promotional material for Life, the Universe and Everything










Promotional material for Mostly Harmless










Letter between Douglas Adams and editor Nicky Hursell shortly before his death






OceanofPDF.com






ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha, founded in 1980, is the official Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy appreciation society. (Owning a towel is not a condition of membership, though it is 'about the most massively useful thing an interstellar hitchhiker can have'.) For those interested in the Hitchhiker's trilogy and other works of Douglas Adams, we publish a quarterly magazine, Mostly Harmless, with news, reviews, artwork, fiction and competitions.


ZZ9 also offers a range of Hitchhiker's related merchandise, available to members by post, including T-shirts and our famous two-headed, three- armed Beeblebears. ZZ9 organizes meetings around the UK (and occasionally in other countries), and has members all over the world. On subscribing, members will receive one year's membership, which includes four issues of the magazine.


Visit www.zz9.org - you can join online or download a membership form. www.facebook.com/groups/ZZ9PluralZAlpha/
OceanofPDF.com






March 1978 saw the first ever transmission of Douglas Adams's The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy on BBC Radio 4; the beginning of a cult phenomenon.


March 2020 marked the 42nd anniversary of that first transmission - 42 being the answer, of course, to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe and Everything. To mark the occasion, Pan Macmillan are bringing back into print The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: The Original Radio Scripts with an introduction from Simon Jones.


The collection also includes the previously 'lost' Hitchhiker script from the 25th anniversary edition, 'Sheila's Ear' and the original introductions by producer Geoffrey Perkins and Douglas Adams.


This collection, which is a faithful reproduction of the text as it was first published in 1985, features all twelve original radio scripts - Hitchhiker as it was written and exactly as it was broadcast for the very first time. They include amendments and additions made during recordings and original notes on the writing and producing of the series by Douglas Adams and Geoffrey Perkins. For those who have always loved Douglas Adams, as


well as for his new generation of fans, these scripts are essential reading and a must-have piece of Adams memorabilia.


OceanofPDF.com


























OceanofPDF.com






Footnotes






* President: full title President of the Imperial Galactic Government.
  The term Imperial is kept though it is now an anachronism. The hereditary Emperor is nearly dead and has been for many centuries. In the last moments of his dying coma he was locked in a stasis field which keeps him in a state of perpetual unchangingness. All his heirs are now long dead, and this means that without any drastic political upheaval, power has simply and effectively moved a rung or two down the ladder, and is now seen to be vested in a body which used to act simply as advisers to the Emperor - an elected governmental assembly headed by a President elected by that assembly. In fact it vests in no such place.
  The President in particular is very much a figurehead - he wields no real power whatsoever. He is apparently chosen by the government, but the qualities he is required to display are not those of leadership but those of finely judged outrage. For this reason the President is always a controversial choice, always an infuriating but fascinating character. His job is not to wield power but to draw attention away from it. On those criteria Zaphod Beeblebrox is one of the most successful Presidents the Galaxy has ever had - he has already spent two of his ten presidential years in prison for fraud. Very very few people realize that the President and the government have virtually no power at all, and of these few people only six know whence ultimate political power is wielded. Most of the others secretly believe that the ultimate decision-making process is handled by a computer. They couldn't be more wrong.
* Ford Prefect's original name is only pronounceable in an obscure Betelgeusian dialect, now virtually extinct since the Great Collapsing Hrung Disaster of Gal./Sid./Year 03758 which wiped out all the old Praxibetel communities on Betelgeuse Seven. Ford's father was the only man on the entire planet to survive the Great Collapsing Hrung Disaster, by an extraordinary coincidence that he was never able satisfactorily to explain. The whole episode is shrouded in deep mystery: in fact no one ever knew what a Hrung was nor why it had chosen to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven particularly.
Ford's father, magnanimously waving aside the clouds of suspicion that had inevitably settled around him, came to live on Betelgeuse Five, where he both fathered and uncled Ford; in memory of his now dead race he christened him in the ancient Praxibetel tongue.
  Because Ford never learned to say his original name, his father eventually died of shame, which is still a terminal disease in some parts of the Galaxy. The other kids at school nicknamed him Ix, which in the language of Betelgeuse Five translates as 'boy who is not able satisfactorily to explain what a Hrung is, nor why it should choose to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven'.
* An ornamental tuft of plumes.
* A jumbled mass.
* A cleric ranking below a bishop.
* See Life, the Universe and Everything, chapter 18.
OceanofPDF.com






About the Author


DOUGLAS ADAMS created all the various and contradictory manifestations of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: radio,
novels, TV, computer game, stage adaptations, comic book and bath towel. He lectured and broadcast around the world and was a patron of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund and Save the Rhino International.
Douglas Adams was born in Cambridge, UK, and lived with his wife and daughter in Islington, London, before moving to Santa Barbara, California, where he died suddenly in 2001.
OceanofPDF.com










BOOKS BY DOUGLAS ADAMS


The Hitchhiker trilogy
  The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy The Restaurant at the End of the Universe
Life, the Universe and Everything So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish Mostly Harmless


The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: The Original Radio Scripts
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Radio Scripts: the Tertiary, Quandary and
Quintessential Phases


The Dirk Gently series
Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul


Collected Works
The Salmon of Doubt


With John Lloyd
    The Meaning of Liff The Deeper Meaning of Liff
With Mark Carwardine
Last Chance to See . . .


By Terry Jones, based on a story/computer game by Douglas Adams
Douglas Adams's Starship Titanic
OceanofPDF.com








First published 1995 by William Heinemann


This electronic edition published 2020 by Pan Books an imprint of Pan Macmillan
The Smithson, 6 Briset Street, London EC1M 5NR Associated companies throughout the world www.panmacmillan.com


ISBN 978-1-5098-8651-7


Copyright (c) Serious Productions Ltd 1979, 1980, 1982, 1984, 1986, 1992 Foreword copyright (c) Russell T Davies 2009
 Foreword copyright (c) Terry Jones 2009 Foreword copyright (c) Simon Brett 2009 Foreword copyright (c) Neil Gaiman 2009 Foreword copyright (c) Dirk Maggs 2009


Cover Images (c) Shutterstock, Cover Design by Stuart Wilson


The novels and short story comprising The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: A Trilogy in Five Parts were originally published separately: The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (1979), The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (1980), Life, the Universe and Everything (1982), and So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish (1984) by Pan Books; and Mostly Harmless (1992) by William Heinemann Ltd. First published as The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy: A Trilogy in Five Parts by William Heinemann Ltd in 1995. Young Zaphod Plays It Safe (1986) was originally published in The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book by Fontana Press.


The extract from the US edition of Life, the Universe and Everything quoted here was originally published 1982 by Harmony Books.


The right of Douglas Adams to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.


Pan Macmillan does not have any control over, or any responsibility for, any author or third-party websites referred to in or on this book.


You may not copy, store, distribute, transmit, reproduce or otherwise make available this publication (or any part of it) in any form, or by any means (electronic, digital, optical, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher. Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.


A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.


Visit www.panmacmillan.com to read more about all our books and to buy them. You will also find features, author interviews and news of any author events, and you can sign up for e-newsletters so that you're always first to hear about our new releases.


OceanofPDF.com