CHAPTER VIII


JUPITER SOMEWHAT CLOSE




Except as to the time the comet would take to revolve round the sun,
it must be confessed that all the professor's calculations had comparatively
little interest for anyone but himself, and he was consequently left
very much to pursue his studies in solitude.


The following day was the 1st of August, or, according to Rosette, the 63rd
of April.  In the course of this month Gallia would travel 16,500,000 leagues,
attaining at the end a distance of 197,000,000 leagues from the sun.
This would leave 81,000,000 leagues more to be traversed before reaching
the aphelion of the 15th of January, after which it would begin once more
to approach the sun.


But meanwhile, a marvelous world, never before so close
within the range of human vision, was revealing itself.
No wonder that Palmyrin Rosette cared so little to quit
his observatory; for throughout those calm, clear Gallian nights,
when the book of the firmament lay open before him, he could
revel in a spectacle which no previous astronomer had ever been
permitted to enjoy.


The glorious orb that was becoming so conspicuous an object
was none other than the planet Jupiter, the largest of all
the bodies existing within the influence of solar attraction.
During the seven months that had elapsed since its collision
with the earth, the comet had been continuously approaching
the planet, until the distance between them was scarcely more
than 61,000,000 leagues, and this would go on diminishing until
the 15th of October.


Under these circumstances, was it perfectly certain that no
danger could accrue?  Was not Gallia, when its pathway
led it into such close proximity to this enormous planet,
running a risk of being attracted within its influence?
Might not that influence be altogether disastrous?
The professor, it is true, in his estimate of the duration
of his comet's revolution, had represented that he had made
all proper allowances for any perturbations that would be caused
either by Jupiter, by Saturn, or by Mars; but what if there
were any errors in his calculations? what if there should be
any elements of disturbance on which he had not reckoned?


Speculations of this kind became more and more frequent,
and Lieutenant Procope pointed out that the danger incurred
might be of a fourfold character:  first, that the comet,
being irresistibly attracted, might be drawn on to the very
surface of the planet, and there annihilated; secondly, that as
the result of being brought under that attraction, it might be
transformed into a satellite, or even a sub-satellite, of that
mighty world; thirdly, that it might be diverted into a new orbit,
which would never be coincident with the ecliptic; or, lastly,
its course might be so retarded that it would only reach
the ecliptic too late to permit any junction with the earth.
The occurrence of any one of these contingencies would be fatal
to their hopes of reunion with the globe, from which they had
been so strangely severed.


To Rosette, who, without family ties which he had never found leisure
or inclination to contract, had no shadow of desire to return to the earth,
it would be only the first of these probabilities that could give him
any concern.  Total annihilation might not accord with his views, but he would
be quite content for Gallia to miss its mark with regard to the earth,
indifferent whether it revolved as a new satellite around Jupiter, or whether
it wended its course through the untraversed regions of the milky way.
The rest of the community, however, by no means sympathized with the
professor's sentiments, and the following month was a period of considerable
doubt and anxiety.


On the 1st of September the distance between Gallia and Jupiter was
precisely the same as the mean distance between the earth and the sun;
on the 16th, the distance was further reduced to 26,000,000 leagues.
The planet began to assume enormous dimensions, and it almost seemed
as if the comet had already been deflected from its elliptical orbit,
and was rushing on in a straight line towards the overwhelming luminary.


The more they contemplated the character of this gigantic planet,
the more they became impressed with the likelihood of a serious
perturbation in their own course.  The diameter of Jupiter is
85,390 miles, nearly eleven times as great as that of the earth;
his volume is 1,387 times, and his mass 300 times greater;
and although the mean density is only about a quarter of that
of the earth, and only a third of that of water (whence it has
been supposed that the superficies of Jupiter is liquid), yet his
other proportions were large enough to warrant the apprehension
that important disturbances might result from his proximity.


"I forget my astronomy, lieutenant," said Servadac.  "Tell me
all you can about this formidable neighbor."


The lieutenant having refreshed his memory by reference to
Flammarion's _Recits de l'Infini_, of which he had a Russian translation,
and some other books, proceeded to recapitulate that Jupiter accomplishes
his revolution round the sun in 4,332 days 14 hours and 2 minutes;
that he travels at the rate of 467 miles a minute along an orbit
measuring 2,976 millions of miles; and that his rotation on his axis
occupies only 9 hours and 55 minutes.


"His days, then, are shorter than ours?" interrupted the captain.


"Considerably," answered the lieutenant, who went on to
describe how the displacement of a point at the equator
of Jupiter was twenty-seven times as rapid as on the earth,
causing the polar compression to be about 2,378 miles; how the axis,
being nearly perpendicular, caused the days and nights to be
nearly of the same length, and the seasons to be invariable;
and how the amount of light and heat received by the planet
is only a twenty-fifth part of that received by the earth,
the average distance from the sun being 475,693,000 miles.


"And how about these satellites?  Sometimes, I suppose, Jupiter has
the benefit of four moons all shining at once?" asked Servadac.


Of the satellites, Lieutenant Procope went on to say that one
is rather smaller than our own moon; that another moves round
its primary at an interval about equal to the moon's distance
from ourselves; but that they all revolve in considerably less time:
the first takes only l day 18 hours 27 minutes; the second takes
3 days 13 hours 14 minutes; the third, 7 days 3 hours 42 minutes;
whilst the largest of all takes but 16 days 16 hours 32 minutes.
The most remote revolves round the planet at a distance
of 1,192,820 miles.


"They have been enlisted into the service of science,"
said Procope.  "It is by their movements that the velocity
of light has been calculated; and they have been made available
for the determination of terrestrial longitudes."


"It must be a wonderful sight," said the captain.


"Yes," answered Procope.  "I often think Jupiter is like a prodigious
clock with four hands."


"I only hope that we are not destined to make a fifth hand,"
answered Servadac.


Such was the style of the conversation that was day by day reiterated
during the whole month of suspense.  Whatever topic might be started,
it seemed soon to settle down upon the huge orb that was looming upon
them with such threatening aspect.


"The more remote that these planets are from the sun," said Procope,
"the more venerable and advanced in formation are they found to be.
Neptune, situated 2,746,271,000 miles from the sun, issued from
the solar nebulosity, thousands of millions of centuries back.
Uranus, revolving 1,753,851,000 miles from the center of the
planetary system, is of an age amounting to many hundred millions
of centuries.  Jupiter, the colossal planet, gravitating at a distance
of 475,693,000 miles, may be reckoned as 70,000,000 centuries old.
Mars has existed for 1,000,000,000 years at a distance of 139,212,000 miles.
The earth, 91,430,000 miles from the sun, quitted his burning
bosom 100,000,000 years ago.  Venus, revolving now 66,131,000
miles away, may be assigned the age of 50,000,000 years at least;
and Mercury, nearest of all, and youngest of all, has been revolving
at a distance of 35,393,000 miles for the space of 10,000,000 years--
the same time as the moon has been evolved from the earth."


Servadac listened attentively.  He was at a loss what to say;
and the only reply he made to the recital of this novel theory was
to the effect that, if it were true, he would prefer being captured
by Mercury than by Jupiter, for Mercury, being so much the younger,
would probably prove the less imperative and self-willed master.


It was on the 1st of September that the comet had crossed
the orbit of Jupiter, and on the 1st of October the two
bodies were calculated to be at their minimum separation.
No direct shock, however, could be apprehended; the demonstration
was sufficiently complete that the orbit of Gallia did not
coincide with that of the planet, the orbit of Jupiter being
inclined at an angle of 1 degrees 19 mins to the orbit of the earth,
with which that of Gallia was, no doubt, coincident.


As the month of September verged towards its close, Jupiter began
to wear an aspect that must have excited the admiration
of the most ignorant or the most indifferent observer.
Its salient points were illumined with novel and radiant tints,
and the solar rays, reflected from its disc, glowed with a
mingled softness and intensity upon Gallia, so that Nerina
had to pale her beauty.


Who could wonder that Rosette, enthusiast as he was, should be
irremovable from his observatory?  Who could expect otherwise than that,
with the prospect before him of viewing the giant among planets,
ten times nearer than any mortal eye had ever done, he should have
begrudged every moment that distracted his attention?


Meanwhile, as Jupiter grew large, the sun grew small.


From its increased remoteness the diameter of the sun's disc was diminished
to 5 degrees 46 mins.


And what an increased interest began to be associated
with the satellites!  They were visible to the naked eye!
Was it not a new record in the annals of science?


Although it is acknowledged that they are not ordinarily visible on
earth without the aid of a somewhat powerful telescope, it has been
asserted that a favored few, endued with extraordinary powers of vision,
have been able to identify them with an unassisted eye; but here,
at least, in Nina's Hive were many rivals, for everyone could so far
distinguish them one from the other as to describe them by their colors.
The first was of a dull white shade; the second was blue; the third was
white and brilliant; the fourth was orange, at times approaching to a red.
It was further observed that Jupiter itself was almost void of scintillation.


Rosette, in his absorbing interest for the glowing glories of the planet,
seemed to be beguiled into comparative forgetfulness of the charms
of his comet; but no astronomical enthusiasm of the professor could
quite allay the general apprehension that some serious collision
might be impending.


Time passed on.  There was nothing to justify apprehension.
The question was continually being asked, "What does
the professor really think?"


"Our friend the professor," said Servadac, "is not likely to tell us
very much; but we may feel pretty certain of one thing:  he wouldn't keep us
long in the dark, if he thought we were not going back to the earth again.
The greatest satisfaction he could have would be to inform us that we had
parted from the earth for ever."


"I trust from my very soul," said the count, "that his
prognostications are correct."


"The more I see of him, and the more I listen to him," replied Servadac,
"the more I become convinced that his calculations are based on a
solid foundation, and will prove correct to the minutest particular."


Ben Zoof here interrupted the conversation.  "I have something
on my mind," he said.


"Something on your mind?  Out with it!" said the captain.


"That telescope!" said the orderly; "it strikes me that that telescope
which the old professor keeps pointed up at yonder big sun is bringing
it down straight upon us."


The captain laughed heartily.


"Laugh, captain, if you like; but I feel disposed to break the old
telescope into atoms."


"Ben Zoof," said Servadac, his laughter exchanged for a look
of stern displeasure, "touch that telescope, and you shall
swing for it!"


The orderly looked astonished.


"I am governor here," said Servadac.


Ben Zoof knew what his master meant, and to him his master's wish was law.


The interval between the comet and Jupiter was, by the 1st
of October, reduced to 43,000,000 miles.  The belts all parallel
to Jupiter's equator were very distinct in their markings.
Those immediately north and south of the equator were of a dusky hue;
those toward the poles were alternately dark and light;
the intervening spaces of the planet's superficies, between edge
and edge, being intensely bright.  The belts themselves were
occasionally broken by spots, which the records of astronomy
describe as varying both in form and in extent.


The physiology of belts and spots alike was beyond the astronomer's
power to ascertain; and even if he should be destined once again to take
his place in an astronomical congress on the earth, he would be just as
incapable as ever of determining whether or no they owed their existence
to the external accumulation of vapor, or to some internal agency.
It would not be Professor Rosette's lot to enlighten his brother
_savants_ to any great degree as to the mysteries that are associated
with this, which must ever rank as one of the most magnificent amongst
the heavenly orbs.


As the comet approached the critical point of its career it cannot
be denied that there was an unacknowledged consciousness of alarm.
Mutually reserved, though ever courteous, the count and the captain
were secretly drawn together by the prospect of a common danger;
and as their return to the earth appeared to them to become more
and more dubious, they abandoned their views of narrow isolation,
and tried to embrace the wider philosophy that acknowledges
the credibility of a habitable universe.


But no philosophy could be proof against the common instincts
of their humanity; their hearts, their hopes, were set upon
their natural home; no speculation, no science, no experience,
could induce them to give up their fond and sanguine anticipation
that once again they were to come in contact with the earth.


"Only let us escape Jupiter," said Lieutenant Procope, repeatedly, "and we
are free from anxiety."


"But would not Saturn lie ahead?" asked Servadac and the count
in one breath.


"No!" said Procope; "the orbit of Saturn is remote, and does
not come athwart our path.  Jupiter is our sole hindrance.
Of Jupiter we must say, as William Tell said, 'Once through
the ominous pass and all is well.'"


The 15th of October came, the date of the nearest approximation
of the comet to the planet.  They were only 31,000,000 miles apart.
What would now transpire?  Would Gallia be diverted from its proper
way? or would it hold the course that the astronomer had predicted?


Early next morning the captain ventured to take the count and the lieutenant
up to the observatory.  The professor was in the worst of tempers.


That was enough.  It was enough, without a word, to indicate the course
which events had taken.  The comet was pursuing an unaltered way.


The astronomer, correct in his prognostications, ought to
have been the most proud and contented of philosophers;
his pride and contentment were both overshadowed by the certainty
that the career of his comet was destined to be so transient,
and that it must inevitably once again come into collision
with the earth.






CHAPTER IX MARKET PRICES IN GALLIA




"All right!" said Servadac, convinced by the professor's ill humor
that the danger was past; "no doubt we are in for a two years'
excursion, but fifteen months more will take us back to the earth!"


"And we shall see Montmartre again!" exclaimed Ben Zoof,
in excited tones that betrayed his delight in the anticipation.


To use a nautical expression, they had safely "rounded the point,"
and they had to be congratulated on their successful navigation;
for if, under the influence of Jupiter's attraction, the comet had been
retarded for a single hour, in that hour the earth would have already
traveled 2,300,000 miles from the point where contact would ensue,
and many centuries would elapse before such a coincidence would
possibly again occur.


On the 1st of November Gallia and Jupiter were 40,000,000 miles apart.
It was little more than ten weeks to the 15th of January, when the comet
would begin to re-approach the sun.  Though light and heat were
now reduced to a twenty-fifth part of their terrestrial intensity,
so that a perpetual twilight seemed to have settled over Gallia,
yet the population felt cheered even by the little that was left,
and buoyed up by the hope that they should ultimately regain their proper
position with regard to the great luminary, of which the temperature
has been estimated as not less than 5,000,000 degrees.


Of the anxiety endured during the last two months Isaac Hakkabut
had known nothing.  Since the day he had done his lucky stroke
of business he had never left the tartan; and after Ben Zoof,
on the following day, had returned the steelyard and the
borrowed cash, receiving back the paper roubles deposited,
all communication between the Jew and Nina's Hive had ceased.
In the course of the few minutes' conversation which Ben Zoof
had held with him, he had mentioned that he knew that
the whole soil of Gallia was made of gold; but the old man,
guessing that the orderly was only laughing at him as usual,
paid no attention to the remark, and only meditated upon
the means he could devise to get every bit of the money
in the new world into his own possession.  No one grieved
over the life of solitude which Hakkabut persisted in leading.
Ben Zoof giggled heartily, as he repeatedly observed "it was
astonishing how they reconciled themselves to his absence."


The time came, however, when various circumstances prompted him
to think he must renew his intercourse with the inhabitants of
the Hive.  Some of his goods were beginning to spoil, and he felt
the necessity of turning them into money, if he would not be a loser;
he hoped, moreover, that the scarcity of his commodities would
secure very high prices.


It happened, just about this same time, that Ben Zoof had been
calling his master's attention to the fact that some of their most
necessary provisions would soon be running short, and that their stock
of coffee, sugar, and tobacco would want replenishing.  Servadac's mind,
of course, turned to the cargo on board the _Hansa_, and he resolved,
according to his promise, to apply to the Jew and become a purchaser.
Mutual interest and necessity thus conspired to draw Hakkabut and
the captain together.


Often and often had Isaac gloated in his solitude over the prospect
of first selling a portion of his merchandise for all the gold
and silver in the colony.  His recent usurious transaction
had whetted his appetite.  He would next part with some more
of his cargo for all the paper money they could give him;
but still he should have goods left, and they would want these.
Yes, they should have these, too, for promissory notes.
Notes would hold good when they got back again to the earth;
bills from his Excellency the governor would be good bills;
anyhow there would be the sheriff.  By the God of Israel!
he would get good prices, and he would get fine interest!


Although he did not know it, he was proposing to follow the practice of
the Gauls of old, who advanced money on bills for payment in a future life.
Hakkabut's "future life," however, was not many months in advance
of the present.


Still Hakkabut hesitated to make the first advance, and it was accordingly
with much satisfaction that he hailed Captain Servadac's appearance
on board the _Hansa_.


"Hakkabut," said the captain, plunging without further preface
into business, "we want some coffee, some tobacco, and other things.
I have come to-day to order them, to settle the price, and to-morrow
Ben Zoof shall fetch the goods away."


"Merciful, heavens!" the Jew began to whine; but Servadac cut him short.


"None of that miserable howling!  Business!  I am come to buy your goods.
I shall pay for them."


"Ah yes, your Excellency," whispered the Jew, his voice
trembling like a street beggar.  "Don't impose on me.
I am poor; I am nearly ruined already."


"Cease your wretched whining!" cried Servadac.  "I have told you once,
I shall pay for all I buy."


"Ready money?" asked Hakkabut.


"Yes, ready money.  What makes you ask?" said the captain,
curious to hear what the Jew would say.


"Well, you see--you see, your Excellency," stammered out the Jew,
"to give credit to one wouldn't do, unless I gave credit to another.
You are solvent--I mean honorable, and his lordship the count is honorable;
but maybe--maybe--"


"Well?" said Servadac, waiting, but inclined to kick the old rascal
out of his sight.


"I shouldn't like to give credit," he repeated.


"I have not asked you for credit.  I have told you, you shall
have ready money."


"Very good, your Excellency.  But how will you pay me?"


"Pay you?  Why, we shall pay you in gold and silver and copper,
while our money lasts, and when that is gone we shall pay you
in bank notes."


"Oh, no paper, no paper!" groaned out the Jew, relapsing into
his accustomed whine.


"Nonsense, man!" cried Servadac.


"No paper!" reiterated Hakkabut.


"Why not?  Surely you can trust the banks of England, France, and Russia."


"Ah no!  I must have gold.  Nothing so safe as gold."


"Well then," said the captain, not wanting to lose his temper,
"you shall have it your own way; we have plenty of gold for
the present.  We will leave the bank notes for by and by."
The Jew's countenance brightened, and Servadac, repeating that
he should come again the next day, was about to quit the vessel.


"One moment, your Excellency," said Hakkabut, sidling up with
a hypocritical smile; "I suppose I am to fix my own prices."


"You will, of course, charge ordinary prices--proper market prices;
European prices, I mean."


"Merciful heavens!" shrieked the old man, "you rob me of my rights;
you defraud me of my privilege.  The monopoly of the market belongs to me.
It is the custom; it is my right; it is my privilege to fix my own prices."


Servadac made him understand that he had no intention of swerving
from his decision.


"Merciful heavens!" again howled the Jew, "it is sheer ruin.
The time of monopoly is the time for profit; it is the
time for speculation."


"The very thing, Hakkabut, that I am anxious to prevent.
Just stop now, and think a minute.  You seem to forget _my_ rights;
you are forgetting that, if I please, I can confiscate all your
cargo for the common use.  You ought to think yourself lucky
in getting any price at all.  Be contented with European prices;
you will get no more.  I am not going to waste my breath on you.
I will come again to-morrow;" and, without allowing Hakkabut time
to renew his lamentations, Servadac went away.


All the rest of the day the Jew was muttering bitter curses against the
thieves of Gentiles in general, and the governor of Gallia in particular,
who were robbing him of his just profits, by binding him down to a maximum
price for his goods, just as if it were a time of revolution in the state.
But he would be even with them yet; he would have it all out of them:
he would make European prices pay, after all.  He had a plan--he knew how;
and he chuckled to himself, and grinned maliciously.


True to his word, the captain next morning arrived at the tartan.
He was accompanied by Ben Zoof and two Russian sailors.
"Good-morning, old Eleazar; we have come to do our little bit
of friendly business with you, you know," was Ben Zoof's greeting.


"What do you want to-day?" asked the Jew.


"To-day we want coffee, and we want sugar, and we want tobacco.
We must have ten kilogrammes of each.  Take care they are all good;
all first rate.  I am commissariat officer, and I am responsible."


"I thought you were the governor's aide-de-camp," said Hakkabut.


"So I am, on state occasions; but to-day, I tell you.
I am superintendent of the commissariat department.
Now, look sharp!"


Hakkabut hereupon descended into the hold of the tartan, and soon returned,
carrying ten packets of tobacco, each weighing one kilogramme, and securely
fastened by strips of paper, labeled with the French government stamp.


"Ten kilogrammes of tobacco at twelve francs a kilogramme:
a hundred and twenty francs," said the Jew.


Ben Zoof was on the point of laying down the money, when Servadac stopped him.


"Let us just see whether the weight is correct."


Hakkabut pointed out that the weight was duly registered on
every packet, and that the packets had never been unfastened.
The captain, however, had his own special object in view,
and would not be diverted.  The Jew fetched his steelyard,
and a packet of the tobacco was suspended to it.


"Merciful heavens!" screamed Isaac.


The index registered only 133 grammes!


"You see, Hakkabut, I was right.  I was perfectly justified in having
your goods put to the test," said Servadac, quite seriously.


"But--but, your Excellency--" stammered out the bewildered man.


"You will, of course, make up the deficiency," the captain continued,
not noticing the interruption.


"Oh, my lord, let me say--" began Isaac again.


"Come, come, old Caiaphas, do you hear?  You are to make up the deficiency,"
exclaimed Ben Zoof.


"Ah, yes, yes; but--"


The unfortunate Israelite tried hard to speak, but his agitation
prevented him.  He understood well enough the cause of the phenomenon,
but he was overpowered by the conviction that the "cursed Gentiles"
wanted to cheat him.  He deeply regretted that he had not a pair
of common scales on board.


"Come, I say, old Jedediah, you are a long while making up what's short,"
said Ben Zoof, while the Jew was still stammering on.


As soon as he recovered his power of articulation, Isaac began
to pour out a medley of lamentations and petitions for mercy.
The captain was inexorable.  "Very sorry, you know, Hakkabut.  It is
not my fault that the packet is short weight; but I cannot pay
for a kilogramme except I have a kilogramme."


Hakkabut pleaded for some consideration.


"A bargain is a bargain," said Servadac.  "You must complete your contract."


And, moaning and groaning, the miserable man was driven to make
up the full weight as registered by his own steelyard.
He had to repeat the process with the sugar and coffee:
for every kilogramme he had to weigh seven.  Ben Zoof and
the Russians jeered him most unmercifully.


"I say, old Mordecai, wouldn't you rather give your goods away,
than sell them at this rate?  I would."


"I say, old Pilate, a monopoly isn't always a good thing, is it?"


"I say, old Sepharvaim, what a flourishing trade you're driving!"


Meanwhile seventy kilogrammes of each of the articles required were weighed,
and the Jew for each seventy had to take the price of ten.


All along Captain Servadac had been acting only in jest.  Aware that
old Isaac was an utter hypocrite, he had no compunction in turning
a business transaction with him into an occasion for a bit of fun.
But the joke at an end, he took care that the Jew was properly paid
all his legitimate due.