CHAPTER 8








195,285 Miles Away






WHAT WAS GOING ON? What had caused this strange intoxication that could have had such disastrous consequences? A simple blunder on Michel's part, which Nicholl was luckily able to remedy in time.


After a genuine swoon that lasted a few minutes, the captain came back to life first and gathered his wits about him.


Though he'd had breakfast two hours earlier, he felt his stomach growling dreadfully, as if he hadn't eaten for several days. From belly to brain his whole system was in an extreme state of hyperactivity.


So he stood up and ordered Michel to fix a light snack. Michel, wiped out, didn't reply. Nicholl then tried to brew a couple cups of tea, intending it to ease his consumption of a dozen or so sandwiches. First he set about lighting the gas and briskly struck a match.


He was startled to see its sulfur shine with such amazing brilliance, he could barely stand to look at it. When he lit the gas jet, a flame shot out of it like a beam of electric light.


An explanation dawned in Nicholl's mind. That bright light, the physiological problems he was experiencing, the hyperactivity of all his mental and emotional processes—now he understood.


“The oxygen!” he exclaimed.


And bending over the air device, he saw that this colorless, tasteless, odorless gas was pouring full blast from the spigot—a substance essential to life but in an unadulterated state causing the severest organic disorders. Michel had inadvertently left the spigot on the device wide open!


Nicholl hurriedly turned off the oxygen, which was saturating the atmosphere and would have led to the deaths of the travelers, not from asphyxiation but from combustion.


An hour later the air was thinner and their lungs back to normal. Little by little the three friends got over their intoxication; but they had to sleep off their oxygen like a drunk with his wine.


When Michel learned about the role he'd played in this incident, he didn't seem put out in the least. This unscheduled spree broke the monotony of their journey. Under its influence many foolish words had been spoken, but they were no sooner said than forgotten.


“Then again,” added the lighthearted Frenchman, “I'm not sorry I sampled a little of that heady gas. You know, my friends, it would be interesting to set up an emporium with oxygen rooms, where folks with weak constitutions could lead a more active life for a few hours! Imagine a gathering where the air was steeped in this noble elastic fluid, or a theater where the management would always add a stiff dose—what passions would fill the souls of the actors and the audience, what fire and enthusiasm! And if instead of a mere crowd we could saturate a whole community, how vigorously it would behave, what extra vitality it would gain! Maybe we could turn a worn-out nation into a big strong one, and I know more than one old European country that needs to go on an oxygen regimen for health reasons!”


Michel babbled so energetically, you would have sworn the spigot was still wide open. But a single sentence from Barbicane threw the brakes on his enthusiasm.


“That's all well and good, Michel my friend,” he told Ardan, “but how do you explain the presence of these hens that joined in our music making? ”


“Hens?”


“Yes.”


It was true, half a dozen hens and a handsome rooster were strutting around, clucking and flapping their wings.


“Oh, the spoilsports!” Michel exclaimed. “That oxygen incited them to rebellion!”


“But what did you bring these hens for?” Barbicane asked.


“To acclimate them to the moon, of course!”


“Then why hide them?”


“It was a prank, my dear president, simply a prank that backfired pitifully. I meant to turn them loose on the moon without saying anything. Goodness, how amazed you would have been to see these earth birds pecking away at your moon meadows!”


“You scamp, you eternal scamp!” Barbicane replied. “You don't need any oxygen going to your head! The way we acted under the influence of that gas is the way you always act! You're always out of your mind!”


“Ah, but what if that's a way to wisdom?” Michel Ardan remarked.


After this philosophical thought the three friends put the projectile back in order. Hens and rooster were reinstated in their chicken coop. But while proceeding with this operation, Barbicane and his two companions became distinctly aware of a new phenomenon.


Since the moment they'd left the earth, their own weight, the shell's, and that of the objects inside all had been progressively decreasing. Though they couldn't verify this weight loss in the projectile's case, the time would come when they would feel its effect on their own persons and on the tools and instruments they'd been using.


Needless to say, a scale couldn't have registered this loss, because the weights used to measure the object's heaviness would have lost the same amount as the object itself. But a spring balance, for instance, keeps its tension regardless of the gravitational pull and could have assessed this loss accurately.


We know that an object's force of attraction, also called its specific gravity, is in direct proportion to the object's mass and in inverse ratio to the square of its distance. From this it follows: if all other celestial bodies had been suddenly wiped out and our planet were alone in space, the projectile, in accordance with Newton's law, would weigh less and less the farther it got from our globe—yet it would never be completely weightless, because the earth's gravitational pull would always be felt no matter how far away.


But in the present instance, there had to come a time when the projectile was no longer subject to the laws of gravity, disregarding other celestial bodies, which could be viewed as having zero influence.


In essence the projectile was following a path between the earth and the moon. As it traveled away from our planet, the earth's gravitational pull decreased in inverse ratio to the square of its distance, but the moon's influence increased by the same proportion. So there had to come a point where these two forces of attraction would neutralize each other and the shell would no longer have any weight. If the moon and the earth had been equal in mass, this point would be found halfway between the two heavenly bodies. But after accounting for their difference in mass, it's easy to calculate that this point would be located at 47/52 of the way there—hence, to run the numbers, 195,285 miles away from the earth.


At this point an object without any built-in source of speed or motion would stay stationary forever, pulled equally by both heavenly bodies and drawn neither to one nor the other.


Now then, if the projectile's thrust had been accurately calculated, it was due to reach this point when its speed was gone and it had lost every ounce of its weight, like all the objects it carried inside.


Then what would happen? There were three theoretical possibilities.


Either the projectile would still keep some of its speed, go past the point of equal attraction, and fall to the moon—because the earth's gravitational pull would be less than its satellite's.


Or, running out of speed and failing to reach the point of equal attraction, the shell would fall back to the earth—because the moon's gravitational pull would be less than its planet's.


Or finally, impelled by enough speed to reach the neutral point but not enough to go past it, the projectile would stay eternally suspended in midair between zenith and nadir, like the fabled coffin of Mohammed.


That was the situation, and Barbicane clearly explained the consequences to his traveling companions. They were extremely concerned. Now then, when would they know that the projectile had reached this neutral point, which was located 195,285 miles away from the earth?


Exactly when they and the objects inside the projectile were no longer governed by the laws of gravity.


Till then, though the travelers all could tell this force was having less and less effect, they were still aware of its presence. But that day, near eleven o'clock in the morning, Nicholl let a glass slip out of his hand, and instead of falling, the glass stayed suspended in the air.


“Aha!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Now there's an entertaining lesson in physics.”


And right away, when they let go of various objects, weapons, and bottles, the articles stayed miraculously aloft. Released in space by Michel, even Diana herself duplicated—but without any sleight of hand—that marvelous suspension trick worked by such magicians as Alfred de Caston and Jean Robert-Houdin. What's more, the dog didn't seem to even realize she was floating in the air.


Despite their scientific sophistication, our three venturesome companions were startled and astonished themselves, feeling swept off into a realm of wonders, their bodies weightless. If they held out an arm, it hadn't any inclination to drop. Their heads bobbed around on their shoulders. Their feet no longer stayed on the projectile's floor. They were like drunkards who had lost their sense of balance. Fantastic tales have featured people who had no reflections, others who had no shadows. But here, by neutralizing the force of gravity, real life had created human beings for whom nothing had any weight, who weighed nothing themselves!


Suddenly Michel gathered himself, leaped off the floor, and stayed suspended in the air like the floating monk in Murillo's painting Angels’ Kitchen.


His two friends joined him instantly, and right in the middle of the projectile, all three enacted a miraculous ascension into Heaven.


“Is this credible? Is this feasible? Is this possible?” Michel exclaimed. “No, and yet it's happening! Oh, if only Raphael had seen us like this, what an ‘assumption’ he could have put on canvas!”


“This assumption isn't likely to hold up,” Barbicane replied. “If the projectile goes past the neutral point, the moon's gravity will pull us toward her.”


“Then our feet will stand on the ceiling of the projectile,” Michel answered.


“No,” Barbicane said, “because the projectile's center of gravity is quite low, so it will swing around little by little.”


“Then it'll turn all our arrangements upside down, literally!”


“Relax, Michel,” Nicholl replied. “Nothing's going to overturn, don't worry. Not a single object will move, because the projectile will change position without our even noticing.”


“That's right,” Barbicane went on. “And once it has cleared the point of equal attraction, its base, being comparatively heavier, will draw it vertically down to the moon. But for this phenomenon to occur, we need to have gone past the neutral line.”


“Past the neutral line!” Michel exclaimed. “Then let's do what seamen do when they cross the equator. Let's drink to the occasion!”


An easy sideways movement took Michel to the padded wall. There he found a bottle and glasses, set them “out in the open” for his companions, and they gleefully greeted the boundary line with a round of toasts followed by three cheers.


These gravitational effects lasted barely an hour. The travelers felt themselves gradually settling back onto the floor, and Barbicane thought he saw the projectile's conical end veer a little from its usual position of pointing toward the moon. With a countermovement the base was coming around. So the moon's gravity was winning out over the earth's. They were starting their fall toward the lunar disk, though it was still barely noticeable; they must have been going only fifteen feet per hour. But little by little this gravitational influence would grow stronger, their descent would become more pronounced, the projectile's base would be pulled downward and its cone would point toward the earth, then the shell would fall with increasing speed to the surface of the lunar landscape. Therefore they would reach their destination. Now nothing could impede the undertaking's success, and both Nicholl and Michel Ardan shared Barbicane's delight.


Then they chatted about all those phenomena they'd marveled at one after another. In particular they couldn't say enough about that neutral point where the laws of gravity weren't enforced. Michel Ardan, always the enthusiast, tried to draw some conclusions that were simply sheer imagination.


“Ah, my good friends,” he exclaimed, “what progress we could make back home if we could get rid of gravity, that chain shackling us to the earth! We would be like prisoners set free! Our arms and legs would never get tired again. No doubt it's true we would need to be 150 times stronger to fly over the earth's surface, to stay in the air just by using our muscles—but if there weren't any gravity, we could go off into space on a mere whim, simply by an act of will.”


“That's right,” Nicholl said, grinning. “If we managed to eliminate gravity the way we eliminate pain with an anesthetic, modern society would certainly be in for a change!”


“Yes,” Michel exclaimed, all caught up in his argument. “Let's abolish gravity, then we'll have no more burdens to carry! Which means no more cranes, jacks, winches, hand cranks, or other outmoded gadgets!”


“Well put,” Barbicane remarked. “But if nothing had any weight, nothing would hold still anymore—not even the hat on your head, my good Michel, nor your house, whose bricks stay in place simply because of their weight! Nor even a boat, which keeps steady on the water merely as a result of gravity. Nor the ocean itself, whose waves would no longer be regulated by the earth's gravitational pull. Nor finally even the atmosphere, whose molecules would no longer cling together and would scatter into space!”


“How inconvenient,” Michel remarked. “There's nothing like these practical folks for bringing you back to reality with a thud.”


“But take heart, Michel,” Barbicane went on. “Though there's no heavenly body where the laws of gravity have been repealed, at least you're going to visit one with much less gravity than the earth.”


“The moon?”


“Right. On the surface of the moon, objects weigh a sixth of what they do on the earth, a phenomenon you'll quite easily verify.”


“Then we'll notice it ourselves?” Michel asked.


“Obviously, since 450 pounds will weigh only 75 on the surface of the moon.”


“And our muscles won't have less strength?”


“Not at all. Instead of jumping three feet off the ground, you'll jump eighteen.”


“Why, I'll be a regular Hercules on the moon!” Michel exclaimed.


“To say the least,” Nicholl replied. “Because if a moonperson's size is in proportion to his sphere's mass, he'll be barely a foot tall.”


“Like the people of Lilliput!” Michel remarked. “So I'll get to play the role of Gulliver! We'll bring those fairy tales about giants to life! That's the advantage of leaving our planet and roaming the solar system!”


“Hold on, Michel,” Barbicane responded. “If you want to play Gulliver, visit just the smaller planets such as Mercury, Venus, or Mars, whose masses are a bit less than the earth's. But don't venture onto the big planets of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune, because there you'll swap roles and you'll be the one from Lilliput.”


“What about the sun?”


“Though the sun has a quarter of the earth's density, it has 1,324,000 times the volume, and its gravity is twenty-seven times stronger than on the surface of our globe. Keeping everything in proportion, the natives there should boast an average height of two hundred feet.”


“Damnation!” Michel exclaimed. “I would be nothing more than a pygmy, a house pet!”


“Gulliver in Brobdingnag,” Nicholl said.


“Exactly,” Barbicane replied.


“So it would be helpful to take along a couple cannons for protection.”


“Oh good,” Barbicane remarked. “Your shells would be completely ineffectual on the sun—they would travel only a few yards before they fell to the ground.”


“That's a strong statement.”


“That's a true statement,” Barbicane replied. “The gravity on that huge heavenly body is so considerable, an object weighing 150 pounds on the earth would weigh over 4,200 pounds on the surface of the sun. Your hat would weigh over 20 pounds, your cigar half a pound. In short, if you slipped and fell on that solar soil, you would be so heavy—over 5,500 pounds—that you couldn't pick yourself up again.”


“Holy smoke!” Michel put in. “So I would need to pack a small portable crane! All right, my friends, let's be happy with the moon for right now. At least, we'll cut an impressive figure there. Later on we'll see if there's any point in going to the sun, where nobody can have a drink without a winch to hoist his glass to his lips!”