CHAPTER 13








Lunar Scenery






BY 2:30 IN THE MORNING, the shell hovered abreast of the 13th lunar parallel, at an actual distance of some 620 miles but a viewing distance their optical instruments had reduced to about 6¼. There still seemed to be no possibility they could reach any part of the lunar disk. They were orbiting at a comparatively moderate speed, which President Barbicane found bewildering. At this distance from the moon, it would take considerable velocity to withstand her gravitational pull. So the reason for this phenomenon remained elusive. Anyhow there wasn't time to look for the cause. The moon's surface features were parading under our travelers’ eyes, and they didn't want to miss a single detail.


As seen through their spyglasses, then, the lunar disk was 6¼ miles away. If a balloonist were carried that far above the earth, how much could he make out on its surface? We can't say, since the highest flights haven't gone more than 5 miles up.


Meanwhile here's an accurate description of what Barbicane and his companions saw from that altitude.


Broad swatches of pigment appeared over the moon's disk, covering a fair range of colors. Lunar scholars aren't in agreement on the nature of these pigments. There are a variety of them and they're pretty sharply contrasted. Julius Schmidt claims that if the earth's oceans dried up and a lunar skywatcher compared those oceans to our globe's inland plains, they wouldn't offer as great a range of distinct shades as the moon shows to skywatchers on the earth. According to him, the color common to those wide plains called “seas” is a dark gray mixed with green and brown. A few big craters also feature this pigmentation.


Barbicane was acquainted with the views of this lunar specialist from Germany, views shared by Messrs. Beer and Mädler. His own eyes verified that they were right and not certain astronomers who acknowledged only gray pigments on the surface of the moon. In some areas the color green was exceptionally distinct, being conspicuous, according to Julius Schmidt, in the Sea of Serenity and Sea of Moods. Barbicane likewise noticed some wide craters that hadn't any cones inside and were giving off a bluish color, like the gleam from a shiny new piece of boiler plate steel. These pigments were truly intrinsic to the moon's disk and weren't caused, as some astronomers say, by a spyglass's flawed objective lens or by the intervention of the earth's atmosphere. Barbicane had no doubts on this score. He was viewing them out in space and couldn't have made any optical errors. He accepted these different pigments as a proven scientific fact. Did that mean these shades of green came from tropical vegetation thriving in a dense, low-lying atmosphere? He still couldn't make up his mind.


Farther off he noted a reddish hue that was distinct enough. A comparable shade had already been spotted on the floor of a remote basin named Lichtenberg Crater, which is located near the Hercynian Mountains on the edge of the moon; even so, he couldn't discover its nature.


He wasn't any luckier with another lunar oddity whose cause he couldn't accurately define. Here's that oddity.


Michel Ardan was on watch next to the Gun Club's president, when he noticed some long white lines shining intensely in the direct sunlight. It was a sequence of luminous furrows very different from the bright rays Copernicus had recently displayed. They lay parallel to each other.


With his usual breeziness Michel didn't fail to exclaim:


“Say! Tilled fields!”


“Tilled fields?” Nicholl responded, shrugging his shoulders.


“Plowed at least,” Michel Ardan contended. “But what farmhands these moonpeople have got to be, and what gigantic oxen they must hitch to their plows to cut such furrows!”


“They aren't furrows,” Barbicane said, “they're rills.”


“Go on with your rills,” Michel replied genially. “Just what do you mean by rills, in a scientific sense?”


Barbicane promptly told his companion what he knew about lunar rills. He knew that such furrows had been spotted on every lowland part of the moon's disk; that isolated examples of these furrows very often measured from 10 to 125 miles in length; that they ran from 3,000 to 5,000 feet wide, and that their edges were absolutely parallel; but he didn't know anything more about their formation or their nature.


Using his spyglass, Barbicane examined these rills with the greatest care. He noticed that their edges consisted of ultra steep slopes. They were long parallel ramparts, and with a little imagination you could accept them as lengthy lines of fortifications erected by lunar engineers.


Some of these different rills were as flawlessly straight as if they'd been drawn with a tape measure. Others had gentle curves, though their edges always stayed parallel. The latter intersected each other; the former cut across craters. Here, they plowed through routine cavities such as the Posidonius or Petavius basins; there, they streaked over whole seas such as the Sea of Serenity.


These local irregularities inevitably fired the imaginations of astronomers on the earth. Their initial moonwatching hadn't turned up these rills. Neither Hevelius, Cassini, La Hire, nor Herschel seems to have been aware of them. It was Schröter who first brought them to scientific notice in 1789. After him others such as Pastorff, Gruithuisen, Beer, and Mädler studied these furrows. As many as seventy have been counted to date. But though we know their number, we still haven't determined their nature. They definitely aren't fortifications, any more than they're old dried up riverbeds, because for one thing, water is so scarce on our satellite's surface that it couldn't have carved itself any spillways, and for another, these furrows often go across craters located at high elevations.


It must be acknowledged, however, that Michel Ardan came up with an explanation—and without realizing it, this time he fell in with Julius Schmidt's thinking.


“Why couldn't those bewildering sights,” he said, “simply be a phenomenon caused by vegetation?”


“What do you mean?” Barbicane asked instantly.


“Easy, my dear president,” Michel replied. “Couldn't those dark lines making up that barricade be trees planted in neat rows?”


“So you're in favor,” Barbicane said, “of calling them vegetation?”


“I'm in favor,” Michel Ardan remarked, “of explaining what all you experts can't! At least my theory would have the advantage of suggesting why these rills vanish, or seem to vanish, at regular intervals.”


“And what's your reason for this?”


“The reason is that the trees become invisible when they lose their leaves, and visible when they get them back.”


“Your explanation is clever, my dear companion,” Barbicane replied, “but it's unacceptable.”


“Why?”


“Because there literally are no seasons on the surface of the moon, so that vegetation of yours couldn't cause any phenomenon whatever.”


In fact the minimal angle of the moon's axis keeps the sun virtually at a constant elevation in every latitude. Over the equatorial regions that shining orb is almost always found at the zenith, and in the polar regions it barely goes past the horizon line. So depending on the particular region, winter, spring, summer, or autumn will reign all year long, as they do on the planet Jupiter, which likewise orbits on an axis that's minimally tilted.


How did these rills originate? Hard question to answer. They definitely arrived after the craters and basins were formed, because several have invaded these cavities by busting through their circular ramparts. So this occurrence could have been contemporary with recent geological history and may have been due simply to the encroachment of natural forces.


Meanwhile the projectile had pulled level with the 40th lunar parallel, hovering at a distance that couldn't have been more than 500 miles. Framed in their spyglasses, objects seemed to be located only 5 miles away. At this juncture Helicon rose to a height of 1,657 feet right underneath where they stood, and on its left curved those medium-sized hills that surround a small portion of the Sea of Rain known as the Bay of Rainbows.


If astronomers are to thoroughly examine the surface of the moon, the earth's atmosphere would need to be 170 times more transparent than it actually is. But in this vacuum where the projectile was cruising, no moisture intervened between the eye of the beholder and the object beheld. What's more, Barbicane enjoyed a viewing distance that the highest-powered telescopes had never afforded, neither the one built by the Earl of Rosse nor the one in the Rocky Mountains. So he had absolutely optimum conditions for settling that crucial question of whether or not life could exist on the moon. But the answer still eluded him. He could make out only an empty expanse of immense plains plus some barren mountains to the north. No artifacts revealed the hand of man. No ruins gave evidence of human beings passing that way. No herds of animals indicated that at least the lower life forms had developed. Nowhere any movement, nowhere a trace of vegetation. Out of the three kingdoms sharing the planet earth, only one was represented in this lunar world: the mineral kingdom.


“Oh drat!” Michel Ardan said, looking a little flustered. “Isn't anybody home?”


“Not so far,” Nicholl replied. “No human beings, no animals, no trees. After all, we still haven't any way of knowing if there's air hidden deep in those cavities, inside those basins, or even on the other side of the moon.”


“Besides,” Barbicane added, “even for the keenest eyes, a human being isn't visible more than 4½ miles off. So if any moonpeople exist, they can see our projectile, but we can't see them.”


Near four o'clock in the morning, level with the 50th parallel, their distance had shrunk to some 370 miles. On the left, prominent in the broad daylight, a row of erratically shaped mountains unfolded. To the right, by contrast, a dark hole punctured the ground like a huge murky pit, impossible to plumb, drilled far into the lunar soil.


That hole was Plato, the Black Lake, a deep basin earthlings can properly study between the last quarter and the new moon, when shadows fall from west to east.


This black pigment is seldom found on our satellite's surface. It has been identified elsewhere only in the depths of Endymion Crater, east of the Sea of Cold in the northern hemisphere, and on the floor of Grimaldi Basin, at the equator near the eastern edge of the moon.


Plato is a circular mountain located in latitude 51° north and longitude 9° east. Its basin is fifty-seven miles long and thirty-eight wide. Barbicane was sorry they weren't passing directly over this huge opening. There were depths to plumb, maybe some mysterious phenomenon to discover. But the projectile's course couldn't be changed. They had to resign themselves completely to this fact. Even hot air balloons can't be steered, much less a shell when you're closed up inside its walls.


By around five o'clock in the morning, they'd finally gone past the northerly limits of the Sea of Rain. La Condamine Crater and Fontenelle Crater were still to come, one on the left, the other on the right. Starting with the 60th parallel, that part of the moon's disk was turning completely mountainous. Their spyglasses brought it within 2½ miles, less than what separates the summit of Mt. Blanc from sea level. This whole region was garnished with peaks and basins. Near latitude 70° Philolaus Crater towered to a height of 12,140 feet, revealing an oval basin forty miles long and ten wide.


Viewed from that distance, though, the moon's disk had an extremely peculiar appearance. Her scenery was visible under far different, far poorer conditions than on the earth.


Since the moon hasn't any atmosphere, this absence of a gaseous covering has consequences that already have been shown. There isn't any twilight on her surface, so night follows day and day follows night with the abruptness of a lamp turned off or on in the midst of utter darkness. There's no transition from hot to cold, so the temperature drops in a second from the boiling point to the coldness of outer space.


This absence of air has another consequence: wherever the sun's rays don't reach, it's as dark as the pit. What we refer to on the earth as diffuse light, the luminous matter hanging in the air that creates dusk and dawn, that produces shadows, half-lights, and all the magic of chiaroscuro—this doesn't exist on the moon. Ergo these stark contrasts of hers that feature just two colors, black and white. If moonpeople were to shade their eyes from the sun's rays, the sky would seem completely black to them, and the stars would look as bright as they do on the darkest nights.


You can gather what an impact this strange vista had on Barbicane and his two friends. Their eyes were befuddled. They couldn't tell foregrounds from backgrounds. No landscape painter on earth could render a piece of lunar scenery that lacks the softening effects of chiaroscuro. The result would be nothing more than ink blotches on a blank sheet of paper.


This vista didn't change, not even when the projectile drew level with the 80th parallel and was separated from the moon by little more than sixty miles. Nor even at six o'clock in the morning when it came within thirty miles of Gioja Crater, a distance their spyglasses reduced to some 1,600 feet. They practically could reach out and touch the moon! It seemed impossible that the shell wouldn't bump into her before long, if only at her north pole whose brilliant crest stood out sharply against the black background of the sky. Michel Ardan wanted to open a porthole and dive down to our satellite's surface. A 30-mile fall? No problem. But it wouldn't have been worth the effort, because Michel would have been dragged along in their wake; if the projectile couldn't reach any part of the moon, he couldn't either.


Just then, at six o'clock, the lunar pole appeared. Sharply lit up, only half of the moon's disk was offered to the travelers’ eyes, while the other half was lost in shadow. All at once the projectile crossed the line of demarcation between bright light and utter darkness, then abruptly plunged into the blackest of nights.