CHAPTER 9








The Consequences of Going off Course






BARBICANE HAD REGAINED his confidence, if not in the journey's outcome, at least in the projectile's thrust. Its speed had the potential to take it past the neutral line. Therefore it wouldn't fall back to the earth. Therefore it wouldn't stay stationary at the point of equal attraction. This left only one theoretical possibility with a chance of becoming reality: the shell would arrive at its destination through the workings of the moon's gravity.


Actually this meant a fall of 20,740 miles—onto a heavenly body, it's true, whose gravity must be reckoned at just a sixth of the earth's. A fearsome fall nevertheless, and one for which they needed to take every conceivable precaution.


These precautions were of two kinds: some were to deaden the impact right when the projectile landed on the lunarsoil, others were to slow their fall and thus reduce its force.


With regard to deadening the impact, it was a shame Barbicane couldn't use the same methods that had so effectively lessened the jolt at departure, in other words, collapsible partitions and the use of water as springs. The partitions were still available but not the springs, because the travelers couldn't use their water supply for this purpose—a supply that would prove invaluable, if, during their first days on the moon, they found this liquid element lacking in her soil.


What's more, this supply would have been quite inadequate as a set of springs. The cushion of water stored in the projectile at departure —underneath the watertight disk—was a good three feet deep, with a surface area of fifty-four square feet. Its volume was nearly eight cubic yards, its weight 6.3 tons. Now then, their containers of drinking water didn't hold a fifth of this amount. So they had to do without this potent method of deadening the jolt on arrival.


Luckily, since Barbicane hadn't been content with using just water, the movable disk featured highly resilient buffers, designed to lessen the jolt at the shell's base when the horizontal partitions slammed into it. These buffers were still available; the travelers simply needed to readjust them and put the movable disk back in position. All these parts were easy to handle, weighed nothing to speak of, and could be quickly reassembled.


This took place. Readjusting the various pieces wasn't a problem. It was literally a nuts-and-bolts affair. And tools weren't in short supply. Soon the reconditioned disk lay on its steel buffers like a table on its legs. One problem resulted from the presence of this disk. It blocked the lower window. So even when they were rushing straight at the moon, it would be impossible for the travelers to keep an eye on her through this opening. Consequently they had to make do without it. However they could still see the vast lunar landscape out the side openings, just as you can look at the earth from an airship's gondola.


Positioning this disk was a good hour's work. It was afternoon by the time everything was ready. Barbicane took new readings on the projectile's tilt; but much to his annoyance, it hadn't swung around enough to start falling; it seemed to be traveling along a curve that ran parallel to the moon's disk. That silver orb was gleaming radiantly in space, while the golden orb opposite was a blazing fire.


The situation didn't inspire confidence.


“Will we get there?” Nicholl said.


“We'll proceed on that assumption,” Barbicane replied.


“You scaremongers,” Michel Ardan remarked. “We'll get there, and faster than we may like.”


This response sent Barbicane back to his preparatory work, and he got busy readying the devices designed to slow their fall.


You may recall the drama at that rally held in Tampa, Florida, during which Captain Nicholl played the role of Barbicane's foe and Michel Ardan's opponent. When Captain Nicholl argued that the projectile would shatter like glass, Michel had replied he would slow its fall by using shrewdly positioned rockets.


In essence, with the projectile's base as their launchpad, powerful explosives could blow up outside, create a recoil, and check the shell's speed to some extent. True, these rockets would have to burn in a vacuum, but they wouldn't be short of oxygen since they supplied it themselves, like those lunar volcanoes that can burn despite the moon's lack of atmosphere.


So Barbicane had come equipped with these explosives, which were packed in small tubes of threaded steel that could be screwed into the projectile's base. On the inside of the shell, these tubes were flush with the floor. Outside, they jutted six inches. There were twenty of them. An opening contrived in the disk allowed you to light the fuse on each. The result took place entirely outdoors. They'd tamped the detonation charges into the tubes beforehand. So all they had to do was pull out the metal plugs lodging in the base and replace them with these tubes, which fitted snugly into their holes.


Near three o'clock they'd finished this new chore, and after taking all these precautions, they had nothing left to do except wait.


Meanwhile the projectile was visibly closing in on the moon. To some extent it was obviously subject to her gravity, but its own impetus was also tugging it at an angle. The line of travel resulting from these two influences could take the shell off on a tangent. But the projectile definitely wasn't going to fall to the surface of the moon in the normal way, because its lower end, being heavier, already should have swung around toward her.


Barbicane's confidence shrank as he watched his shell withstand the moon's gravitational pull. The unknown was opening up in front of him, the unknown of interstellar space. He, the expert, thought he'd foreseen the three theoretical possibilities—falling back to the earth, falling to the moon, or staying stationary at the neutral line! And now a fourth possibility, fraught with all the terrors of the infinite, had unexpectedly surged into view. To face up to it without flinching, you needed to be a determined professional like Barbicane, a confirmed stoic like Nicholl, or a daring adventurer like Michel Ardan.


This now became the topic of conversation. Other men would have explored the question from a practical viewpoint. They would have wondered where their projectile coach was carrying them. Not these three. They looked for the cause that had produced this effect.


“So we've jumped the tracks,” Michel said. “But why?”


“Despite all the precautions that were taken,” Nicholl replied, “I very much fear the columbiad wasn't correctly angled. No matter how small the error was, it must have been enough to make us overshoot the moon's gravitational field.”


“Then their aim was off?” Michel asked.


“I don't think so,” Barbicane replied. “The cannon was absolutely vertical, it was unquestionably directed at the zenith overhead. Now then, once the moon reaches that zenith, we should hit her dead center. There's an additional argument, but it eludes me.”


“Aren't we arriving too late?” Nicholl asked.


“Too late?” Barbicane put in.


“Yes,” Nicholl went on. “The memo from the Cambridge Observatory maintains that we're to accomplish this flight in 97 hours, 13 minutes, and 20 seconds. Which means that if we arrive any sooner, the moon won't have made it to the point in question, and any later, she'll already be gone.”


“Agreed,” Barbicane replied. “But we left on December 1 at 10:46:40 in the evening, and we're supposed to arrive at midnight on the 5th, right when the moon is full. Now then, today is December 5. It's 3:30 in the afternoon, and another 8½ hours should be enough to take us to our destination. Why isn't it happening?”


“Could we be going too fast?” Nicholl responded. “Because we now know that our initial velocity was greater than it should have been.”


“No, a hundred times no!” Barbicane responded. “Even if the projectile's going too fast, this wouldn't keep us from reaching the moon if our direction's right. No, our course has changed! Something has driven us off course.”


“How? Why?” Nicholl asked.


“I can't say,” Barbicane replied.


“Well then, Barbicane,” Michel said, “would you like to know my views on this question of what drove us off course?”


“Go on.”


“I wouldn't give fifty cents for the answer. We're off course and that's that. It makes no difference where we're heading! We'll soon find out. Hell's bells, we're being dragged through space, so we'll definitely end up falling into some gravitational field or other.”


Michel Ardan's lack of concern didn't appease Barbicane. It wasn't that he was worried about the future, but about why his projectile had gone off course—he wanted to figure this out at any cost.


Meanwhile the shell continued to move sideways toward the moon, escorted by the retinue of objects tossed out of it. From prominent landmarks on the moon, now less than 5,000 miles away, Barbicane could even verify that they'd started moving at a uniform speed. Fresh proof they weren't falling. The projectile's thrust was still winning out over the moon's gravitational pull, but its flight path was definitely bringing it closer to the lunar disk, and there was a chance that when it got closer still, the force of gravity would take over and ultimately cause it to fall.


Having nothing better to do, our three friends stayed on watch. But they still couldn't make out the details of the moon's topography. All her surface features were flattened by the direct sunlight.


Consequently they peered out the side windows till eight o'clock in the evening. By then that silver orb had grown so big as they looked, it concealed a good half of the firmament. From opposite sides both sun and moon flooded the projectile with light.


By this point Barbicane thought he could put the distance separating them from their destination at just 1,750 miles. He judged that the projectile's speed was over 200 yards per second, hence about 410 miles per hour. Under the influence of centripetal force, the shell's base was showing a tendency to swing toward the moon; but centrifugal force was still winning out, so their linear flight path seemed likely to change into some sort of curve, its nature still undetermined. …


Barbicane kept looking for a solution to his insoluble problem.


The hours went by to no effect. The projectile was obviously closing in on the moon, but it was equally obvious that they wouldn't reach her. As for how near they would come, this depended on the two forces, one attracting and one repelling, that were courting this moving object.


“All I want,” Michel kept saying, “is to get close enough to probe the moon's secrets!”


“A thousand curses on whatever caused our projectile to go off course!” Nicholl exclaimed.


“In that case,” Barbicane replied, as if an idea had suddenly occurred to him, “curse that meteor we passed on the way!”


“Huh?” Michel Ardan put in.


“What do you mean?” Nicholl snapped.


“I mean,” Barbicane said in a decisive tone, “that our going off course is entirely due to our meeting up with that rambling space rock.”


“But it didn't even graze us,” Michel replied.


“That makes no difference. Compared to our projectile, its mass was enormous, so its gravitational pull was enough to affect our course.”


“Only minimally!” Nicholl exclaimed.


“Yes, Nicholl, but as minimal as it was,” Barbicane replied, “over a distance of 210,000 miles, that's all it took to make us miss the moon!”