CHAPTER 12








Mountain Matters






THE PROJECTILE'S HEADING, as we've already indicated, was taking it toward the moon's northern hemisphere. Our travelers were far from that center point they were scheduled to hit before their flight plan suffered an irreparable change in course.


It was 12:30 in the morning. At this juncture Barbicane put their distance at 870 miles, a little longer than the moon's radius and sure to decrease as they drew nearer to her north pole. By then the projectile wasn't level with the equator but abreast of the 10th parallel—and from this latitude up to the pole, as they carefully reckoned on their map, Barbicane and his two companions could study the moon under optimum conditions.


With the help of their spyglasses, in fact, this distance of 870 miles shrank to 8.7 miles, hence 3½ geographic leagues. That telescope in the Rocky Mountains could bring the moon closer still, but the earth's atmosphere significantly weakened its optical power. Stationed in his projectile and looking through his pocket binoculars, Barbicane could accordingly view certain surface features that weren't visible to moonwatchers on the earth.


“My friends,” said the Gun Club's president in a solemn voice, “I don't know where we're heading, I don't know if we'll ever see the planet earth again. Nevertheless let's proceed as if our research will someday benefit our fellow mortals. Let's forget all our worries and free up our minds. We're astronomers. This shell is a workroom at the Cambridge Observatory transferred into outer space. Let's start our investigations.”


After that they conducted their research with tremendous diligence, faithfully recording changes in the moon's appearance at the different distances where the projectile hovered in relation to her. Right when the shell was level with the 10th parallel north, it seemed to be heading faithfully up longitude 20° east.


Here we'll make an important comment about the chart they were using in their investigations. In moon maps based on images supplied by spyglasses, the south is above and the north below, because these instruments show things upside down; given this inversion, it would seem natural for the east to be on the left and the west on the right. But this isn't the case. If the map were turned downside up and it displayed the moon as we see her, the east would still be on the left and the west still on the right, the opposite of earth maps. Here's the reason for this anomaly. Skywatchers located in the northern hemisphere—in Europe, say—see the moon to the south in relation to themselves. When they study her, their backs are to the north, the reverse of where they'll be when these folks look at an earth map. Since their backs are to the north, the east is on their left and the west on their right. To skywatchers located in the southern hemisphere—in Patagonia, for instance—the moon's west would be properly on their left and her east on their right, since the south is behind them.


That's the reason for this seeming reversal of the two compass points, and it's essential to take this into account while keeping an eye on President Barbicane's investigations.


With the help of Beer and Mädler's Mappa Selenographica, the travelers could instantly identify any portion of the lunar disk framed in the fields of their spyglasses.


“What are we seeing right now?” Michel asked.


“The northerly part of the Sea of Clouds,” Barbicane replied. “We're too far away to determine its character. Are those plains composed of dry sand, as the earliest astronomers claimed? Are they only immense forests, in line with Mr. Warren De la Rue's thinking, which gives the moon a very dense but low-lying atmosphere? That's something we'll find out later. We won't draw any conclusions till we're qualified to.”


This Sea of Clouds is rather sketchily defined on the maps. Supposedly this wide plain is littered with chunks of lava spewed out of those volcanoes close to its right-hand side, Ptolemy, Purbach, and Arzachel. But the projectile was moving ahead, drawing noticeably nearer, and soon some peaks appeared, closing off the northerly end of this sea. To the front stood a luminous mountain in all its beauty, its summit hidden from sight behind an outburst of solar rays.


“That's … ?” Michel asked.


“Copernicus,” Barbicane replied.


“Let's give Copernicus a look.”


Located in latitude 9° north and longitude 20° east, this pinnacle rises to a height of 11,280 feet above the level of our satellite's surface. It's quite visible from the earth, and astronomers can study it thoroughly, especially during the phase that occurs between the last quarter and the new moon, because at that point shadows fall lengthwise from east to west, letting you calculate its elevation.


After Tycho, which is located in the southern hemisphere, Copernicus boasts the most prominent network of bright rays on the moon. Like a gigantic lighthouse, it towers in isolation over the part of the Sea of Clouds that's next to the Ocean of Storms, and it sheds its magnificent radiance on both oceans at the same time. Those long luminous trails were a matchless sight, so dazzling during the full moon, crossing over the boundary of mountain chains to the north and going as far as the Sea of Rain before fading out. It was one o'clock in the morning earth time, and like a hot air balloon carried off into space, the projectile looked down on this splendid mountain.


Barbicane could accurately identify its chief characteristics. Copernicus belongs to the category of circular mountains, the first order in the division of large basins. Like Kepler and Aristarchus, which overlook the Ocean of Storms, it has sometimes gleamed through the gray light like a blazing spark, causing it to be mistaken for a volcanic eruption. But it's only an extinct volcano like all the others on that side of the moon. It measured about fifty-five miles across, rampart to rampart. Their spyglasses revealed traces of stratification produced by consecutive outpourings, and the whole neighborhood seemed to be littered with volcanic waste, a fair amount still visible inside the crater itself.


“There are several kinds of basins on the surface of the moon,” Barbicane said, “and it's easy to see that Copernicus belongs to the variety notable for its bright rays. If we were closer, we could spot those cones that garnish its insides and that used to be volcanic vents. An unusual characteristic, which is consistent on the moon, is that the inner surfaces of these basins go significantly below ground level, unlike the structure seen in craters on the earth. As a result, the overall curve at the bottom of each basin is a miniature version of the moon's spherical shape.”


“And what's the reason for this distinctive characteristic?” Nicholl asked.


“Nobody knows,” Barbicane replied.


“What marvelously bright rays!” Michel kept saying. “A lovelier sight would be hard to imagine!”


“Then what would you say,” Barbicane responded, “if traveler's luck takes us to the southern hemisphere?”


“Hopefully I'll say it's lovelier still!” Michel Ardan remarked.


Just then the projectile looked straight down on this basin. The ramparts of Copernicus formed a nearly perfect circle and its ultra steep walls stood out clearly. You could even detect a second ring of rock inside. All around it stretched a grayish, wild-looking plain whose surface features were highlighted in yellow. On the basin's floor, like jewels in a case, two or three volcanic cones sparkled for a second as if they were enormous dazzling gemstones. To the north the walls receded, forming a valley that very likely gave access to the crater's interior.


While passing over the surrounding plains, Barbicane could take note of a good many less-important mountains, among others a small circular one named Gay-Lussac that measured some fourteen miles across. To the south the plain looked extremely flat, not a single bulge, not a single projection above ground. To the north as far as the Ocean of Storms, however, it resembled a liquid surface agitated by a hurricane, and its peaks and swellings looked like a sequence of waves suddenly taking form. Across this whole expanse, luminous trails ran in from every direction, converging on the summit of Copernicus. Some were over eighteen miles wide, their lengths incalculable.


Our travelers discussed the origin of these strange rays, no more able to determine their nature than moonwatchers on the earth.


“But why,” Nicholl said, “couldn't these rays simply be spurs of mountains that reflect sunlight more intensely?”


“Not possible,” Barbicane replied. “If that were the case, these ridges would cast shadows under certain lunar conditions. Now then, they don't do any such thing.”


In essence these rays are visible only when the sun is directly opposite the moon, and they vanish as soon as the sunlight shines at an angle.


“But what have they come up with to explain those light trails?” Michel asked. “Because I refuse to believe scientists are ever at a loss for an explanation!”


“It's true,” Barbicane replied, “that Herschel made his views known, but he didn't dare offer them as conclusive.”


“Never mind. What were his views?”


“He thought those rays must have been streams of hardened lava that glittered under normal sunlight. Maybe so, but it's far from a certainty. If we pass nearer to Tycho, however, we'll be in a better position to identify what's causing those bright rays.”


“My friends,” Michel said, “do you know what that plain looks like from this far up?”


“No,” Nicholl replied.


“Well, since all those bits of lava are as skinny as spindles, it looks like an immense game of pick up sticks tossed around helter-skelter. All that's missing is a hook for pulling them out one by one.”


“Can't you ever be serious!” Barbicane said.


“Seriously then,” Michel remarked in a serene voice, “let's say bones instead of sticks. This way the plain could simply be a vast cemetery covered with the mortal remains of a thousand deceased generations. Do you like this highfalutin comparison better?”


“One's as bad as the other,” Barbicane remarked.


“Holy smoke, you're hard to please!” Michel replied.


“My good friend,” continued the practical Barbicane, “it makes no difference what it looks like, when we don't know what it is.”


“Excellent answer!” Michel exclaimed. “That'll teach me to argue with an expert.”


Meanwhile the projectile was moving ahead, going around the lunar disk at a speed that was nearly uniform. As you can readily imagine, our travelers didn't dream of resting, not for a second. Every minute brought a change in the scenery speeding by under their eyes. Near 1:30 in the morning, they glimpsed the upper reaches of another mountain. Checking his map, Barbicane identified it as Eratosthenes.


It was a circular mountain over 14,700 feet high, one of those basins so plentiful on the earth's satellite. Pertinent to this, Barbicane told his friends about Kepler's odd views on the formation of these basins. According to that famous mathematician, these crater-shaped cavities had been dug by human hands.


“For what purpose?” Nicholl asked.


“For a perfectly understandable purpose,” Barbicane replied. “The moonpeople would have undertaken these immense labors and dug these enormous holes in order to take refuge in them—to stay protected from the sun's rays, which beat down on them for two weeks at a time.”


“Those moonpeople were no fools!” Michel said.


“An odd notion,” Nicholl replied. “But it's likely that Kepler didn't know the real dimensions of these basins, because digging them would have been a job for giants, hardly feasible for moonpeople!”


“Why not?” Michel said. “On the surface of the moon, isn't gravity only a sixth of what it is on the earth?”


“But what if moonpeople are only a sixth as big?” Nicholl remarked.


“And what if there aren't any moonpeople?” Barbicane added. Which shut down the discussion.


Soon Eratosthenes vanished below the horizon without the projectile's getting close enough for them to carefully scrutinize it. This peak separated the Apennines from the Carpathians.






Among the moon's pinnacles you can make out several mountain chains distributed chiefly over her northern hemisphere. However some also reside in certain parts of her southern hemisphere.


Here's a table of these different chains listed from south to north, along with their latitudes and the elevations of their loftiest peaks:


Mountains: Latitudes: Elevations:


Dörfel 84° south 24,944 ft.


Leibnitz 65° " 24,934 "


Rook 20° to 30° " 5,249 "


Altai 17° to 28° " 13,278 "


Cordillera 10° to 20° " 12,789 "


Pyrenees 8° to 18° " 11,913 "


Ural 5° to 13° " 2,749 "


D'Alembert 4° to 10° " 19,183 "


Haemus 8° to 21° north 6,631 "


Carpathian 15° to 19° " 6,362 "


Apennine 14° to 27° " 18,048 "


Taurus 21° to 28° " 9,009 "


Ripheus 25° to 33° " 13,684 "


Hercynian 17° to 33° " 3,839 "


Caucasus 32° to 41° " 18,264 "


Alps 42° to 49° " 11,867 "


The most prominent of these different chains are the Apennines, 375 miles in length—which is less, however, than the major mountain systems on the earth. The Apennines skirt the east coast of the Sea of Rain and continue to the north as the Carpathians, whose geological profile measures about 250 miles.


The travelers could glimpse only the upper part of these Apennines, which are laid out between longitude 10° west and longitude 16° east; but the Carpathian chain stretched under their eyes from longitude 18° to 30° east, and they could appreciate its characteristics.


One theory struck them as thoroughly justified. Noticing that here and there this Carpathian chain took on a circular shape and was overlooked by peaks, they concluded this range used to feature prominent basins. These circular mountains must have partially broken up during the huge eruption that created the Sea of Rain. In appearance these Carpathians were what the Purbach, Arzachel, and Ptolemy basins might have been, assuming some cataclysm had knocked down their left-hand ramparts and transformed them into a continuous chain. They boasted an average elevation of 10,500 feet, an elevation comparable to certain parts of the Pyrenees on the earth, such as the valley of Pineda. Their southerly slopes dropped abruptly down to the immense Sea of Rain.


Near two o'clock in the morning, Barbicane found they were level with the 20th lunar parallel and not far from a small mountain 5,115 feet high, which goes by the name Pythias. The projectile's distance from the moon didn't exceed 750 miles, which their spyglasses reduced to 7½.


The Mare Imbrium, or Sea of Rain, spread out under our travelers’ eyes like an immense valley whose features were still barely visible. Near it on the left stood Mt. Lambert, whose elevation has been put at 5,948 feet, and farther on by the edge of the Ocean of Storms, luminous Mt. Euler shines in latitude 23° north and longitude 29° east. This mountain rose just 5,955 feet above the lunar surface and was the subject of some interesting research by the astronomer Johann Schröter. Trying to identify how these lunar mountains had originated, this scientist wondered if each crater always ended up having the right amount of space to hold the ramparts forming it. Now then, this perfect fit turned out to be generally the case, so Schröter concluded that a single outpouring of volcanic waste was all it took to form these ramparts, because additional outpourings would have upset the balance. Only Mt. Euler belied this general rule—it must have required several consecutive outpourings when it was formed, since its cavity had twice the space needed to hold its surrounding wall.


These various theories were all very well for some earthbound skywatcher whose instrument functioned only in a limited way. But Barbicane wasn't willing to settle for them, and seeing that his projectile was drawing steadily nearer to the moon's disk, he hoped that if he couldn't reach her, at least he could discover the secrets of her formation.