CHAPTER 22








The Rescue






THE ACTUAL LOCALITY where the projectile had plunged under the waves was certain knowledge. The instruments for clutching and carrying it back to the surface of the ocean were still lacking. They had to be invented, then manufactured. This was a minor matter, no problem for American engineers. Once the grappling hooks were in place and steam power applied, they were sure to raise the projectile regardless of its weight, which in any case was lessened by the density of the liquid engulfing it.


But it wasn't enough to fish up the shell. In the travelers' best interests, it was essential to act promptly. Nobody questioned that they were still alive.


“Yes!” J. T. Maston repeated continually, his confidence winning everybody over. “They're skillful men, our friends, and they wouldn't handle this fall like simpletons. They're alive, definitely alive, but we've got to move fast if we're to find them in that state. Food and water don't worry me. They have enough for a good while. But air, air —that's what they'll soon run out of! So let's hurry, let's hurry!”


And hurry they did. They modified the Susquehanna for its new assignment. Its powerful engines were ready to work the hauling chains. That aluminum projectile weighed only 19,250 pounds—much less than the Atlantic Cable, which had been raised under similar circumstances. So the only difficult thing about fishing up this cylindroconical shell was that its walls were so smooth, they might be hard to grip.


Racing to San Francisco with this in mind, Murchison the engineer devised some enormous grappling hooks that worked automatically— they were designed so that they would never relax their hold once they'd managed to clutch the projectile in their powerful pincers. He also got some diving suits ready, which offered strong waterproof protection for undersea explorers scouting out the ocean floor. He likewise put some cleverly designed compressed-air chambers aboard the Susquehanna. Inset with portholes, these were actual rooms that could plummet far into the depths by letting water into various compartments. These diving chambers were already available in San Francisco, where they'd been used in building an underwater jetty. And this was a real stroke of luck because there wouldn't have been time to manufacture any.


But despite the excellence of these devices, despite the cleverness of the experts assigned to work with them, the success of this operation was anything but assured. The odds were iffy, since it was a matter of recovering that projectile from 20,000 feet down! Then, even supposing the shell were brought back to the surface, how would the travelers have borne up under that dreadful impact, if those 20,000 feet of water hadn't softened it sufficiently?


In short, they had to work faster. J. T. Maston drove his hired hands day and night. He was all set to put on a diving suit or test a compressed-air chamber himself, in order to scout out the predicament his courageous friends were in.


But despite all the diligence displayed in readying these various pieces of equipment, despite the considerable sums placed at the Gun Club's disposal by the Union government, five long days—five centuries—went by before preparations were complete. In the meantime public interest had surged to a fever pitch. Telegrams continually shot back and forth over wires and electric cables around the world. Rescuing Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan was an international affair. Every participant in the Gun Club's funding drive had a personal stake in the travelers' welfare.


Finally the hauling chains, the compressed-air chambers, and the automatic grappling hooks had been loaded aboard the Susquehanna. J. T. Maston, Murchison the engineer, and the Gun Club delegation were already occupying their cabins. They had only to set sail.


On December 21 at eight o'clock in the evening, the sloop of war got under way with a smooth sea, a breeze out of the northeast, and a fairly sharp chill in the air. The whole population of San Francisco crowded the wharves, excited but silent, saving their cheers for the ship's return.


Steam up to maximum pressure, the Susquehanna's propeller swiftly carried them out of the bay.


It's pointless to describe the shipboard conversations between officers, sailors, and passengers. Every man had only one thought. Every heart throbbed with the same emotion. While the vessel was racing to their rescue, what were Barbicane and his companions up to? What had happened to them? Were they in a position to attempt some daring move to win their freedom? Nobody could say. The truth is, anything they tried would have failed! Submerged nearly five miles down, that metal prison could defy its prisoners' best efforts.


On December 23 at eight o'clock in the morning, after a quick run, the Susquehanna arrived at the supposed site of the calamity. They needed to wait till noon to get their exact bearings. They still hadn't discovered the buoy with the sounding line lashed to it.


At noon, assisted by the officers who double-checked his readings, Captain Blomsberry took his sights in the presence of the Gun Club delegation. It was an anxious moment for them. According to their position fix, the Susquehanna lay a few minutes west of the actual locality where the projectile had vanished under the waves.


So the sloop of war changed course in order to reach this exact spot.


At 12:47 in the afternoon they turned up the buoy. It was in perfect condition and must have drifted very little.


“Finally!” J. T. Maston exclaimed.


“Shall we get started?” Captain Blomsberry asked.


“Without wasting another second,” J. T. Maston replied.


They took every precaution to keep the sloop of war absolutely still.


First of all, before trying to grab hold of the projectile, Murchison the engineer wanted to scout out its location on the ocean floor. The underwater chamber assigned to this search was supplied with air. Working this equipment had its dangers, because at 20,000 feet below the surface of the waves, it's under considerable pressure and vulnerable to rupturing, with dreadful consequences.


Not worrying about these dangers, J. T. Maston, cousin Blomsberry, and Murchison the engineer took their places in the compressed-air room. Stationed on the bridge, the skipper directed the operation, ready to stop lowering or to haul in the chains at the tiniest signal. The propeller had been thrown in gear, and with the engines' full power put on the winch, they could quickly bring the diving chamber back on board.


The descent began at 1:25 in the afternoon; once its ballast tanks were full of water, the chamber sank below the surface of the ocean and vanished from view.


The officers and sailors on board now divided their anxieties between the projectile's inmates and those in the underwater chamber. As for the latter, they hadn't a thought for themselves, stayed glued to the panes of their portholes, and carefully scanned the mass of liquid they were going through.


It was a swift descent. J. T. Maston and his companions had reached the floor of the Pacific by 2:17. But all they saw was a barren wasteland no longer livened up by marine flora or fauna. In the light from their lamps, which were equipped with powerful reflectors, they could inspect the murky underwater strata over a pretty extensive radius, but the projectile was nowhere to be seen.


These bold divers were consumed with indescribable impatience. Their chamber was in electrical contact with the sloop of war, so they sent it a prearranged signal, and the Susquehanna moved their underwater room here and there over a onemile area, dangling it a few yards above the seafloor.


That's how they explored this whole underwater plain, fooled every second by heartbreaking optical illusions. Here a rock, there a bulge on the bottom, looked to them like the dearly desired projectile; then they quickly realized their mistake and were in despair.


“But where are they? Where are they?” J. T. Maston demanded.


And the poor fellow called for Nicholl, Barbicane, and Michel Ardan at the top of his lungs, as if his unlucky friends could have heard him or answered him back through that impregnable medium!


They continued to search under these conditions till the foul air in the chamber forced the divers to ascend again.


The winch started hauling them in around six o'clock in the evening and didn't finish till past midnight.


“We'll try again tomorrow,” J. T. Maston said, setting foot on the warship's deck.


“Right,” Captain Blomsberry replied.


“And at another location.”


“Right.”


J. T. Maston still felt confident of success, but his companions—no longer as tipsy with excitement as they'd been early on—had already grasped the full difficulty of this undertaking. What seemed easy in San Francisco looked almost unattainable here in midocean. The odds that they would succeed were shrinking tremendously, and they could only hope some stroke of luck would lead them to the projectile.


Despite their exhaustion from the day before, they resumed operations the next morning, December 24. The sloop of war shifted a few minutes to the west, and after the diving chamber was refilled with air, it carried the same explorers back into the ocean depths.


They spent the whole day in fruitless searching. The seabed was empty. Their workday on the 25th didn't produce any results either. Nor did the 26th.


It was agonizing. Think of those unfortunate men closed up in that shell for the past twenty-six days! Maybe at this point they were feeling the first symptoms of asphyxiation—if they'd survived their dangerous fall in the first place. Their air was running out, and along with it, no doubt, their courage and strength of mind.


“Air possibly,” J. T. Maston invariably replied. “But strength of mind never!”


On the 28th, after two more days of searching, they abandoned all hope. That projectile was a flyspeck in the vastness of the sea! They had to give up their quest.


But J. T. Maston wouldn't hear of heading back. He wasn't willing to leave the area without at least finding the grave of his friends. Yet Captain Blomsberry couldn't stay out any longer, and over the good secretary's objections, he had no choice but to get his vessel under way.


On December 29 at nine o'clock in the morning, the Susquehanna aimed its prow to the northeast and plied a course back toward San Francisco Bay.


It was ten o'clock in the morning. The sloop of war was going off under half steam, as if grieving the site of the catastrophe, when there came a sudden shout from the sailor on watch in the crosstrees of the topgallant sail:


“Buoy abreast of us to leeward!”


The officers peered in the direction indicated. Using their spyglasses, they found that the object sighted did indeed look like one of those buoys used for marking entrances to bays or rivers. But oddly enough, a flag was fluttering in the wind on top of its cone, which emerged five or six feet above water. This buoy gleamed in the sunlight as if its walls were made of silver plate.


Captain Blomsberry, J. T. Maston, and the Gun Club delegation climbed onto the bridge and examined this object, which was wandering over the waves at random.


They all looked with feverish anxiety but without saying a word. Nobody dared voice the thought that had occurred to every one of them.


Closing in, the sloop of war lay less than a quarter of a mile from the object.


The whole crew shook with excitement.


That flag was the American flag!


Just then an authentic bellow of pain rang out. It came from our gallant J. T. Maston, who had just fallen in a heap. Forgetting in the first place that an iron hook had replaced his right arm, and in the second that only a guttapercha cap covered his braincase, he'd just given his forehead a fearsome smack.






They rushed over to him. They lifted him up. They revived him. And what were his first words?


“Oh, we're donkeys three times over, morons four times over, and nincompoops five!”


“What's wrong?” exclaimed everybody around him.


“Wrong?”


“Come on, out with it!”


“You numbskulls,” howled the dreaded secretary, “the shell weighs only 19,250 pounds!”


“So?”


“Yet it displaces twenty-eight tons, the same as 56,000 pounds, and consequently it will float! ”


Oh, how the good fellow underlined this verb “float!” And it was the truth! Every one of these experts—yes, every one of them—had forgotten this fundamental law: namely, the projectile had a low specific gravity, so after its fall had dragged it far into the ocean depths, it naturally had to come back to the surface! And now it was floating serenely, at the mercy of the waves …


After J. T. Maston and his friends had hurried into them, the longboats were put to sea. Excitement was running high. All hearts were pounding as the dinghies moved toward the projectile. What did it hold? The living or the dead? The living surely—unless death had claimed Barbicane and his two friends after they'd displayed that flag!


Utter silence reigned on the longboats. Every heart had a seizure. Eyes couldn't see straight. One of the projectile's portholes was open. A few shards were still in the frame, showing that the glass had been knocked out. This porthole was currently located at a height of five feet above the waves.


The longboat carrying J. T. Maston pulled alongside. J. T. Maston lunged at the shattered window …


Just then a bright, cheerful voice rang out; it was Michel Ardan's voice, exclaiming in triumphant tones:


“Double blank, Barbicane, double blank!”


Barbicane, Michel Ardan, and Nicholl were playing a game of dominoes.


`