CHAPTER 15








Hyperbola or Parabola






MAYBE IT SURPRISES YOU that while Barbicane and his companions were shooting through the infinite ether, they were so unconcerned about the future in store for them inside their metal prison. Instead of wondering where they were heading, they spent their time conducting experiments, as if they were serenely ensconced in their workrooms.


We could reply that these stouthearted men were above such concerns, that they didn't bother with trivia, that they had other things to do besides worrying about their future lot in life.


The truth is, they weren't in control of their projectile, they couldn't check its speed or change its direction. A seaman can adjust his vessel's heading at will; a balloonist can make his airship go up and down. Our travelers, by contrast, were powerless over their vehicle. Every possible maneuver was prohibited. Ergo this inclination to let things be, or as sailors say, “ride it out.”


Where were they hovering just then, at eight o'clock in the morning on that earth day reckoned as December 6? Very definitely in the vicinity of the moon, and so close even that she looked like a huge black shield covering the firmament. As for the distance separating them, it was impossible to estimate. Kept aloft by some bewildering force, the projectile had skimmed our satellite's north pole, barely thirty miles up. But during their two hours inside this conical shadow, had their distance increased or decreased? There weren't any landmarks to help them gauge the projectile's direction and speed. Maybe it was hurrying away from the lunar disk and would soon leave this unbroken shadow. On the other hand, maybe it was drawing appreciably closer to the moon and was about to bump into some lofty peak on her invisible side—which would bring this journey to a close, no doubt at our travelers’ expense.


This topic came up for discussion; Michel Ardan, always chock full of explanations, offered his view that since the shell was caught in the moon's gravity, it would end up falling to her surface as a meteor falls to the earth.


“First of all, my dear comrade,” Barbicane answered him, “not all meteors fall to the earth, just a small number. So even if we're transformed into a meteor, it doesn't follow that we're sure to reach the surface of the moon.”


“But,” Michel responded, “what if we get close enough…”


“A fallacy,” Barbicane replied. “Haven't you seen thousands of shooting stars streak through the sky at various times?”


“Right.”


“Well, those stars—or rather those particles—only shine after they've heated up from flying through layers of air. Now then, if they enter the earth's atmosphere, they come within forty miles of the ground yet rarely fall on it. The same goes for our projectile. It could get very close to the moon yet not fall on her.”


“In that case,” Michel insisted, “I would be pretty curious to know how our vagabond vehicle will behave out in space.”


“I see only two theoretical possibilities,” Barbicane replied after thinking for a few seconds.


“Which are?”


“The projectile has a choice of two mathematical curves, and it will go along one or the other depending on the speed impelling it, which I can't estimate just now.”


“Yes,” Nicholl said, “it will go along a parabola or a hyperbola.”


“Right,” Barbicane replied. “At a certain speed it will take the parabola, and at a more considerable speed the hyperbola.”


“I love these big words,” Michel Ardan snapped. “Right off they're so self-explanatory. And what, if you please, is this parabola of yours?”


“My friend,” the captain replied, “a parabola is a curve of the second order that results from slicing a cone with a plane parallel to one of its sides.”


“Aha!” Michel put in smugly.


“It's almost the same,” Nicholl went on, “as the flight path taken by a bombshell fired from a mortar.”


“Wonderful. And how about your hyperbola?” Michel asked.


“A hyperbola, Michel, is a curve of the second order produced by the intersection of a conical surface and of a plane parallel to its axis, which forms two separate and distinct branches that extend indefinitely in opposite directions.”


“It can't be!” Michel Ardan cooed in the most solemn tone, as if he'd learned of some aweinspiring development. “But bear this in mind, Captain Nicholl. What I love about your definition of hyperbola—I almost said hyperbaloney—is that it's even less clear than the word you're claiming to define!”


Nicholl and Barbicane ignored Michel Ardan's jokes. They'd launched into a scientific discussion. Which curve would the projectile take: that's what had them fired up. One favored a hyperbola, the other a parabola. The reasons they gave each other were garnished with x's. They couched their arguments in language that made Michel jumpy. It was a heated discussion, and neither opponent would back down from his curve of choice.


This scientific conflict wore on, and Michel finally got impatient, saying:


“Oh drat! Will you fiends for trigonometry stop throwing parabolas and hyperbolas at each other? There's just a single interesting thing in this whole business, and I want to hear about it. We'll go along one or the other of your curves. Fine. But where will they lead us?”


“Nowhere,” Nicholl replied.


“Excuse me? Nowhere?”


“Obviously,” Barbicane said. “They're open curves that continue indefinitely.”


“Oh, you scientists, you're so dear to my heart!” Michel exclaimed. “Come on! Out in space what difference does it make if it's a parabola or hyperbola, since they'll both carry us off into infinity!” Barbicane and Nicholl couldn't help smiling. They'd just been indulging in “art for art's sake.” Never had a more needless question been raised at a less timely moment. Here was the grim truth: whether their projectile was carried off hyperbolically or parabolically, they were never again to meet up with the earth or its moon.


Now then, what would happen to these bold travelers in the not-too-distant future? If they didn't die from hunger or thirst, it's because by the time their gas ran out in a few days, they would be dead from lack of air, if the cold didn't kill them first.


Yet as crucial as it was to conserve this gas, the extremely low temperature of their surroundings required them to consume a certain amount. In a pinch they could do without its light, but not its heat. Luckily the warmth generated by the Reiset and Regnault device raised the projectile's interior temperature a little, and they managed to keep it at a bearable level without burning too much gas.


But it had gotten very difficult to look out the portholes. The moisture inside the shell was condensing on the windows and immediately freezing. They had to scrape ice off the panes time and again. However this allowed them to verify some phenomena of the greatest interest.


Actually, if the moon's invisible half were supplied with an atmosphere, shouldn't you see the light trails of meteors streaking over it? If the projectile itself had gone through those shifting layers of air, wouldn't you detect some noises transmitted by echoes from the moon—the rumbling of a storm, for instance, or the hubbub of an avalanche, or the explosions of an erupting volcano? And if some fire-breathing mountain threw in a few lightning bolts, wouldn't you notice their intense flashing? Carefully validated, such data could significantly clarify that murky issue of the moon's composition. Accordingly Barbicane and Nicholl were stationed at their porthole like trueblue astronomers, studying her with scrupulous patience.


But so far her disk remained dark and silent. She wasn't answering the assorted questions posed by these eager brains.


Which provoked this remark by Michel, an apt one on the face of it: “If we ever make this trip again, we'll be better off picking a time when the moon's new.”


“Actually,” Nicholl replied, “that would be a more promising circumstance. Since the sun's rays will wash out the moon, I admit she won't be visible during the flight, but as compensation we'll see the earth when it's full. What's more, if we're forced to circle the moon—which is happening right now—at least we'll have the benefit of seeing her invisible half magnificently lit up!”


“Well put, Nicholl,” Michel Ardan remarked. “Barbicane, what think you?”


“I think this,” replied the Gun Club's solemn president. “If we ever make this trip again, we'll start out at the same time and under the same conditions. Suppose we'd reached our destination, wouldn't it have been better to find these landmasses in broad daylight rather than plunged in the blackest of nights? Wouldn't we have taken up residence under better circumstances to begin with? Yes, obviously. As for this invisible side, we could have inspected it during our scouting expeditions over the lunar globe. So that period of the full moon was the right choice. But it called for reaching our destination, and to do so, not going off course.”


“I can't argue with that,” Michel Ardan said. “Nevertheless we've missed a fine opportunity for studying the other side of the moon. Who knows if the residents of other planets aren't farther along than our earth scientists when it comes to their satellites.”


To Michel Ardan's comment we could easily reply as follows: yes, other satellites are easier to study simply because they're closer to their planets. The residents of Saturn, Jupiter, and Uranus— assuming there are any—would have less trouble setting up contact with their moons. Jupiter's four satellites revolve at distances of 270,650 miles, 430,500 miles, 686,750 miles, and 1,200,325 miles. But these distances are computed from the planet's center, and after subtracting the length of the radius (which is between 42,500 and 45,000 miles), you'll find that the first satellite isn't as far from Jupiter's surface as the moon is from the earth's. Out of Saturn's eight moons, four are likewise closer: Dione is 211,500 miles away, Tethys 157,415, Enceladus 120,478, and finally Mimas with an average distance of just 86,250. Out of Uranus's eight satellites, Ariel, the first, is only 128,800 miles away from its planet.


On the surface of these three heavenly bodies, therefore, an experiment similar to President Barbicane's presented fewer difficulties. So if their residents have made such an attempt, maybe they've identified the composition of that half of their satellite's disk


that's perpetually hidden from their eyes. 7 But if they've never left their planet, they're no farther along than astronomers on the earth.


In the darkness, meanwhile, the shell was going along that incalculable flight path no landmark helped them work out. Had its heading shifted, whether from the tug of the moon's gravity or the influence of some alien entity? Barbicane couldn't tell. But a change had taken place in the vehicle's relative position, and Barbicane verified the fact around four o'clock in the morning.


The change amounted to this: the projectile's base had swung toward the surface of the moon, its axis point staying at a right angle to her. Her force of attraction—in other words, her specific gravity— had brought about this shift. The heaviest part of the shell was facing her invisible disk, exactly as if it was falling toward her.


Was it falling, then? Were the travelers finally going to reach their deeply desired destination? Not so. And the sight of a landmark (which in itself was rather bewildering) soon showed Barbicane that his projectile wasn't closing in on the moon, that it had headed off along a nearly concentric curve.


This landmark was a bright gleam Nicholl suddenly spotted on the edge of that horizon formed by the black disk. This speck of light couldn't be confused with a star. It was a reddish glow that increased little by little, irrefutable proof the projectile was moving toward it and not falling to the surface of the moon in the normal way.


“A volcano! It's an active volcano!” Nicholl exclaimed. “An outpouring of our satellite's inner fires! So this world still isn't completely dead.”


“Yes, it's an eruption!” Barbicane replied, carefully studying the phenomenon through his night glasses. “Honestly, what else could it be except a volcano?”


“But in that case,” Michel Ardan said, “there has to be air for it to keep burning. So an atmosphere is covering that part of the moon.”


“Maybe,” Barbicane replied, “but not necessarily. By decomposing certain ingredients, a volcano can supply its own air and thus shoot up flames in a vacuum. That blaze strikes me as definitely having the intensity and brilliance caused by objects burning in unadulterated oxygen. So we mustn't be too hasty about proclaiming the existence of a lunar atmosphere.”


This fire-breathing mountain had to have been located around latitude 45° south on the invisible part of the lunar disk. But much to Barbicane's displeasure, the curve taken by the projectile led it far away from the scene of the eruption. Therefore he couldn't determine its nature more specifically. Half an hour after they'd spotted it, this brilliant speck of light vanished below the dark horizon. But their sighting of this phenomenon was a notable event in lunar research. It proved that heat still hadn't completely vanished from the bowels of this sphere, and where there's heat, who can say that the vegetable kingdom—even the animal kingdom—isn't still withstanding the forces of destruction? Conclusively identified by experts on the earth, the presence of this erupting volcano would surely lead to many affirmative theories on that important issue of whether life could exist on the moon.


Barbicane let his thoughts run away with him. He was lost in silent reverie, all aquiver with the fateful mysteries of the lunar world. He was trying to piece together the evidence gathered to this point, when a new incident brought him sharply back to reality.


This incident was more than a cosmic phenomenon, it was an impending danger whose consequences could be disastrous.


Out in the ether, in that deep darkness, an enormous mass had suddenly appeared. It looked like a moon, but a white-hot moon whose brilliance was even more unbearable by contrast with the stark blackness of space. Circular in shape, this mass gave off so much light that it filled up the projectile. Bathed in harsh white rays, the faces of Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan took on a pale, ghastly, bluish gray appearance, which physicists can create with that artificial light produced by mixing salt in alcohol.


“Damnation, we look hideous!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “What is that illomened moon?”


“A meteor,” Barbicane replied.


“A meteor burning in a vacuum?”


“Yes.”


That ball of fire was indeed a meteor. Barbicane wasn't mistaken. Seen from the earth, shooting stars out in the cosmos generally give off a bit less light than the moon, but here in this dark ether, they dazzle the eyes. These rambling space rocks carry their own source of incandescence. They don't need oxygen around them in order to burn. And while it's true that some meteors cross through the atmospheric layers five to eight miles above the earth, others, by contrast, go along flight paths at a distance where the atmosphere can't reach. Examples of the latter include the meteor on October 27, 1844, which appeared at an altitude of 320 miles up, and another on August 18, 1841, which vanished at a distance of 455 miles up. Some of these shooting stars are around 1¾ to 2½ miles wide and reach speeds greater than 45 miles per second, moving in a


direction opposite to the earth's.,8 More than 250 miles away from them, this spinning ball was suddenly visible in the darkness, so Barbicane estimated that it had to measure over 6,500 feet across. It came on at a speed of about 1¼ miles per second, hence 75 miles per minute. It was cutting across the projectile's path and was bound to reach them in a few minutes. As it closed in, it grew at a tremendous rate.


Imagine, if you can, the predicament our travelers were in! It's impossible to describe. Despite their courage, their composure, their jauntiness in the face of danger, they stood silent and motionless, muscles clenched, in the grip of wild terror. Their projectile—whose course they couldn't change—was racing straight at that flaming mass, which was brighter than the gaping maw of a reverberatory furnace. They seemed to be rushing into a fiery chasm.


Barbicane clutched the hands of his two companions, and all three looked through half-closed eyelids at that white-hot asteroid. If their thought processes hadn't been eradicated, if their brains still functioned in this frightful situation, they must have figured they were done for!


Two minutes after the meteor's abrupt appearance—two centuries of agony—the projectile seemed on the verge of colliding with it, when that ball of fire burst like a bombshell, but without making the slightest noise out in that vacuum where sounds can't occur, since they're simply layers of vibrating air.


Nicholl gave a shout. He and his companions rushed to the glass portholes. What a sight! What pen could ever describe it, what palette had colors rich enough to duplicate such magnificence?


It was like a crater gaping wide, like a huge fire scattering sparks. Thousands of glowing fragments lit up the void, streaking it with their embers. Every size, every color, was in the mix. There were rays tinted yellow, ivory, red, green, gray, a royal crown of multicolored fireworks. As for that enormous, alarming ball of fire, nothing was left of it except pieces flying in all directions, now changed to asteroids in their turn, some like flaming swords, others surrounded by whitish clouds, a number leaving brilliant trails of cosmic dust in their wake.


These luminous lumps were crisscrossing, colliding, scattering into smaller fragments, a few even striking the projectile. One piece hit the left window so forcefully, it actually cracked the glass. They seemed to be cruising through a hailstorm of shrapnel, and the tiniest shard could wipe them out in a second. The ether was steeped in light that was expanding with incomparable intensity, these asteroids spreading it in all directions. At one point it was so bright, Michel dragged Barbicane and Nicholl over to his window, exclaiming: “The invisible moon—it's finally visible!”


During an outpouring of light that lasted a couple seconds, all three glimpsed the moon's secret side, which human eyes were seeing for the first time.


What could they make out from that incalculable distance? A few slender bands over her disk, actual clouds forming in an environment with very little air, an environment where whole mountains emerged as well as less important surface features, where basins and yawning craters were laid out in erratic patterns, just like on the moon's visible side. Then there were immense open spaces, no longer barren plains but actual seas, oceans distributed far and wide, reflecting in their liquid mirrors all the dazzling magic of the bonfires in space. Finally, on the surface of those landmasses, there were huge dark forms, like immense forests swiftly seen beneath flashes of lightning …


Was it a mirage, a hallucination, an optical illusion? Could they give scientific credence to a discovery so hastily made? Did they dare decide that question of life on the moon after such a faint view of her invisible disk?


Meanwhile those flashes out in space gradually grew weaker; their periodic brilliance died away; the asteroids fled down different flight paths and faded into the distance. The ether finally resumed its usual murkiness; momentarily outshone, the stars twinkled in the firmament, and the moon's disk, barely glimpsed, vanished once more into the impregnable night.