CHAPTER 3








In Which They Take Up Residence






AFTER THIS UNUSUAL but unquestionably accurate explanation, the three friends fell sound asleep again. Where could they have found a calmer spot, a more peaceful setting in which to bed down? On the earth both urban homes and rustic cottages feel every tremor running through the planet's crust. Out at sea a ship tossing on the waves goes by fits and starts. In the sky a hot air balloon shifts continually between wind currents of different densities. Only this projectile, cruising in a perfect void, surrounded by perfect silence, could offer its guests the ideal retreat.


Accordingly our three venturesome travelers maybe would have slept on indefinitely, if an unexpected sound hadn't woken them up near seven o'clock in the morning on December 2, eight hours after their departure.


It was the unmistakable sound of barking.


“The dogs! It's the dogs!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, getting up immediately.


“They're hungry,” Nicholl said.


“By God,” Michel replied, “we forgot about them!”


“Where are they?” Barbicane asked.


They looked around and found one of the animals cowering under the couch. Unnerved and immobilized by that initial jolt, it had stayed in its hideout till the point where it had gotten hungry enough to announce the fact.


It was sweet Diana, still pretty dispirited, who emerged from her cubbyhole after some persuasion. Michel Ardan had to coax her with his most honeyed words.


“Here, Diana!” he said. “Here, girl! You're about to go down in the history of hounds! You're a pooch that pagans would have made a house pet of the god Anubis, Christians a mascot for St. Roch! You deserve to be cast in bronze by the lord of the underworld, like that magic mutt Jupiter gave lovely Europa in exchange for a kiss! You'll be more famous than the sleuthhound of Montargis or the heroic rescuers of the St. Bernard passes! You're shooting into interplanetary space and maybe you'll be the Eve of moondogs! Out here you're going to live up to that saying of Professor Toussenel's: ‘In the beginning God created man, then saw how imperfect he was and created dog.’ Here, Diana, here!”


Flattered or not, Diana came out little by little, whimpering plaintively.


“Good,” Barbicane put in. “I can see Eve all right, but where's Adam?”


“Adam?” Michel responded. “Adam can't be far off! He's around somewhere, let's give him a call! Satellite! Come here, Satellite!”


But Satellite didn't appear. Diana kept on whimpering. They verified, however, that she hadn't been hurt in any way, and a tasty serving of dog chow put a stop to her complaints.


As for Satellite, he seemed to have vanished completely. They had to search a good while before finding him in one of the projectile's upper compartments, where, in some bewildering manner, the recoil had forcefully hurled him. The poor animal was badly injured and in pitiful condition.


“Holy blazes!” Michel said. “So much for acclimating a race of canines!”


They carefully lowered the unfortunate dog. He'd cracked his skull against the ceiling and didn't seem likely to recover from such a blow. All the same they stretched him out comfortably on a cushion, where he gave a moan.


“We'll take care of you,” Michel said. “We're responsible for your existence. I would rather lose a whole arm than one paw of my poor Satellite!”


And with that he offered a few sips of water to the injured animal, who lapped them up eagerly.


After tending to him, the travelers studied the earth and moon intently. The earth was now represented only by a disk of reflected light ending in a crescent that was narrower than on the previous evening; but its size was still enormous compared to that of the moon, which was nearer and nearer to becoming a perfect circle.


“Actually,” Michel Ardan said, “it's a shame we didn't take off just as the earth was full, in other words, when our globe was in opposition to the sun.”


“Why is that?” Nicholl asked.


“Because we could have viewed our continents and oceans from a new perspective, the former shining in the direct sunlight, the latter looking darker, just as they're shown on some world maps. I wish I could have seen those poles of rotation that mankind still hasn't clapped eyes on!”


“No doubt,” Barbicane replied, “but if the earth had been full, the moon would have been new, in other words, invisible in the midst of the sun's rays. Now then, it's better for us to see our scheduled destination rather than our starting point.”


“You're right, Barbicane,” Captain Nicholl replied. “And besides, once we've reached the moon, we'll have some leisure time during those long lunar nights and we can examine that globe crowded with folks like us.”


“Folks like us!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Why, they're no more like us now than moonpeople are! We live in a new world populated only by ourselves—this projectile! I'm like Barbicane and Barbicane's like Nicholl. Over and beyond ourselves, humanity is no more, and we're the only citizens of this miniature cosmos till the time we turn into regular moonpeople.”


“In about eighty-eight hours,” the captain remarked.


“What do you mean?” Michel Ardan asked.


“That it's 8:30 in the morning,” Nicholl answered.


“All right,” Michel shot back, “then I can't see even the shadow of a reason for not eating breakfast this second.”


In essence the citizenry of this new heavenly body had to eat to live, and their bellies had to abide by the all-powerful laws of hunger. Being the only Frenchman on the premises, Michel Ardan elected himself chief cook, a high office for which he ran uncontested. The gas jet furnished the few degrees of heat needed for his culinary artistry, and the supply chest provided the ingredients for this first-time feast.


Breakfast started with three cups of excellent beef broth, brewed by dissolving in hot water some of those invaluable Liebig cubes that are made with the best cuts from the cattle of the Pampas. After the soup came some slices of steak, shaped into patties by a hydraulic press, as tender and juicy as if they hailed from the kitchen of the Café Anglais. Michel, a man with an imagination, even claimed they were “pink inside.”


Canned vegetables (“fresher tasting than nature's,” added the tolerant Michel) followed the meat course, and after that came cups of tea with bread and butter in the American style. This drink, which they found superb, was an herbal tea made with the choicest leaves, and the Tsar of Russia had donated a couple cases for the travelers’ consumption.


Finally, to top off this meal, Ardan dug up a splendid bottle of Nuits-Saint-Georges, which “just happened” to be in the supply chest. The three friends drank to the partnership of the earth and its satellite.


And as if it hadn't done enough by fermenting this full-bodied wine on the slopes of Burgundy, the sun decided to join the party. Just then the projectile had emerged from the conical shadow cast by our planet, and thanks to the angle that the moon's orbit makes with the earth's, the solar rays struck the base of the shell head-on.


“The sun!” Michel Ardan exclaimed.


“Certainly,” Barbicane replied. “I've been expecting it.”


“But,” Michel said, “what about this conical shadow the earth casts in space—does it reach beyond the moon?”


“A good distance beyond, if you don't count the atmosphere's refraction,” Barbicane said. “But when the moon is covered by this shadow, it's because the centers of three heavenly bodies, the sun, earth, and moon, are lying in a straight line. Then the nodes coincide with the phases of the full moon and we get an eclipse. If we'd departed just as there was a lunar eclipse, our whole flight would have taken place in the dark, which would have been a nuisance.”


“Why?”


“Because, though we're cruising in space, our projectile is bathing in the sun's rays, getting both light and heat. This saves on gas, an invaluable savings in every respect.”


In fact, under these rays whose temperature and intensity no atmosphere can tame, the projectile got warmer and brighter as if winter had suddenly changed into summer. The moon above and the sun below were flooding it with light.


“It's pleasant in here,” Nicholl said.


“I think so too!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “If we spread a little vegetable soil over our aluminum planet, we could grow green peas in twenty-four hours. I've got only one fear, namely that the shell's walls might melt.”


“No need to worry, my good friend,” Barbicane replied. “Our projectile handled a much higher temperature as it flew through the atmospheric layers. To the eyes of those spectators in Florida, I wouldn't be surprised if it looked like a fiery meteor.”


“Then J. T. Maston must have figured we'd roasted to death.”


“What does surprise me,” Barbicane responded, “is that we didn't. It was a danger we hadn't anticipated.”


“I worried about it,” Nicholl merely replied.


“And you didn't say a thing, O noblest of captains!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, shaking his companion's hand.


Meanwhile Barbicane proceeded to take up residence inside the projectile as if he were destined to live there in perpetuity. You'll recall that this airborne coach had a base with a surface area of fifty-four square feet. Twelve feet high at the apex of its ceiling, cleverly laid out inside, instruments and traveling gear kept out of the way in their specific places, it gave its three guests reasonable freedom of movement. The heavy window inset in part of the base could bear a considerable amount of weight with impunity. Accordingly Barbicane and his companions walked on its surface as if it were solid flooring —but the sun's rays, striking it head-on, illuminated the projectile's interior from underneath and created some unusual lighting effects.


They started by double-checking the condition of their water tank and supply chest. These containers hadn't suffered at all, thanks to the measures taken to deaden the impact at takeoff. They held ample provisions, enough to feed three travelers for a whole year. Barbicane wasn't taking any chances in case the projectile landed in a sector of the moon that was completely barren. As for the water and their fifty-gallon stock of brandy, they had enough for just two months. But according to the latest research by astronomers, the moon maintained a low, dense, heavy atmosphere—at least in her deep valleys—and there would be no shortage of brooks or springs. For the remainder of their flight, then, and for the first year of their residence in that lunar landscape, these venturesome explorers wouldn't suffer from hunger or thirst.


One issue remained: the air inside the projectile. Again there was no problem. The Reiset and Regnault device for producing oxygen had a two month supply of potassium chlorate. Inevitably it consumed a fair amount of gas, because it needed to keep the producing compound hotter than 750° Fahrenheit. But here, too, they were on firm footing. Besides, the device required minimal attention. It functioned automatically. At that high temperature the potassium chlorate turned into potassium chloride, releasing all the oxygen it contained. Now then, how much oxygen would eighteen pounds of potassium chlorate provide? The exact seven pounds that made up the daily oxygen requirement of each of the projectile's guests.


But it wasn't enough to replenish the spent oxygen: they also had to consume the carbon dioxide produced by exhaling. Now then, some twelve hours had gone by and the shell's air was full of this absolutely noxious gas, which ultimately results from the combustion of the blood's elements by the inhaled oxygen. Nicholl realized the air was in this state when he saw Diana panting laboriously. In essence, due to the same phenomenon that occurs inside the renowned “Dog's Cave” near Mt. Vesuvius, the carbon dioxide— being heavier than air—had collected close to the floor of the projectile. Poor Diana carried her head much lower than did her masters, so she was bound to suffer sooner from the presence of this gas … but Captain Nicholl was quick to remedy this state of affairs. On the projectile's floor he placed several containers of potassium hydroxide, which he shook for a while, and this substance consumed all the carbon dioxide with great eagerness, thus cleansing the air inside.


Next they started in on an inventory of the instruments. Their thermometers and barometers had made it safely, except for a minimum thermometer whose glass had shattered. They took an excellent aneroid barometer out of its padded case and hung it on one of the walls. Naturally it could sense and measure only the air pressure inside the projectile. However it also showed how much moisture the shell contained. Just then its needle was wavering between 29.9 and 30.1 inches. This promised “fair weather.”


Barbicane had also packed several compasses that were in one piece. You can appreciate that under the current circumstances their needles were going berserk, in other words, they weren't pointing in one continuous direction. At the shell's distance from the earth, in fact, the magnetic pole couldn't have exercised any noticeable control over the devices. But if they were transferred to the lunar disk, maybe these compasses could record some unusual phenomena. In any event it would be interesting to see if the earth's satellite was subject to magnetic influences just like the planet itself.


A hypsometer for measuring the elevations of lunar mountains, a sextant for taking the sun's altitude, a surveyor's theodolite for mapping terrain and plotting angles at a distance, spyglasses that were bound to come in handy as the projectile neared the moon— the travelers carefully inspected all these instruments and found them in good condition, despite the force of that initial jolt.


As for the utensils, picks, mattocks, and assorted tools that Nicholl had expressly selected, plus the shrubs and various sacks of grain that Michel Ardan banked on transplanting to those lunar lands, they occupied their proper places in the projectile's upper reaches. A sort of loft gaped up there, piled with things the extravagant Frenchman had crammed into it. What they were nobody knew, and the lighthearted fellow wasn't telling. Every so often he climbed the iron steps clamped to the wall, then crept into this hideaway that he alone was allowed to visit, his own private Capernaum. He tidied, he organized, he rummaged through various mysterious boxes, livening things up with an old French song crooned in a voice hopelessly out of tune.


Barbicane was interested to note that his rockets and other explosives hadn't suffered any damage. With their powerful charges these important items were meant to break the projectile's fall, once it had gone past the point of neutral attraction and the moon's gravity started pulling it down to the ground. Besides, the shell was due to fall only a sixth as fast as it would on the earth's surface, thanks to the difference in mass between these two heavenly bodies.


So their inspection ended on an overall note of satisfaction. Then everybody went back and peered into space through the side windows and the glass below.


Same sight as before. The whole dome of the heavens swarmed with stars and constellations of such wonderful clarity, an astronomer would have come unhinged. On one side was the sun, like the open maw of a blazing furnace, a brilliant disk without its earthly halo, standing out from the black background of the sky! On the other side, the moon threw back this radiance by reflecting it, seemingly motionless in the middle of the starry universe. Then, fairly prominent and still edged with a silvery border, a dark patch seemed to puncture the firmament: it was the earth. Here and there floated cloudy masses like huge flakes of interstellar snow, and from zenith to nadir stretched an immense ring made up of infinitesimal powdery stars—that Milky Way galaxy in which the sun ranks as a star of merely the fourth magnitude!


Our skywatchers couldn't take their eyes off this unique sight, which no description can hint at. What thoughts it brought to mind! What strange feelings it aroused in their souls! Barbicane wanted to keep a record of his journey while under the sway of these impressions, and hour after hour he took notes on all the events that distinguished this first stage of his undertaking. He wrote serenely in his large square script and matter-of-fact style.


In the meantime Nicholl the calculating machine was reviewing his flight formulas, manipulating figures with matchless skill. Michel Ardan chatted in turn with Barbicane who didn't answer him, with Nicholl who didn't hear him, with Diana who didn't grasp any of his theories, then finally with himself, asking and answering, coming and going, busy with a thousand details, sometimes bent over the glass below, sometimes perched high in the projectile, singing constantly all the while. In this miniature cosmos he stood for Gallic talkativeness and impulsiveness, and believe me, these attributes were adequately represented.


That day—or more accurately, that lapse of the twelve hours making up daytime on the earth—ended with a bounteous, nicely cooked supper. As yet no incident of any kind had occurred to shake the travelers’ confidence. Full of hope, already sure of success, they accordingly fell into a peaceful sleep, as the projectile made its way through the heavens at a speed that was steadily decreasing.