CHAPTER 16








The Southern Hemisphere






THE SHELL HAD JUST escaped a dreadful danger, a danger totally unforeseen. Who would have imagined these brushes with meteors? Such wandering space rocks could pose major hazards for the projectile. They were scattered over this ocean of ether like so many reefs, and our travelers—less fortunate than navigators at sea—had no way of avoiding them. But did these space explorers complain? Not since nature had given them that superb sight of a meteor explosion on a fearsome scale, not since they'd seen those cosmic fireworks even the Ruggieri Brothers couldn't have duplicated, not since those incomparable skyrockets had shed a couple seconds of light on the moon's invisible glory. That swift flash had shown them landmasses, seas, and forests. Did this mean an atmosphere had brought its bracing particles to the moon's unseen face? These were issues that still couldn't be settled, riddles eternally nagging at mankind's curiosity!










By then it was 3:30 in the afternoon. The shell headed along the curving line of its course around the moon. Due to that meteor, were they again on a new flight path? They feared so. However the projectile had to be sweeping in a steady curve determined by the laws of rational mechanics. Barbicane was inclined to think that this curve would be a parabola rather than a hyperbola. Assuming it was a parabola, however, pretty soon the shell would have to emerge from the conical shadow, which, here in space, fell away from the sun. In actuality this cone is quite narrow, since the moon's angular diameter is so small compared to the diameter of that golden orb. Now then, the projectile was still hovering in absolute darkness. Whatever their speed had been—and it couldn't have been negligible—the shell wasn't coming out into the sunlight. This was obvious enough, yet shouldn't things maybe have been otherwise, given that their flight path was supposed to be a strict parabola? It was a new problem pestering Barbicane's brain, caught up in a cycle of mysteries he honestly couldn't unravel.


Our travelers didn't dream of resting, not for a second. Each was on the alert for some unforeseen event that could shed new light on the layout of the heavens. Near five o'clock Michel Ardan distributed, under the guise of dinner, some cold cuts and slices of bread, which were swiftly consumed without any of them leaving their portholes, whose windowpanes continually iced over from vapor condensing.


Around 5:45 in the evening, Nicholl aimed his spyglass at the southerly edge of the moon—the direction in which the projectile was heading—and he sighted a few brilliant specks of light puncturing the dark shield of the sky. You would have sworn it was some jagged mountain range with a profile like a squiggle. It was shining pretty brightly. Which is how the moon's horizon line looks during one of her octants.


The cause was unmistakable. This time they weren't dealing with a simple meteor, because that glittering ridge didn't boast any color or motion. Nor was it an erupting volcano. Accordingly Barbicane gave his verdict without hesitation.


“It's the sun!” he exclaimed.


“What! The sun?” Nicholl and Michel Ardan responded.


“Yes, my friends, it's that shining orb in person, lighting up the tips of those mountains located on the moon's southerly edge. Obviously we're closing in on her south pole.”


“After having gone over her north pole,” Michel replied. “So we've done a full circle around our satellite!”


“Yes, my gallant Michel.”


“Then we haven't any more hyperbolas, parabolas, or open curves to worry about!”


“No, just a closed curve.”


“Meaning what?”


“An ellipse. Instead of getting lost in interplanetary space, most likely the projectile will sweep in an elliptical orbit around the moon.”


“Oh really?”


“And it'll become her satellite.”


“The moon's moon!” Michel Ardan exclaimed.


“Only I'll remind you, my good friend,” Barbicane remarked, “that despite this turn of events, we're still done for.”


“True, but at least we'll go out in warmth and comfort,” replied the carefree Frenchman with his cheeriest smile.


President Barbicane was right. In sweeping along its elliptical orbit, the projectile would undoubtedly revolve around the moon for all eternity like a junior satellite. A new heavenly body had been added to the solar system, a miniature cosmos housing three occupants— who would soon die from lack of air. So Barbicane couldn't have been overjoyed at this permanent state of affairs, which had been inflicted on the shell by the twofold influence of centripetal force and centrifugal force. He and his companions were going to see daylight again on the face of that lunar disk. Maybe they could even stay alive till they took one last look at the entire earth, splendidly lit by the sun's rays. Maybe they could bid a final farewell to that globe they were never to see again! Then their projectile would be nothing more than a snuffedout mass, as inert as some lifeless asteroid circulating in the ether. Their only consolation was that they were finally leaving this bottomless darkness, going back into daylight, reentering zones bathed by the sun's rays.


Meanwhile those mountains Barbicane had identified were standing out more and more from the mass of blackness. They were Mt. Dörfel and Mt. Leibnitz, which garnish the moon's circumpolar regions to the south.


All the mountains on the visible half have been measured with flawless accuracy. Maybe you'll find this perfection surprising, yet a hypsometer is an infallible instrument for determining heights. You could even say that the elevations of the moon's mountains have been worked out just as accurately as those of the earth's.


The method usually favored is to measure shadows that the mountains cast, while accounting for the sun's altitude at the time of your readings. Assuming the correct diameter of the lunar disk has been accurately established, such measurements are easily gotten by using a spyglass that has a reticular eyepiece with two parallel crosshairs. This method likewise allows for calculating the depth of craters and cavities on the moon. Galileo put it to good use, and since then Messrs. Beer and Mädler have utilized it with the greatest success.


Another approach, known as the “tangent rays method,” can also be employed in measuring the moon's surface features. You employ it just as the mountains turn into specks of light that stand out from the boundary line of night and day, shining above the dark part of the lunar disk. These specks of light are caused by solar rays higher than those marking the edge of the phase. So if we measure the interval of darkness left between the speck of light and the lighted portion of the phase that's nearest, we'll get the locale's exact elevation. Understand, however, that this procedure can be employed only with mountains near the boundary line of night and day.


A third method consists of using a micrometer to measure the profiles of lunar mountains outlined against the background; but it doesn't work with elevations near the moon's rim.


In any event you'll note that this measuring of shadows, intervals, or profiles can be executed only when the sun's rays, in relation to the onlooker, strike our satellite at an angle. When they strike her directly —in a word, when she's full—every shadow is summarily dismissed from her disk and no more readings are possible.


After Galileo had identified the existence of mountains on the moon, he was the first to calculate their elevations by measuring the shadows they cast. He attributed to them, as we've already said, an average height of 27,000 feet. Hevelius reduced these figures significantly, but on the other hand Father Riccioli doubled them. Their measurements were exaggerations in both directions. Equipped with new and improved instruments, Herschel came much closer to the hypsometric truth of the matter. But we ultimately need to look for it in the reports by modern skywatchers.


Messrs. Beer and Mädler, the foremost lunar scholars on the entire planet, have measured 1,095 of the moon's mountains. From their calculations it emerges that six of these mountains are higher than 19,000 feet, and twenty-two higher than 15,700 feet. The moon's loftiest summit measures 24,944 feet; consequently it's smaller than those on the earth, some of which exceed it by 3,000 to 3,500 feet. But one comment is called for. If you put these pinnacles alongside the respective masses of the two heavenly bodies, the moon's mountains are comparatively higher than the earth's. The former make up 1/470 of the moon's diameter, the latter only 1/1,440 of the earth's. To match the comparative proportions of a lunar mountain, an earthly mountain would have to measure 85,800 feet straight up. Now then, the highest we've got is less than 30,000 feet.


Hence, to continue with the comparisons, the Himalayan chain includes three peaks higher than any lunar peak: Mt. Everest at 28,993 feet high, Kanchenjunga at 28,176 feet, and Dhaulagiri at 26,860 feet. Mt. Dörfel and Mt. Leibnitz on the moon have an elevation comparable to Mt. Jewahir's in this same chain, hence around 24,940 feet. The chief lunar peaks in her Caucasus and Apennine ranges—Newton, Casatus, Curtius, Short, Tycho, Clavius, Blancanus, Endymion—are higher than Mt. Blanc, which measures 15,781 feet. Equal to Mt. Blanc are: Moretus, Theophilus, Catharnia; equal to Monte Rosa, hence 15,210 feet: Piccolomini, Werner, Harpalus; equal to the Matterhorn at 14,836 feet: Macrobius, Eratosthenes, Albategnius, Delambre; equal to the peak in Tenerife, which stands 12,172 feet high: Baco, Cysatus, Philolaus, and the summits of the lunar Alps; equal to Mt. Perdido in the Pyrenees, hence 10,994 feet: Römer and Boguslawsky; equal to Mt. Etna at 10,620 feet: Hercules, Atlas, Furnerius.


These comparative examples can help us appreciate the elevations of mountains on the moon. Now then, the projectile's flight path was taking it straight toward the upland regions of her southern hemisphere, where the finest samples of these lunar pinnacles rise into the air.