CHAPTER 21








Reenter J. T. Maston






THERE WAS TREMENDOUS excitement aboard the Susquehanna. Officers and sailors forgot the dreadful danger they'd just run—the possibility of being pulverized and sent to the bottom. They thought only about the catastrophe concluding that moon journey. Hence the most daring undertaking of all time had cost the lives of the bold adventurers who had attempted it.


“It's them—they're back!” the young midshipman had said, and everybody knew what he meant. Nobody questioned that this meteor was the Gun Club's projectile. Regarding the travelers locked up inside, there were differing views as to their fate.


“They're dead!” this one said.


“They're alive,” said that one. “The water's deep in this area and it softened their fall.”


“But they were short of air,” another went on, “so they must have died of asphyxiation!”


“They burned to death!” somebody else contended. “When the projectile crossed through the atmosphere, it was nothing but a mass of flame.”


“What difference does it make!” the crew replied to a man. “Whether they're alive or dead, we've got to pull them out!”


Meanwhile Captain Blomsberry had gathered his officers and—by their leave—was conferring with them. This involved their agreeing on an immediate course of action. The most urgent concern was to fish up the projectile—an operation that was difficult though not impossible. But their sloop of war didn't have the requisite equipment, which needed to be both powerful and precise. So they decided to make for the nearest port and send word to the Gun Club that its shell had fallen out of the sky.


This verdict was unanimous. The choice of a port came under discussion. The nearby coast didn't offer any anchorage at latitude 27°. Higher up, on the far side of Monterey Peninsula, sat the major town it's named after. But this community lay on the borders of an honest-to-goodness desert, no network of telegraph lines linked it with cities inland, and only electricity could spread this crucial news swiftly enough.


San Francisco Bay opened a few degrees farther north. This metropolitan area in the California gold country was in easy contact with the heart of the Union. By running at full steam, the Susquehanna could reach the port of San Francisco in less than two days. So they had to leave without delay.


The furnaces had been stoked. They could get going immediately. 10,000 feet of sounding line were still left in the depths. Unwilling to waste valuable time hauling it in, Captain Blomsberry decided to cut it.


“We'll secure the end to a buoy,” he said, “and this buoy will mark exactly where the projectile fell.”


“What's more,” Lieutenant Bronsfield responded, “we know our exact position: latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 41° 37' west.”


“Fine, Mr. Bronsfield,” the captain replied, “and by your leave let's get that line cut.”


The crew deposited a sizeable buoy, reinforced by a couple of spare yards, on the surface of the ocean. The end of the sounding line was tightly lashed to the top of the buoy, which, being subject solely to the comings and goings of the billows, wasn't destined to drift significantly.


Just then the engineer notified the captain they were up to pressure and could depart. The captain thanked him for this excellent news. Then he set their course for north-northeast. Tacking about, the sloop of war headed at full steam for San Francisco Bay. It was three o'clock in the morning.


There were 550 miles to cover, a minor matter for a good racer like the Susquehanna. It gobbled up this distance in thirty-six hours, and at 1:27 in the afternoon on December 14, it stood into San Francisco Bay.


The sight of an American naval craft arriving at top speed, bowsprit shorn and foremast braced, excited substantial public curiosity. A jam-packed crowd had soon gathered along the wharves, waiting for the crew to come on land.


After dropping anchor, Captain Blomsberry and Lieutenant Bronsfield got down into a dinghy equipped with eight oars, which swiftly carried them ashore.


They leaped onto the wharf.


“Where's the telegraph?” they asked, without answering a single one of the thousand questions coming their way.


In the midst of an immense gathering of curiosity seekers, the harbormaster himself led them to the telegraph office.


Blomsberry and Bronsfield went into the office while the crowd clustered around the door.


In a few minutes they'd fired off a telegram in quadruplicate: the first to the Secretary of the Navy in Washington, D.C.; the second to the Vice President of the Gun Club in Baltimore; the third to the honorable J. T. Maston on Long's Peak in the Rocky Mountains; the fourth to the deputy director of the Cambridge Observatory in Massachusetts.


It ran as follows:


On December 12 at 1:17 in the morning, the projectile from the columbiad fell into the Pacific in latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 41° 37' west. Send instructions.


BLOMSBERRY,


Commander Susquehanna.


Five minutes later the whole town of San Francisco had heard the news. Before six o'clock that evening, the various states of the Union knew about this crowning catastrophe. After midnight all Europe learned by cablegram how the great American experiment had concluded.


We'll make no attempt to describe the effect this unexpected outcome had on the whole world.


After receiving the telegram, the Secretary of the Navy wired the Susquehanna, ordering it to wait in San Francisco Bay without shutting down its furnaces. It needed to be ready day or night to put to sea.


The Cambridge Observatory met in a special session and with that stateliness typical of scholarly gatherings, placidly discussed the scientific aspects of the matter.


At the Gun Club there was an explosion. All the artillerymen were convened. Sure enough, the honorable Mr. Wilcome—their vice president—was reading that premature telegram in which Belfast and J. T. Maston announced they'd just spotted the projectile in their gigantic reflector on Long's Peak. This message further conveyed that the shell had gotten caught in the moon's gravitational pull and was playing the role of a junior satellite in the solar system.


You already know the truth of the matter.


But when Blomsberry's wire arrived and flatly contradicted J. T. Maston's telegram, two factions took form in the Gun Club's bosom. On one side were those who accepted that the projectile had fallen to the earth and that the travelers had therefore come back. On the other were the ones who swore by the findings from Long's Peak and concluded that the Susquehanna's commander was mistaken. To this latter group the so-called projectile was just a meteor, nothing more, a shooting star that had fallen out of the sky and smashed the sloop of war in the bow. There weren't many facts that could refute this argument, because the moving object had to have been traveling so swiftly, it would've been very hard to make out. Certainly the Susquehanna's commander and his officers could have committed an error in good faith. Nevertheless one argument worked in their favor: namely, if the projectile had fallen to the earth, it could meet up with our planet only in latitude 27° north and—taking into account the lapse of time and the earth's spinning motion—between longitude 41° and 42° west.


Be that as it may, the Gun Club unanimously decided that cousin Blomsberry, Bilsby, and Major Elphiston should get to San Francisco without delay and settle on a way of pulling up the projectile from the ocean depths.


These dedicated men wasted no time in starting out, and the railroad —which soon would run all across the center of America—took them to St. Louis, where speedy stagecoaches were waiting for them.


Practically at the same instant that the Secretary of the Navy, the Gun Club's vice president, and the observatory's deputy director got their telegrams from San Francisco, the honorable J. T. Maston was experiencing the most intense excitement he'd known in his entire existence, an excitement he hadn't felt even when his notorious cannon blew up, an excitement that once again nearly cost him his life.


As you'll recall, the Gun Club's secretary had left a few seconds after the projectile had (and almost as quickly) for the workstation at Long's Peak in the Rocky Mountains. J. M. Belfast, the Cambridge Observatory's scholarly director, went with him. Arriving at the outpost, the two friends took up residence in short order and didn't leave the topside of their enormous telescope for a moment.


In essence, as you know, this gigantic instrument was set up to be a “frontview” reflector, as the English term it. With this arrangement objects were subjected to just a single reflection, thereby providing a sharper image. Consequently, when J. T. Maston and Belfast watched the skies, they didn't stand at the lower end of the instrument but the upper. They reached this by a spiral staircase, a masterpiece of light construction, and beneath them, culminating in an iridescent mirror, gaped a metal well that was 280 feet deep.


Now then, positioned above the telescope was a cramped platform where the two experts spent their lives, cursing the sunlight for hiding the moon from their eyes, the clouds for stubbornly concealing her at night.


Then, after a few days of suspense, how gleeful they felt on the night of December 5 when they spotted the space vehicle carrying their friends! But their glee gave way to deep disappointment when, relying on their sketchy findings, they fired off their first telegram to the world, which mistakenly claimed the projectile had turned into the moon's satellite and was revolving in an unchanging orbit.


After that the shell was no longer in view, a vanishing act easily explained since by then it had gone behind the moon's invisible side. But when the time came for it to reappear in front of the visible one, the reader can imagine J. T. Maston's seething impatience and the similar impatience of his companion! Every sixty seconds that night they thought they'd spotted the projectile again—but they hadn't! Ergo there were endless debates and vicious quarrels between the two. Belfast insisted the projectile was out of sight, J. T. Maston maintained it was “right under his nose.”


“That's the shell!” J. T. Maston kept saying.


“No!” Belfast replied. “That's an avalanche breaking loose from a lunar mountain!”


“Then we'll see it tomorrow.”


“No, we'll never see it again! It flew off into space.”


“We will!”


“We won't!”


And during these times when exclamations were raining down like hail, the well-known temper of the Gun Club's secretary posed a perpetual danger for the honorable Mr. Belfast.


Their joint existence would soon have become impossible, but an unexpected development cut short their constant feuding.


During the night of December 14–15, the two estranged friends were busy studying the moon's disk. As usual J. T. Maston had been insulting the scholarly Belfast, who was fuming at his side. The Gun Club's secretary was maintaining for the thousandth time that he'd just spotted the projectile, even adding that Michel Ardan's face was visible through one of the portholes. He was backing up his arguments with a series of gestures rendered quite bothersome by his alarming hook.


Just then Belfast's manservant appeared on the platform—it was ten o'clock in the evening—and handed him a wire. It was the telegram from the Susquehanna's commander.


Belfast tore open the envelope, read its contents, and let out a shout.


“Huh?” J. T. Maston put in.


“The shell!”


“What about it?”


“It just fell to the earth!”


He was answered by a second shout, which this time changed into a howl.


He turned to J. T. Maston. The poor fellow had been recklessly leaning out over the metal tube and he'd vanished into that immense telescope. A 280-foot drop! Belfast rushed frantically to the reflector opening.


He breathed again. J. T. Maston had caught himself with his metal hook and was hanging from one of the struts that regulated the telescope's range. He was emitting fearsome shrieks.


Belfast called for help. His assistants came running. They set up pulleys and hauled out the Gun Club's reckless secretary, not without some difficulty.


He reemerged unhurt at the top of the opening.


“Say,” he put in, “what if I'd broken the mirror?”


“You would have to pay for it,” Belfast replied sternly.


“So that damned shell fell out of the sky?” J. T. Maston asked.


“Into the Pacific!”


“Let's get going.”


Fifteen minutes later the two experts were heading down the slopes of the Rocky Mountains; and two days later, at the same instant as their Gun Club friends, they arrived in San Francisco—after working five horses to death on the way.


Elphiston, cousin Blomsberry, and Bilsby rushed up to them on their arrival.


“What's the plan?” they snapped.


“Fish up the shell,” J. T. Maston replied, “and as fast as possible!”