CHAPTER 18








Important Issues






MEANWHILE THE PROJECTILE had gone past Tycho's surrounding wall. With the most scrupulous care, Barbicane and his two friends examined those glowing streaks the famous mountain scatters so intriguingly to every horizon.


What was this radiant halo? What geological phenomenon had designed this blazing headdress? These issues had Barbicane legitimately concerned.


Under his eyes, in fact, shiny furrows ran off in all directions, each sporting raised edges and sunken middles, some of them twelve miles wide, others thirty. In certain localities these glittering trails stretched as far as 750 miles from Tycho and seemed to take in— especially toward the east, northeast, and north—a good half of the southern hemisphere. One of them spurted as far as Neander Crater, located on the 40th meridian. Another made a turn and went off to plow the Sea of Nectar, crashing against the Pyrenees range after a thousand-mile run. To the west still others covered the Sea of Clouds and Sea of Moods with a network of light.


Over the plains as well as over surface features of every height, these glittering rays stood out—how had they originated? All of them shared the same center, Tycho's crater. This was their starting point. Herschel attributed their shining appearance to old lava flows frozen by the cold, a view that's far from official. Other astronomers have regarded these bewildering streaks as similar to glacial deposits, rows of erratic rubble that would have been dumped at the time of Tycho's formation.


“And why not?” Nicholl asked Barbicane, who was reporting these different views, then rejecting them.


“Because the symmetry of these shiny lines is so bewildering, given the force that's needed to shoot volcanic material to such a distance.”


“Of course I myself,” Michel Ardan replied, “can easily explain how these rays originated.”


“You don't say,” Barbicane put in.


“I do say,” Michel went on. “All we have to do is view them as a huge star-shaped fracture, like you get when a ball or a stone hits a pane of glass.”


“Fine,” Barbicane remarked with a smile. “And whose hand would be strong enough to throw a stone that could cause such a fracture?”


“The hand isn't essential,” Michel replied, unflustered. “And as for the stone, let's assume it's a comet.”


“Oh, those poor overworked comets!” Barbicane exclaimed. “My gallant Michel, your explanation isn't bad, but your comet's superfluous. The impact that caused this rupture could have come from inside the heavenly body. While the moon's crust was cooling and shrinking, some powerful contraction would have been sufficient to etch this gigantic star shape.”


“A contraction I can go along with,” Michel Ardan replied. “Something like a lunar bellyache.”


“Besides,” Barbicane added, “this is the view of an English expert, James Nasmyth, and it seems to me that it adequately explains the bright rays of these mountains.”


“That Nasmyth was no dummy,” Michel replied.


For a good while the travelers marveled at Tycho's splendors, never tiring of the sight. Steeped in outpourings of light, in rays from both the sun and moon, their projectile must have looked like a ball of fire. So they'd suddenly gone from considerable cold to intense heat. Nature was preparing them in this way to become moonpeople.


To become moonpeople! The thought took them back to the issue of whether life could exist on the moon. After what they'd seen, could our travelers settle this? Could they decide the matter one way or the other? Michel Ardan urged his two friends to clarify their views, asking them straight out if they thought animals and human beings were present in the lunar world.


“I think we can answer you,” Barbicane said. “But to my mind that isn't how the question should be couched. I would like to rephrase it.”


“Phrase it any way you want,” Michel replied.


“Here goes,” Barbicane went on. “The problem is twofold and calls for a twofold solution. Can life exist on the moon? Has life ever actually done so?”


“Good,” Nicholl replied. “First off, let's look into whether life can exist on the moon.”


“To tell the truth, I haven't a clue,” Michel remarked.


“And I myself say no,” Barbicane went on. “In the moon's current condition, her atmospheric cover is definitely quite reduced, her seas mostly dried up, her water supply inadequate, her vegetation minimal, her temperature abruptly shifting from cold to hot, her nights and days lasting 354 hours. So she doesn't strike me as a place where life can thrive; she doesn't seem to offer any promise for propagating the animal kingdom or for adequately supplying the necessities of existence as we understand them.”


“Agreed,” Nicholl replied. “But couldn't creatures live on the moon whose organisms are different from ours?”


“That's a harder question to answer,” Barbicane contended. “I'll give it a try, however, but I would ask Captain Nicholl if motion strikes him as an essential byproduct of life, no matter what organisms are involved?”


“Without the slightest doubt,” Nicholl replied.


“Well then, my fine companion, I'll answer you that we've studied the lunar landmasses from as close as 1,600 feet, and nothing seemed to be moving on the surface of the moon. The presence of any humanity whatever would have been revealed by some earmarks, by various artifacts, by actual ruins. Now then, what did we see? In every locality always the geological achievements of nature, never any human achievements. So if representatives of the animal kingdom live on the moon, they must be hiding out of sight in those bottomless cavities. Which I can't accept, because over these plains they would have left traces of their movements that a layer of atmosphere is bound to protect, no matter how thin it may be. Now then, no such traces are anywhere to be seen. So only one theoretical possibility remains—a species of living beings to whom motion, the essence of life, is alien!”


“That's as good as saying,” Michel remarked, “living creatures who are lifeless.”


“Exactly,” Barbicane replied. “Which from our standpoint is nonsense.”


“Then may we clarify our views?” Michel said.


“We may,” Nicholl replied.


“All right then,” Michel Ardan went on. “Regarding the issue of whether life can currently exist on the moon, this scientific commission has convened in the Gun Club's projectile, conducted an analysis based on freshly discovered facts, and reached a unanimous decision: no, it can't.”


This decision was entered in President Barbicane's notebook, where the proceedings of this meeting on December 6 are still to be found.


“Now,” Nicholl said, “let's attack the second question, the inevitable counterpart of the first. Therefore I ask the honorable commission: if life can't exist on the moon today, has it ever done so in the past?”


“Citizen Barbicane has the floor,” Michel Ardan said.


“My friends,” Barbicane replied, “I didn't plan this journey to form my views on whether life could have previously existed on the earth's satellite. I'll add that our personal investigations could only confirm the views I'd already held. I believe—nay, I insist—that the moon was inhabited by human civilizations like our own, that she brought forth animals anatomically similar to animals on the earth, but I would add that both her human and her animal species have had their day and are extinct for good.”


“Then,” Michel asked, “does this mean the moon's older than the earth?”


“No,” Barbicane answered with conviction, “but a world that has aged faster, that has developed and deteriorated with greater speed. The matter-shaping forces inside the moon have been far more violent, comparatively speaking, than those inside the planet earth. The cracked, craggy, bloated condition of our satellite today is overwhelming proof of this. Originally the earth and moon were only gaseous masses. Due to various influences, these gases changed into a liquid state, then into a solid mass later on. But gases or liquids very definitely remained on the moon after she cooled down, solidified, and became able to support life.”


“That's how I see it,” Nicholl said.


“Then,” Barbicane went on, “an atmosphere surrounded her. Confined inside this gaseous covering, the seas couldn't evaporate. Thanks to the influence of her air, water, light, solar heat, and central heat, vegetation took root on any landmass ready to welcome it, and life definitely appeared around this time, because nature is never wasteful, and a world so wonderfully suited to supporting life needs some life to support.”


“However,” Nicholl replied, “many phenomena hailing from our satellite's movement patterns must have hampered the development of the plant and animal kingdoms. For example, how about these days and nights lasting 354 hours?”


“In the polar regions on the earth,” Michel said, “they go for six months!”


“An argument that carries little weight, since the poles aren't inhabited.”


“Let's take note of one thing, my friends,” Barbicane continued. “In the moon's current condition, these long nights and days create temperature differences no organism can handle, but this wasn't the case at an earlier time in her history. An atmosphere covered the lunar disk with a shifting mantle. Steam condensed into banks of clouds. This natural shield tempered the sunlight's heat and restrained its rays at nighttime. Plus the light in the air could grow just as diffuse as the heat. Ergo, now that this atmosphere has almost totally vanished, the balance between these influences no longer exists. What's more, I'm going to add something amazing …”


“Amaze us,” Michel Ardan said.


“Well, I'm inclined to think that back when there was life on the moon, her nights and days didn't last 354 hours!”


“And why is that?” Nicholl asked instantly.


“Because in those days the moon's spinning motion on her axis very likely wasn't equal to her revolving motion—that state of equality where each part of her disk feels the sunlight's effects for a couple weeks at a time.”


“Right,” Nicholl replied, “but why wouldn't these two motions have been equal the way they are today?”


“Because this state of equality has been determined solely by the earth's gravitational pull. Now then, who knows if this gravity was strong enough to change the moon's movements back when the earth still hadn't solidified?”


“True,” Nicholl remarked, “and who knows if the moon has always been the earth's satellite?”


“And who knows,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, “if the moon wasn't around long before the earth was?”


Their imaginations were carrying them off into an infinite realm of possibilities. Barbicane tried to rein them in.


“We're getting into extravagant speculating,” he said, “and problems that are genuinely insoluble. Let's not go there. Let's simply acknowledge that the earth's original gravity was inadequate, therefore the moon's spinning and revolving motions weren't equal, and her nights and days back then could follow each other just as they do on the earth. What's more, life was possible even without those conditions.”


“Hence,” Michel Ardan asked, “human beings have vanished from the moon?”


“Right,” Barbicane replied, “after enduring, no doubt, for thousands of centuries. Then as the air got thinner, the lunar disk gradually became unlivable, as the planet earth will someday become when it cools off.”


“When it cools off?”


“Undoubtedly,” Barbicane replied. “As the moon's inner fires went out and their molten materials contracted, her crust cooled. Little by little these phenomena led to consequences: organic life vanished, vegetation vanished. Soon the air got thinner, very likely siphoned off by the earth's gravity; oxygen vanished, water vanished simply by evaporating. At this point in time the moon had become lifeless and unlivable. It was a dead world, just as it appears to us today.”


“And you're saying the same fate is in store for the earth?”


“Very likely.”


“But when?”


“When the cooling of its crust will have made it unlivable.”


“And has anybody calculated when our hapless globe will get around to cooling?”


“Surely.”


“And you're familiar with these calculations?”


“Completely.”


“Then speak out, you scaremongering scientist,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, “because you've got me boiling with impatience!”


“All right, my gallant Michel,” Barbicane replied serenely, “we know how much the earth's temperature decreases in the course of a century. Now then, according to some calculations, in another 400,000 years this average temperature will have gone down to zero!”


“Four hundred thousand years!” Michel exclaimed. “Oh, I can breathe again! You had me honestly terrified! To hear you, I figured we had barely 50,000 years left!”


Barbicane and Nicholl couldn't help laughing at their companion's trepidations. Then, wanting to finish things up, Nicholl restated the second question, which had just been under consideration.


“Has life ever existed on the moon?” he asked.


The answer was a unanimous yes.


Though their discussion was full of theories that were a bit chancy, it summed up the general drift of scientific thinking on this topic; in the meantime the projectile was swiftly nearing the moon's equator, while steadily moving farther away from her surface. It went over Wilhelm Crater and the 40th parallel, 500 miles up. Then, leaving Pitatus to the right at 30°, it skirted the southern end of the Sea of Clouds, whose northern regions they'd already approached. Various basins looked blurred in the brilliant white of the full moon: Bullialdus, Purbach (shaped almost like a square with a crater in the middle), then Arzachel whose inner mountain shines with indescribable brilliance.


While the projectile kept getting farther away, these surface characteristics finally faded as the travelers watched, the mountains melted into the distance, and out of that whole wonderful, peculiar, alien panorama of the moon, soon there was nothing left but the undying memory.