CHAPTER 0








Preliminary Chapter






Which summarizes


the first part of this business


as an introduction to the second


DURING THE COURSE of the year 186–, a scientific endeavor unprecedented in the annals of science had the whole world unusually excited. Members of the Gun Club, an association of artillerymen formed in Baltimore after the Civil War, had come up with the idea of making contact with the moon—that's right, the moon—by firing a shell at her. After consulting astronomers at the Cambridge Observatory on this subject, Barbicane—the undertaking's promoter and the club's president—took every step necessary for the success of this extraordinary undertaking, which had been deemed feasible by most qualified individuals. After he'd launched a funding drive that raised almost $6,000,000, he started in on his gigantic task.


According to a memo drafted by members of the observatory, the cannon that was to fire the projectile had to be stationed in an area located between latitude 0° and 28° north or south, so as to target the moon at the zenith. The shell's initial velocity had to be 12,000 yards per second. Fired on December 1 at 10:46:40 in the evening, it was to meet up with the moon four days after its departure, exactly at midnight on December 5 and just as the moon had reached her perigee—in other words, her closest point to the earth, a distance of just 216,025 miles away.


Over several sessions the Gun Club's chief members—President Barbicane, Major Elphiston, the club's secretary J. T. Maston, and other experts—discussed the shape and makeup of the shell, the positioning and nature of the cannon, and the quality and quantity of gunpowder to be used. They decided: 1) that the projectile would be an aluminum capsule with a diameter of 108 inches, with walls a foot thick, and with a weight of 19,250 pounds; 2) that the cannon would be a cast-iron, 900-foot columbiad that had been poured right into the ground itself; 3) that the charge would use 400,000 pounds of guncotton, which would generate some 1.5 billion gallons of gaseous matter under the projectile, easily propelling it up to that silver orb.


These issues settled, President Barbicane, aided by Murchison the engineer, picked a Florida location in latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 5° 7' west. At this site, thanks to marvelous workmanship, they cast the columbiad with complete success.


That's where things stood, when an incident occurred that made this huge undertaking a hundred times more interesting.


A Frenchman—a Parisian eccentric, a witty and daring showman— asked to be closed up inside the shell in order to reach the moon and conduct a scouting expedition on our planet's satellite. This stalwart adventurer was named Michel Ardan. He arrived in America, got an enthusiastic welcome, held rallies, was carried in triumph, reconciled President Barbicane with his mortal foe Captain Nicholl, and as a token of their reconciliation, urged both men to travel along with him inside the projectile.


They accepted his proposition. The shell underwent a change of shape. It took on a cylindro-conical form. A sort of airborne coach, it boasted powerful springs and collapsible partitions to deaden the recoil at departure. It carried a year's supply of food, water for a few months, gaslight for a few days. An automatic device produced and circulated air for the three travelers to breathe. Simultaneously the Gun Club had a gigantic telescope built on one of the loftiest peaks in the Rocky Mountains, allowing members to follow the projectile's flight through space. Everything was ready.


On November 30, at the appointed hour and in the midst of an extraordinary gathering of spectators, the departure took place, and for the first time three human beings left the earth and shot into interplanetary space with a near certainty of reaching their destination. These daring travelers, Michel Ardan, President Barbicane, and Captain Nicholl, were to accomplish their flight in 97 hours, 13 minutes, and 20 seconds. Consequently they couldn't arrive on the surface of the lunar disk till midnight on December 5, right when the moon would be full, rather than on the 4th as some misinformed newspapers had announced.


But there was one unexpected circumstance: the explosion produced by the columbiad immediately had a disruptive effect on the earth's atmosphere, filling the skies with an enormous number of clouds. This phenomenon caused wholesale exasperation, because it hid the moon from the eyes of skywatchers for several nights.


Dear old J. T. Maston, the staunchest friend of the three travelers, left for the Rocky Mountains along with the honorable J. M. Belfast, the Cambridge Observatory's director, and he reached the outpost on Long's Peak where the telescope had been set up, an instrument that brought the moon within a viewing distance of five miles. The honorable secretary of the Gun Club personally wanted to keep an eye on the space vehicle of his daring friends.


The heavy cloud cover prevented any skywatching on December 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. The skywatchers themselves figured they would have to cool their heels till January 3 of the new year, because the moon would enter her last quarter on the 11th and would display only a shrinking portion of her disk, not enough light for tracking the projectile's course.


But to everybody's delight a fierce storm finally cleared the skies on the night of December 11–12, and a half moon stood out clearly against the black background of the heavens.


That same night Belfast and J. T. Maston sent a telegram from the outpost on Long's Peak to staff members at the Cambridge Observatory.


Now then, just what did their telegram announce?


It announced this: that on December 11 at 8:47 in the evening, Messrs. J. M. Belfast and J. T. Maston had sighted the projectile fired by the Stony Hill columbiad; that the shell had gone off course for some unknown reason and hadn't reached its destination but had passed so close to the moon, it had gotten caught in her gravitational pull; that its vertical motion had changed into a circular one; and that it had gone into an elliptical orbit around the moon and was now her satellite.


The telegram added that it wasn't yet possible to establish the characteristics of this new heavenly body—and in fact it was essential to take three sights, each of the heavenly body at a different position, in order to learn these characteristics. Then the wire noted that the distance separating the projectile from the lunar surface “could be put” at about 2,833 miles, hence some 1,100 geographic leagues.


Finally the telegram concluded with this twofold theory: either the moon's gravity would end up winning out and the travelers would reach their destination; or the projectile would stay in an unchanging orbit and would revolve around the moon's disk till the end of time.


Given these different alternatives, what would happen to the travelers? True, their food would last them a good while. But even assuming their reckless undertaking was a success, how would they come back? Would it ever be possible to come back? Would the earth hear from them again? Debated in print by the most scholarly pens of the day, these questions held the public spellbound.


It's appropriate to make a comment here that eager skywatchers would do well to ponder. When an expert announces a highly speculative discovery to the public, he can't exercise too much discretion. Nobody has to discover a planet, comet, or satellite, and anybody who makes a mistake in this activity is fair game for public ridicule. So it's best to bide your time, and that's what our impatient J. T. Maston should have done before firing off this telegram to the world, a telegram he believed was the last word on the undertaking.


In reality this telegram contained two kinds of errors, as was later confirmed: 1) eyewitness errors regarding the projectile's distance from the surface of the moon, because it couldn't possibly have been sighted on that particular date of December 11—so what J. T. Maston saw, or thought he saw, couldn't have been the shell fired by the columbiad; 2) theoretical errors with regard to the fate in store for the aforesaid projectile, because calling it the moon's satellite was a total contradiction of the laws of rational mechanics.


Just one theory offered by the skywatchers on Long's Peak had the potential to come true: the prediction that the travelers—if still alive— could combine their efforts with the moon's gravitational pull to reach the surface of the lunar disk.


Now then, these shrewd, bold men had survived the dreadful recoil at their departure, and what follows is the story of their journey in the projectile coach down to its strangest, most dramatic details. This account will shatter a good many illusions and surmises; but it will also give a fair idea of the complications in store for such an undertaking, and it will showcase Barbicane's scientific instincts, Nicholl's energetic resourcefulness, and the playful daring of Michel Ardan.


Beyond this, it will also demonstrate that their dear old friend J. T. Maston was wasting his time when, bending over his gigantic telescope, he watched the moon making her way through the starry void.