CHAPTER 1








From 10:20 to 10:47 in the Evening






AT THE STROKE OF ten o'clock, Michel Ardan, Barbicane, and Nicholl said good-bye to the many friends they were leaving on the earth. The two dogs—who had the job of getting the canine race acclimated to those lunar landmasses—were already confined inside the projectile. The three travelers went up to the mouth of that enormous cast-iron tube, and a crane lowered them to the shell's conical cap.


There an opening had been contrived for the purpose of giving them access to the aluminum coach. The crane hauled its tackle back outside, and the last pieces of scaffolding were immediately cleared away from the columbiad's muzzle.


After entering the projectile with his companions, Nicholl started to close the opening, lowering a heavy hatch plate that was firmly fastened from inside simply by tightening its screws. Other securely fitting plates covered the biconvex glass of the portholes. Hermetically sealed in their metal prison, the travelers were plunged in total darkness.


“And now, my dear companions,” Michel Ardan said, “let's make ourselves at home. Me, I'm the indoor type and housekeeping is my strong suit. It's time we made the most of our new quarters and got comfortable. But first let's try to get a little clearer view of things. Hell's bells, if we're supposed to be moles, God wouldn't have invented gaslight!”


With that the carefree fellow lit a match by striking it on the sole of his boot; then he went over to the gas jet, which was attached to a container storing enough high-pressure acetylene to light and heat the shell for 144 hours, hence six days and six nights.


The gas lit up. Illuminated in this way, the projectile looked like a cozy room furnished with padded walls, circular couches, and a dome-shaped ceiling.


The articles it contained—weapons, instruments, utensils—were fastened securely and held in place against the curves of the padding, where they would brave the impact of departure with impunity. The club had taken every precaution humanly possible to make this reckless endeavor a success.


Michel Ardan examined everything and stated he was highly pleased with the arrangements.


“It's a prison,” he said, “but a traveling prison, and so long as I can stick my nose out the window, I wouldn't mind signing a hundred-year lease. You're smiling, Barbicane? So you're having second thoughts? Are you telling yourself this prison could turn into our coffin? So be it, but I wouldn't trade it for Mohammed's, which floats in midair but stays put!”


While Michel Ardan rattled on in this way, Barbicane and Nicholl were making their final preparations.


By the time our three travelers were closed up in their shell for good, Nicholl's timepiece said it was 10:20 in the evening. This chronometer and the one belonging to Murchison the engineer had been synchronized to within a tenth of a second. Barbicane checked it.


“My friends,” he said, “it's 10:20. At 10:47 Murchison will shoot an electric spark down the wire that connects to the columbiad's powder charge. At that exact moment we'll part company with our globe. Therefore we still have twenty-seven minutes left on earth.”


“Twenty-six minutes and thirteen seconds,” replied the meticulous Nicholl.


“Fine!” Michel Ardan exclaimed in a good-humored tone. “In twenty-six minutes you can do many things! You can discuss the most serious ethical and political issues, and even settle them! Twenty-six minutes put to good use are worth more than twenty-six years with nothing to show for them. A few seconds of Pascal or Newton are more valuable than the lifetimes of a whole pack of your average dimwits—”


“And what do you conclude from this, you eternal chatterbox?” President Barbicane asked.


“I conclude we've got twenty-six minutes left,” Ardan answered.


“Only twenty-four,” Nicholl said.


“Twenty-four if you say so, my gallant captain,” Ardan replied, “twenty-four minutes in which we can delve into—”


“Michel,” Barbicane said, “during our trip we'll have all the time we need to delve into the knottiest questions. Right now let's concentrate on our departure.”


“Aren't we ready?”


“Certainly. But there are a few precautions we still need to take, to lessen the initial impact as much as possible.”


“That cushion of water between the collapsible partitions—hasn't it enough elasticity to protect us?”


“I hope so, Michel,” Barbicane replied softly, “but I'm not quite sure.”


“Oh, what a trickster!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “He hopes! He's not sure! And he waits till right when we're locked in to make this dismal confession! Excuse me, but I want out!”


“And how will you manage that?” Barbicane countered.


“There are difficulties, it's true,” Michel Ardan said. “We're aboard the train, and the conductor will blow his whistle before twenty-four minutes are up …”


“Twenty,” Nicholl put in.


For a few seconds the three travelers looked at each other. Then they examined the articles locked in along with them.


“Everything's in place,” Barbicane said. “Now it's time to decide on our most effective position for handling the impact at departure. Our postures can't be a casual matter, and as much as possible, we need to keep the blood from suddenly rushing to our heads.”


“Right,” Nicholl put in.


“In that case,” Michel Ardan replied, ready to suit the action to the word, “let's put our heads down and feet in the air, like clowns at the big top!”


“No,” Barbicane said, “let's lie on our sides. We'll withstand the impact better that way. Don't forget, even though we're riding inside it rather than standing in front of it, when the shell's fired, it's still going to be a bit of a shock.”


“So long as it's only ‘a bit,’ I have no complaints,” Michel Ardan remarked.


“You approve of my idea, Nicholl?” Barbicane asked.


“Completely,” the captain replied. “13½ minutes to go.”


“That Nicholl isn't human!” Michel exclaimed. “He's a chronometer with a second hand, escape wheel, lever, roller, and eight jewels …”


But his companions weren't listening anymore and were making their final arrangements with inconceivable composure. They acted like two meticulous travelers on a train, folks who had taken their seats in a passenger car and were trying to get as comfortably situated as possible. Honestly, you have to wonder what substances these Americans are made of, when the most appalling danger can draw near and not make their hearts pound one beat faster!


Three sturdy, securely assembled pallets had been put in the projectile. Nicholl and Barbicane positioned them in the middle of the disk that formed the movable floor. There the three travelers were to lie down a few moments before departure time.


Meanwhile Ardan, incapable of sitting still, paced around his cramped prison like a wild animal in a cage, exchanging chitchat with his friends, talking to the dogs Diana and Satellite, whom he'd given meaningful names some time before, as you can see.


“Hey, Diana! Hey, Satellite!” he called out, taunting them. “So you're going to show your lunar relatives what good manners earth dogs have? That'll be a triumph for the canine race! By God, if we ever do get home again, I want to bring back a cross-bred ‘moon mongrel,’ and it'll cause a sensation!”


“Assuming there are dogs on the moon,” Barbicane said.


“There are,” Michel Ardan asserted, “along with horses, cows, donkeys, and chickens. I'll put money on the chickens!”


“A hundred dollars says we won't find a single one,” Nicholl said.


“Done, my dear captain,” Ardan replied, shaking Nicholl's hand. “But while we're on the subject, you've already lost three bets with our president, since he raised the funds needed for the undertaking, since the casting operation succeeded, and lastly since they loaded the columbiad without any accidents; hence you're out $6,000.


“Yes,” Nicholl replied. “It's 10:37 and six seconds.”


“Very good, captain. Well, in less than fifteen minutes you'll have to hand over an additional $9,000 to our president—$4,000 because the columbiad won't blow up and $5,000 because the shell will rise higher than six miles into the air.”


“I've got the money,” Nicholl replied, slapping his coat pocket. “I'll be only too happy to pay up.”


“Nice going, Nicholl, I can see you're an orderly man, something I could never be; but let me point out that all in all, you've made a series of bets here that won't be very profitable for you.”


“How so?” Nicholl asked.


“Because if you win the first one, that means the columbiad will have blown up and the shell along with it, so Barbicane will no longer be around to dole out your money.”


“My stake is deposited at the Bank of Baltimore, and if Nicholl can't collect, it will go to his heirs,” Barbicane merely replied.


“Oh, what sensible men! What practical minds!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “I marvel at you all the more because you're so beyond my understanding!”


“Ten forty-two,” Nicholl said.


“Five minutes to go,” Barbicane responded.


“Yes, five tiny minutes!” Michel Ardan remarked. “And we're closed up inside a shell at the bottom of a 900-foot cannon! And piled under this shell are 400,000 pounds of guncotton, which is equivalent to 1,600,000 pounds of regular gunpowder! And our friend Murchison, holding his chronometer, eye focused on its second hand, finger resting on the electrical device, is counting off the seconds and preparing to launch us into interplanetary space … !”


“Enough, Michel, enough!” Barbicane said in a stern voice. “Let's get ready. Only a few seconds separate us from this crowning moment. Let's shake hands, my friends.”


“Yes!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, more affected than he wanted to let on.


The three bold companions came together and clasped hands one last time.


“May God be with us!” said the reverent Barbicane.


Michel Ardan and Nicholl stretched out on the pallets positioned in the middle of the disk.


“Ten forty-seven,” the captain muttered.


“Twenty seconds to go!” Barbicane quickly turned off the gas and lay down near his companions.


The heavy silence was broken only by the chronometer's ticking as it marked the seconds.


Suddenly there was a frightful jolt; under the thrust of 1.5 billion gallons of gaseous matter generated by the pyroxile's combustion, the projectile took off into space.










CHAPTER 2