CHAPTER 19








Fighting the Impossible






FOR A FAIRLY LONG TIME, Barbicane and his companions were silent and thoughtful, looking at that world they'd seen only from afar like Moses with the land of Canaan, that world they were leaving never to return. The projectile's position in relation to the moon had shifted and its base had swung toward the earth.


This change, which Barbicane verified, didn't fail to surprise them. Since the shell was supposed to be revolving around the moon along an elliptical orbit, why wasn't its heaviest part facing her, as our satellite herself does with respect to the earth? This detail was unclear.


Watching the projectile's course, they could see it veering away from the moon and going along a curve similar to the one it made when approaching her. Consequently it was sweeping around in an ultra long ellipse that most likely would reach to the point of equal attraction, where the gravitational fields of both the earth and its satellite are nullified.


This was the conclusion Barbicane appropriately drew from the facts they'd gathered, a conviction that his two friends shared.


Immediately the questions rained down.


“And when we're back at the neutral point, what will happen to us?” Michel Ardan asked.


“That we don't know,” Barbicane answered.


“But we can sketch some theories, I presume?”


“Two,” Barbicane replied. “Either the projectile won't have enough speed and therefore it'll stay stationary forever on this line of equal attraction—”


“Whatever the other theory is, I prefer it,” Michel remarked.


“Or,” Barbicane went on, “it will have enough speed and it'll resume its elliptical path, revolving forever around that silver orb.”


“Not a very comforting turnabout,” Michel said. “Reduced to the position of humble lackeys to a moon we're used to regarding as our handmaid! And that's the future waiting for us?”


Neither Barbicane nor Nicholl responded.


“You're not saying anything,” Michel went on impatiently.


“There's nothing to be said,” Nicholl replied.


“Which means there's nothing to be done?”


“Nothing,” Barbicane replied. “Are you claiming you can fight the impossible?”


“Why not? We're a Frenchman and two Americans—we should sneer at the very word!”


“But what would you do?”


“Get control over this motion that's sweeping us along.”


“Control?”


“Yes,” Michel continued more heatedly, “check it or change it, then ultimately use it to carry out our plans.”


“How?”


“That's your department! If artillerymen can't control where their shells go, they aren't artillerymen. If the projectile's in charge of the gunner, we might as well load the gunner in the cannon instead. Ye gods, you're a fine pair of experts! You haven't a clue what will happen next, after coercing me—”


“Coercing you!” Barbicane and Nicholl exclaimed. “What are you talking about?”


“No criticism intended!” Michel said. “I'm not complaining! This outing has been a delight! The projectile suits me fine! But let's do everything humanly possible to fall to the ground somewhere, even if it's not on the moon.”


“There's nothing we would like better, my gallant Michel,” Barbicane replied, “but there's no way to do it.”


“Can't we change the projectile's motion?”


“No.”


“Or slow it down?”


“No.”


“Or even lighten it, like they lighten a ship with too much cargo?”


“What would you toss out?” Nicholl responded. “We don't have any ballast on board. And besides, it seems to me that if the projectile were lighter, we would move faster.”


“Slower,” Michel said.


“Faster,” Nicholl contended.


“Neither slower nor faster,” Barbicane replied, trying to get his two friends on the same page. “Because we're hovering in space, where we don't need to take our specific gravity into account.”


“All right,” Michel Ardan snapped in a decisive tone, “there's only one thing left to do.”


“What?” Nicholl asked.


“Eat breakfast,” our daring Frenchman answered unflappably, always coming up with this solution when circumstances were at their most trying.


In fact, though this activity wasn't destined to influence the projectile's course, it was a surefire, troublefree undertaking from a gastric standpoint. No doubt about it, that Michel had the right priorities.


So they ate breakfast at two o'clock in the morning, but never mind the time. Michel dished out his standard menu, topped off by a hearty bottle extracted from his private cellar. If their brains weren't spinning with ideas, we give up on Chambertin 1863.


Their meal finished, they went back on watch.


Around the projectile, the objects tossed outside stayed at a distance that never varied. As it circled the moon during its orbiting motion, the shell obviously hadn't gone through any atmosphere, because the specific gravities of these different objects would have changed their relative speeds.


There was nothing to see on the side facing their planet. New the previous midnight, the earth was just a day old, and two more days needed to go by before its crescent could move out of the sunlight and serve as a clock for moonpeople, since, during its spinning motion, every part of it goes past the same lunar meridian over a 24-hour period.


There was a different sight on the side facing the moon. That silver orb was shining in all her splendor amid countless constellations whose purity couldn't be disturbed by her rays. Over the moon's disk her plains were already recovering that dark shade visible from the earth. The remainder of her halo still glittered, and in the midst of this overall glittering, Tycho continued to stand out like a sun.


Barbicane didn't have any way of gauging the projectile's speed, but common sense told him it had to be steadily decreasing in line with the laws of rational mechanics.


In essence, conceding that the shell would sweep in an orbit around the moon, this orbit would need to be elliptical. Science proves it has to be this way. No moving thing that travels around an attracting object disobeys this law. Every orbit sweeping around in space is elliptical, whether it's a satellite circling its planet, a planet circling its sun, or a sun circling some unknown heavenly body that serves as its central pivot. Why should the Gun Club's projectile be exempt from the natural order of things?


Now then, with an elliptical orbit the attracting object is always at one of the foci of the ellipse. At one moment, then, the satellite is closer to the heavenly body it's revolving around, at another it's farther away. When the earth is nearest the sun, it's at its perihelion, then its aphelion when it's farthest removed. In the moon's case, she's closest to the earth at her perigee and farthest at her apogee. To coin a couple of comparable expressions that will improve every astronomer's vocabulary, if the projectile remains in the role of a lunar satellite, you ought to say that it's at its “periselene” when at its nearest point, its “aposelene” when at its farthest point.


In the latter case the projectile should reach its minimum speed, in the former its maximum. Now then, the shell was obviously moving toward its aposelenical point, and Barbicane had grounds for thinking they would lose speed up to that moment, gradually regaining it as they drew nearer to the moon. If the point itself coincided with the point of equal attraction, their speed would actually go all the way down to zero.


Barbicane was pondering the consequences of these different scenarios and wondering what conclusions to draw, when he was sharply interrupted by a shout from Michel Ardan.


“By God!” Michel exclaimed. “We're absolute numbskulls, I have to admit!”


“I don't say nay,” Barbicane replied. “But what brings this on?”


“We've got a very simple way to curb this speed that's taking us farther from the moon—and we aren't using it!”


“What way is that?”


“We could utilize the recoil power contained in our rockets.”


“That's it!” Nicholl said.


“So far we haven't utilized this power, it's true,” Barbicane said, “but we'll do so.”


“When?” Michel asked.


“When the time is right. My friends, notice the position our projectile's in, a position still at an angle to the lunar disk—while changing our direction, the rockets could make us veer away from the moon instead of drawing nearer. Now then, you do want to reach the moon, don't you?”


“That's the idea,” Michel replied.


“Then wait. Due to some bewildering influence, the projectile is tending to keep its base toward the earth. At the line of equal attraction, its conical cap will very likely point straight at the moon. By then, hopefully, our speed will be zero. That will be the moment to take action, and with the thrust from our rockets, maybe we can make the shell fall right to the surface of the lunar disk.” “Bravo!” Michel put in.


“We didn't do this—we couldn't do this—when we crossed the neutral point before, because the speed impelling our projectile was still so considerable.”


“Makes sense,” Nicholl said.


“Let's wait patiently,” Barbicane went on. “Let's get the odds on our side, and after so much despair, I'm now inclined to think we'll reach our destination!”


This conclusion prompted a round of hip-hips and hoorays from Michel Ardan. But not one of these daring lunatics remembered that they'd answered no on a crucial issue: no, life doesn't exist on the moon; no, it isn't likely life can exist on the moon. Yet they were willing to try anything to reach her!


There was one matter left to settle: exactly when would the projectile reach that point of equal attraction where the travelers would risk all?


In order to calculate this to within a few seconds, Barbicane had to merely revisit his travel notes and check the various entries he'd made at the lunar parallels. Thus the time it took to cover the distance between the neutral point and the moon's south pole should be equal to the distance separating her north pole from that neutral point. He'd carefully jotted down the hours representing their travel time, and the calculation turned out to be easy.


Barbicane found that their projectile would reach the neutral point at one o'clock in the morning on the night of December 7–8. Now then, at that moment it was three o'clock in the morning on the night of December 6–7. So if nothing impeded its progress, the projectile would reach the desired position in twenty-two hours.


The rockets had originally been put in place to slow the shell's fall to the moon, and now these daredevils were going to use them to create exactly the opposite effect. Be that as it may, the devices were all set and our travelers simply had to wait for the right moment to ignite them.


“Since there's nothing left to be done,” Nicholl said, “I have a proposition to make.”


“What's that?” Barbicane asked.


“I propose we take a nap.”


“By thunder!” Michel Ardan exclaimed.


“We haven't shut our eyes in forty hours,”


Nicholl said. “A couple hours' sleep will build our strength back up.”


“Never,” Michel snapped back.


“Fine, suit yourself,” Nicholl went on. “Me, I'm for a nap.”


Nicholl stretched out on a couch and before long was whistling like a 48-pound shell.


“That Nicholl's a sensible man,” Barbicane said after a short while. “I'm doing likewise.”


A few seconds later his snores were adding a ground bass beneath the captain's baritone.


“No doubt about it,” Michel Ardan said, seeing he was on his own, “these practical fellows know an idea whose time has come.”


Stretching his long legs and folding his big arms behind his head, Michel dozed off in his turn.


But their slumber wasn't to be long or restful. Too many worries were swirling around in the brains of these three men, and a few hours later around seven o'clock in the morning, all three were on their feet at the same instant.


The projectile was still heading away from the moon, its conical end leaning toward her more and more. It was a phenomenon that remained bewildering, though luckily it served Barbicane's purposes.


Seventeen hours to go, then it would be time to take action.


How long that day seemed. Daredevils they might be, but our travelers were on pins and needles over the coming of this moment that was to decide everything—either they would fall to the moon or they would be permanently trapped in an unchanging orbit. So they counted off the hours, which went by too slowly for their liking; Barbicane and Nicholl were stubbornly immersed in their calculations, Michel paced back and forth between the cramped walls, contemplating the unresponsive moon with an eager eye.


Sometimes fleeting memories of the earth crossed their minds. They saw their friends from the Gun Club again—especially J. T. Maston, their dearest friend of all. Just then the distinguished secretary should have been manning his post in the Rocky Mountains. If he spotted the projectile in the mirror of his gigantic telescope, what would he make of it? He'd seen it vanish beyond the lunar south pole, only to see it reappear over her north pole! So it was our satellite's satellite! Had J. T. Maston fired off this unexpected news to the world at large? Was this the outcome, then, of that great undertaking?


Meanwhile the day had gone by uneventfully. It was midnight earth time. December 8 was just starting. In another hour they would reach the point of equal attraction. What was the projectile's current speed? They couldn't estimate it. But no error could have blemished Barbicane's calculations. By one o'clock in the morning their speed should and would be zero.


What's more, another phenomenon would mark the projectile's arrival on the neutral line. At this locality the gravitational fields of both moon and earth would be negated. Our travelers wouldn't be dealing with “weighty things” anymore. This distinctive circumstance, which Barbicane and his companions were fascinated to experience on their outbound journey, would be duplicated on their return trip under identical conditions. Which was exactly when they needed to take action.


Already the projectile's conical cap was noticeably swinging toward the lunar disk. The shell would be in a position to take full advantage of the recoil from the thrust of the explosive devices. So the odds favored the travelers. If the projectile's speed at the neutral point was right at zero, any distinct movement toward the moon, no matter how slight, would be enough to make them fall.


“Twelve fifty-five,” Nicholl said.


“We're all set,” Michel Ardan replied, holding a taper in readiness near the gas jet's flame.


“Wait!” Barbicane said, chronometer in hand.


By then gravity was creating no further effects. The travelers felt it completely vanishing from their persons. They were quite close to the neutral line, if not right on it … !


“One o'clock,” Barbicane said.


Michel Ardan lowered the flaming taper to a fuse in direct contact with the rockets.


No explosion was audible outside where there wasn't any air. But through the portholes Barbicane saw a protracted flash of light, which soon faded away.


The projectile gave a definite lurch that was distinctly noticeable inside.


The three friends looked and listened without saying a word, almost without breathing. In the utter silence you could have heard their heartbeats.


“Are we falling?” Michel Ardan finally asked.


“No,” Nicholl replied, “because the projectile's base hasn't swung back toward the moon!”


Just then Barbicane left the window of his porthole and faced his two companions. He was fearfully pale, frowning, tight lipped.


“We are falling!” he said.


“Aha!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Toward the moon?”


“Toward the earth!” Barbicane replied.


“Blast!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. Then he added philosophically, “Fine. When we got inside this shell, we suspected it wouldn't be easy to come back out!”


That frightful descent was indeed under way. The projectile had kept enough speed to take it past the neutral point. The exploding rockets couldn't hold it in check. Its outbound speed had carried the projectile beyond the point of equal attraction, and its inbound speed was carrying it back again. The laws of physics decreed that it must return to every point on its elliptical orbit that it had already gone past.


It was a dreadful fall from 195,000 miles up, and no springs could soften it. According to the laws of ballistics, the projectile was due to hit the earth at the same speed that had impelled it from the columbiad's muzzle, a terminal velocity of “nearly 18,000 yards per second.”


To provide a basis for comparison, it's calculated that an object tossed from the tip of a steeple at Notre Dame Cathedral—which is only 200 feet high—will reach the pavement at a speed of 300 miles per hour. Here the projectile was due to hit the earth at a speed of 144,000 miles per hour.


“We're done for!” Nicholl said coolly.










“All right, if we die,” Barbicane replied in a kind of religious ecstasy, “the outcome of our journey will increase in magnificence! We'll learn the ultimate secret from God's own lips! In the next life our souls will have no need for machines or engines to gain knowledge! We'll become one with eternal wisdom!”


“In fact,” Michel Ardan remarked, “the next world and everything it entails might be a pretty fair substitute for that lowly satellite known as the moon!”


As a gesture of sublime acceptance, Barbicane folded his arms over his chest.


“May Heaven's will be done!” he said.