CHAPTER 7








An Intoxicating Moment






HENCE THESE STRANGE conditions gave rise to a phenomenon that was unusual but logical, peculiar but understandable. Any objects tossed out of the projectile had to follow its flight path and could come to a halt only when it did. Here was a topic of conversation good for a whole evening. Besides, the three travelers were growing more excited the nearer they got to their journey's end. They were on the alert for anything new and unexpected, and nothing would have surprised them in their current frame of mind. Their feverish fancies were going faster than the projectile itself, which had slowed down significantly without their noticing. But the moon was getting bigger in front of their eyes, and they already imagined that if they simply stretched out their hands, they could practically grab it.


The next day, December 5, all three were on their feet by five o'clock in the morning. If their calculations were correct, this was to be the last day of their journey. In eighteen hours, at midnight that very evening and right when the moon was full, they would arrive on its shining disk. This coming midnight would see them complete their journey, the most amazing of all time. Bright and early that morning, therefore, they looked out the portholes, which were tinted silver by the moon's rays, and they greeted her with a hearty and hopeful cheer.


The earth's satellite was proceeding majestically across the starry firmament. A few more degrees and she would reach the exact point in space where she was due to meet up with the projectile. By Barbicane's own reckoning they would make contact in her northern hemisphere, where mountains are scarce and wide plains stretch into the distance. A promising state of affairs, if, as they believed, the moon stored her atmosphere exclusively in the lowlands.


“Besides,” Michel Ardan pointed out, “it's better to land on a plain than a mountain. If a moonperson got dropped off on the summit of Mt. Blanc in Europe or on top of the Himalayas in Asia, he wouldn't really have arrived yet!”


“What's more,” Captain Nicholl added, “on level terrain the projectile would stay stationary once it descended. By contrast, if we alighted on a slope, our shell would roll down it like an avalanche, and since we aren't squirrels in a cage, we wouldn't arrive safe and sound. So all's for the best.”


In fact the success of their daring endeavor no longer seemed doubtful. But Barbicane was bothered by one thought; however, not wanting to worry his two companions, he kept silent on the matter.


In essence their moving toward the moon's northern hemisphere proved that the projectile's flight path had changed slightly. As worked out by the mathematicians, the blast at takeoff was supposed to carry the shell to the very center of the lunar disk. If it didn't arrive there, that meant it had gone off course. What was the cause? Due to the shortage of landmarks, Barbicane couldn't gauge or even guess the magnitude of this change in course. Nevertheless he hoped it would result only in taking them toward the topside of the moon, a region more suitable for landing.


Therefore, without sharing his worries with his friends, Barbicane was content to keep a close watch on the moon, trying to see if the projectile had truly changed direction. Because if the shell missed its target, overshot the moon, and flew off into interplanetary space, they would be in a dreadful position.


Just then, instead of looking flat like a disk, that silver orb was already hinting at her convexity. If the sun's rays had struck her at an angle, the shadows cast would have highlighted her lofty mountains and made them stand out sharply. A person's eyes could have dipped into the yawning depths of her craters or followed those erratic crevices that streak across her wide plains. But the intense brightness still flattened everything. You could barely see those wide blotches that make our satellite look like a human face.


“A face it may be,” Michel Ardan said, “but with apologies to the


charming goddess of the moon, 3 a pockmarked face!”


But the travelers were so close to their destination, they couldn't take their eyes off this new world. They strolled in their imaginations through its unknown lands. They scaled its lofty peaks. They descended into its wide basins. Here and there they thought they saw huge seas barely coalescing in its thin atmosphere, and watercourses pouring out their contributions from the mountains. Peering into the depths, they hoped to detect some sounds from this heavenly body, eternally silent in the solitude of space.


That last day left them with thrilling memories. They took note of the tiniest details. A vague uneasiness came over them as the time drew nearer. This uneasiness would have been even greater if they'd sensed how their speed was slackening. They wouldn't have thought it at all sufficient to take them to their destination. This was because the projectile no longer “carried any weight” by that point. It kept getting lighter, and at that boundary line where the moon's gravity and the earth's neutralize each other, the shell would become completely weightless, creating some highly startling effects.


But despite his various involvements, Michel Ardan didn't forget to fix their morning meal with his usual punctuality. They ate heartily. Nothing could have been more excellent than that beef broth brewed over the gas jet, nothing finer than those canned meats. A couple glasses of good French wine topped off this meal. And pertinent to this, Michel Ardan pointed out that under such blazing sunlight, even more robust wines were sure to be fermenting in the moon's vineyards, assuming they existed in the first place. In any event the farsighted Frenchman had taken pains to pack some precious cuttings from Médoc and Cote d'Or for which he had especially high hopes.


The Reiset and Regnault device continued to operate with tremendous efficiency. The air was always perfectly fresh. Not a molecule of carbon dioxide eluded the potassium hydroxide, and as for the oxygen, Captain Nicholl called it “definitely high quality.” The traces of water vapor inside the projectile mixed with the air, tempering its dryness, and it's a fact that few apartments and auditoriums in London, Paris, or New York could have offered such sanitary conditions.


But for it to operate reliably, the device had to be kept in perfect working order. Accordingly Michel inspected the escape valves every morning, tested the spigots, and adjusted the gas temperature on the pyrometer. Everything had gone well till then, and like dear old J. T. Maston, the travelers were starting to put on weight—and if they stayed locked in a few months longer, they would end up unrecognizable. In short, they acted like chickens in a coop: they got fatter.


Glancing out the portholes, Barbicane saw the ghostly carcass of the dog and various other objects that had been tossed out of the projectile, all stubbornly tagging along. Diana gave a mournful howl at seeing Satellite's remains. This flotsam and jetsam looked as motionless as if it were lying on solid ground.


“Do you realize, my friends,” Michel Ardan said, “that if one of us had died from the recoil at our departure, we would have had a hard time burying him, or rather ‘etherizing’ him, since out here we've got ether instead of dirt. As you can see, the incriminating corpse would have followed us into space like a guilty conscience.”


“That would have been distressing,” Nicholl said.


“But,” Michel went on, “the thing I miss is being able to go for a stroll outdoors. What rapture to float through this radiant ether, to bathe in it, to roll around in the sun's pure rays! If only Barbicane had thought to provide us with diving gear and an air pump, I could venture outside, pretend to be a gargoyle, and pose on top of the projectile like a chimera or a hippogriff.”


“Well, Michel old fellow,” Barbicane replied, “you wouldn't play hippogriff for long, because, despite your diving suit, the air would expand inside you, then you would inflate and explode like a shell from a mortar, or rather like a hot air balloon that has gone too high in the skies. Therefore you aren't missing anything, and remember this: so long as we're cruising in space, we need to prohibit any starry-eyed strolling outside the projectile.”


Michel Ardan let himself be partially persuaded. He conceded the thing was difficult though not “impossible,” a word that wasn't in his vocabulary.


The conversation shifted from this topic to another, not faltering for a second. Right then the three friends felt that ideas were sprouting in their brains the way leaves sprout during the first warm spell in spring. They were starting to get all tangled up.


In the midst of the questions and answers crisscrossing each other that morning, Nicholl pointed out a problem that didn't have an immediate solution.


“Of course,” he said, “it's all fine and dandy to go to the moon, but how do we get back?”


His two conversation partners looked at each other in surprise. You would have thought this possibility had never occurred to them before.


“What do you mean, Nicholl?” Barbicane asked in all seriousness.


“It strikes me as premature,” Michel added, “to think about leaving a place before we even get there.”


“I'm not saying we shouldn't keep on,” Nicholl remarked, “but I'll repeat my question and ask: how do we get back?”


“I haven't a clue,” Barbicane replied.


“As for me,” Michel said, “if I'd known how to come back, I never would have gone.”


“That's not much help,” Nicholl snapped.


“I'm on Michel's side,” Barbicane said, “and I'll add that the problem has no current relevance. Later on, when we judge it's time to go back, we'll put our heads together. Though we don't have the columbiad, we'll still have the projectile.”


“There's a step in the right direction. A bullet without a gun!”


“The gun we can build,” Barbicane replied. “The gunpowder we can make. There should be no shortage of metal, saltpeter, or coal in the bowels of the moon. Besides, in order to go back all we have to do is overcome the moon's force of attraction, and we only need to go 20,000 miles before we'll fall to the earth simply because of the laws of gravity.”


“That's enough,” Michel said heatedly. “Let's table this question of getting back! We've spent too much time on it already. As for contacting our old colleagues on the ground, that won't be hard.”


“And how would you do it?”


“With meteors launched out of lunar volcanoes.”


“Good thinking, Michel,” Barbicane replied in a decisive tone. “Pierre Laplace calculated that a force five times greater than that of today's cannons would be enough to shoot a meteor from the moon to the earth. Now then, every volcano has more propulsive force than that.”


“Hooray!” Michel shouted. “What handy mailmen these meteors will make, plus they won't cost a cent! And what fun we'll have with the postal authorities! But come to think of it … ”


“Think of what?”


“I've just had a marvelous idea! Why didn't we hook a wire to our shell? We could have traded telegrams with the earth!”


“Damnation!” Nicholl shot back. “A wire 215,000 miles long—do you think it would weigh nothing at all?”


“Nothing at all! We could have tripled the columbiad's powder charge! Even quadrupled or quintupled it!” Michel exclaimed, each of his verbs getting higher in pitch.


“There's just one small objection to make to your plan,” Barbicane replied. “As our globe rotates, the wire will wind itself around it like a chain on a winch—and that'll bring us back down to earth for sure.”


“God bless the Union and its thirty-nine stars!” Michel said. “I'm having nothing but unrealistic ideas today—ideas worthy of J. T. Maston! But I guess if we don't make it back to the earth, J. T. Maston could come and fetch us.”


“Yes, he'll come!” Barbicane remarked. “He's a dear and courageous comrade! Besides, what could be simpler? Isn't the columbiad still buried in Florida soil? Is there any shortage of cotton and nitric acid for manufacturing pyroxile? Won't the moon reappear at the zenith above Florida? Eighteen years from now won't she be in exactly the same place she's in today?”


“Yes,” Michel echoed. “Yes, Maston will come—along with our friends Elphiston, Blomsberry, and all the members of the Gun Club, and they'll get a hearty welcome! Then later on we'll run trains of projectiles between the earth and the moon! Hooray for J. T. Maston!”


It's likely that if the honorable J. T. Maston didn't hear the cheers uttered on his behalf, at least his ears were burning. What was he doing at that juncture? No doubt he was stationed in the Rocky Mountains at the outpost on Long's Peak, still trying to find that invisible shell drifting in space. If he was thinking of his dear companions, it must be conceded that they weren't far behind—all three were in the grip of a strange exhilaration and were sending him their best wishes.


But what was the reason for this lively behavior, now visibly increasing in the projectile's guests? Their sobriety couldn't be doubted. Should this odd intellectual sensitivity be blamed on their unusual circumstances, on the nearness of that moon just a few hours away, on some mysterious lunar influence now affecting their nervous systems? Their faces were as red as if they'd been exposed to heat from an oven; their breathing had quickened, and their lungs were pumping like a blacksmith's bellows; an abnormal light gleamed in their eyes; their voices were exploding with fearsome emphasis; their words were popping out like champagne corks expelled by carbon dioxide; their sweeping gestures were becoming dangerous. And strangely enough, none of them noticed this mental hypertension.


“Now,” Nicholl said in a curt tone, “now that I'm not so sure we'll get back from the moon, I want to know what we'll do there.”


“What we'll do there?” Barbicane replied, stamping his foot like a swordsman at a fencing club. “I have no idea!”


“You have no idea?” Michel exclaimed, bellowing the words so that they reverberated noisily around the projectile.


“No, I haven't the foggiest notion!” Barbicane shot back, matching the volume level of his conversation partner.


“Well, I know what we'll do,” Michel replied.


“So tell us,” Nicholl snapped, no longer able to keep a snarl out of his voice.


“I'll tell you if I feel like it,” Michel exclaimed, grabbing his companion fiercely by the arm.


“You'd better feel like it,” Barbicane said, eyes fiery, fists raised. “You're the one who dragged us on this fearsome journey, and we want to know why!”


“That's right!” the captain put in. “Since I'm not sure where I'm going, I want to know why I'm going!”


“Why?” Michel exclaimed, jumping a yard off the floor. “Why? To lay claim to the moon in the name of the United States! To add a fortieth state to the Union! To colonize these lunar regions, farm them, populate them, send them all our prodigious achievements in art, science, and technology! To bring civilization to the moonpeople, unless they're more civilized than we are, and to set them up in a republic, if they haven't got one already!”


“And what if there aren't any moonpeople?” Nicholl shot back, turning very argumentative under the sway of this bewildering intoxication.


“Who says there aren't any moonpeople?” Michel snapped in a threatening tone.


“I do!” Nicholl roared.


“Captain,” Michel said, “if you continue this insolent behavior, I'll ram it down your throat along with your teeth!”


The two opponents were about to rush at each other, and this disjointed debate was all set to deteriorate into a fistfight, when Barbicane made a fearsome leap in between them.


“Stop, you miserable fools!” he said, causing his two companions to turn their backs on each other. “If there aren't any moonpeople, we'll manage without them.”


“Right,” snapped Michel, who had no strong feelings either way. “We'll manage without them. Who needs moonpeople anyway? Down with all moonpeople!”


“The lunar empire is ours,” Nicholl said.


“The three of us will set up a republic!”


“I'll be the congress,” Michel exclaimed.


“I'm the senate,” Nicholl shot back.


“And Barbicane's president,” Michel roared.


“Not a president elected by the nation!” Barbicane replied.


“All right, a president elected by congress,” Michel snapped. “And since I'm the congress, you're elected unanimously!”


“Three cheers for President Barbicane!” Nicholl shouted.


“Hip hip hooray!” Michel Ardan howled.


Afterward president and senate, both in dreadful voice, sang a rabble-rousing “Yankee Doodle,” while the virile strains of the “Marseillaise” rang out from congress.


Then they started a chaotic round dance, making demented gestures, stomping insanely, turning somersaults like rubber-boned clowns. Howling in her turn, Diana joined the dance and leaped to the ceiling of the projectile. Then came a bewildering ruckus of flapping wings and a peculiar clamor like a rooster crowing. Five or six hens were fluttering around, knocking against the walls like crazed bats …


Their lungs out of order from some perplexing cause, more than just intoxicated, scorched by the air that was burning their respiratory organs, the three traveling companions fell motionless to the projectile's floor.