CHAPTER 5








The Coldness of Space






THIS REVELATION was like a lightning bolt. Who could have anticipated such a calculating error? Barbicane refused to believe it. Nicholl reviewed his figures. They were correct. As for the formula that had generated them, its accuracy was above suspicion, and after verifying it, they'd confirmed that an initial velocity of 18,000 yards per second was needed to reach the neutral point.


The three friends looked at each other in silence. Breakfast wasn't in the picture anymore. Barbicane peered out a porthole, gritting his teeth, knitting his brow, convulsively clenching his fists. Nicholl examined his calculations, arms folded. Michel Ardan muttered:


“So much for your so-called experts! Those good-for-nothings! I would give twenty gold pieces for this shell to fall right on the Cambridge Observatory and pulverize every pencil pusher inside!”


All at once the captain had a thought, which he conveyed immediately to Barbicane.


“Hold on!” he said. “It's seven o'clock in the morning. So we've been gone thirty-two hours. Our flight is more than half over, yet as far as I can tell, we aren't falling.”


Barbicane didn't answer. But after a quick glance at the captain, he picked up a pair of compasses he used for measuring the angular distance of the earth. Then he got a highly accurate reading through the lower window, since the projectile seemed to be stock-still. Afterward he straightened, mopped the beads of sweat forming on his brow, and juggled some figures on his piece of paper. Nicholl saw that the Gun Club's president was trying to compute from the length of the earth's diameter just how far the shell had traveled. The captain watched him anxiously.


“No!” Barbicane exclaimed a few seconds later. “No, we're not falling! We're already over 125,000 miles from the earth! We've gone past the point where the projectile should have halted if its initial velocity had been just 12,000 yards per second. We're still ascending!”


“Obviously,” Nicholl replied. “So we're forced to conclude that the thrust from those 400,000 pounds of guncotton produced an initial velocity greater than the promised 12,000 yards. That explains why it took us just thirteen minutes to meet up with our second satellite, whose orbit is more than 5,000 miles above the earth.”


“And this explanation is all the more likely,” Barbicane added, “because by expelling the water stored between the collapsible partitions, the projectile suddenly lost considerable weight.”


“Right,” Nicholl put in.


“Ah, my gallant Nicholl,” Barbicane exclaimed, “we're saved!”


“Well then,” Michel Ardan replied serenely, “since we're saved, it's time for breakfast.”


In fact Nicholl wasn't mistaken. By a stroke of luck, their initial velocity had been greater than the speed specified by the Cambridge Observatory, but the Cambridge Observatory had made a mistake all the same.


Recovering from this false alarm, our travelers sat down to a hearty breakfast. If they ate a good deal, they talked even more. Their confidence was even greater now than before “the algebra incident.”


“Why shouldn't we succeed?” Michel Ardan kept saying. “Why shouldn't we arrive safely? We've taken off. There are no obstacles in front of us. There are no stumbling blocks in our way. We've got an easy road to travel, easier than a ship struggling against the sea, easier than a balloon fighting with the wind! Now then, if a ship can sail where it wants and a balloon can soar where it pleases, why can't our projectile hit the target it's aiming at?”


“It will hit the target,” Barbicane said.


“If only to do credit to the American people,” Michel Ardan added, “the only people who could see such an undertaking through to completion, the only ones who could bring forth a man like President Barbicane. And come to think of it, what's going to happen to us now that our worries are over? We'll end up being bored stiff.”


Barbicane and Nicholl waved this away.


“But I've foreseen this state of affairs, my friends,” Michel Ardan went on. “Just say the word. You've got chess, checkers, card games, and dominoes at your disposal. All we're lacking is a billiard table.”


“What!” Barbicane asked. “You brought such frivolous things along?”


“Certainly,” Michel replied, “and not just to entertain ourselves, but also with the praiseworthy intention of bequeathing them to the moonpeople's clubhouses.”


“My friend,” Barbicane said, “if there are people on the moon, they appeared thousands of years before people on the earth, because they live on a heavenly body that's unquestionably older than ours. So if these moonpeople have existed for hundreds of thousands of years, and if their brains are put together like human brains, they've already invented everything we've invented, and even what we'll invent in centuries to come. They have nothing to learn from us, and we have everything to learn from them.”


“What!” Michel responded. “You think they've got artists like Phidias, Michelangelo, or Raphael?”


“They do.”


“Writers like Homer, Virgil, Milton, Lamartine, and Victor Hugo?”


“I'm sure of it.”


“Philosophers like Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, and Kant?”


“I haven't any doubt of it.”


“Scientists like Archimedes, Euclid, Pascal, and Newton?”


“I would swear to it.”


“Comedians like Étienne Arnal and photographers like … like that


Nadar fellow?” 2


“I'm sure of it.”


“Then, Barbicane my friend, if these moonpeople are as good as we are, or even better, why haven't they tried to contact the earth? Why haven't they fired a lunar projectile at our planet?”


“Who says they haven't?” Barbicane replied in all seriousness.


“That's right,” Nicholl added. “It would be easier for them than for us, and for two reasons: first, because the gravity on the surface of the moon is a sixth of the earth's gravity, which would allow a projectile to take off more easily; second, because they would need to send this projectile a mere 20,000 miles instead of 200,000, which would require only a tenth as much thrust at departure.”


“Then I repeat,” Michel continued, “why haven't they done it?”


“And I repeat,” Barbicane countered, “who says they haven't?”


“When?”


“Thousands of years before man appeared on the earth.”


“What about the shell? Where's the shell? I insist on seeing the shell.”


“My friend,” Barbicane replied, “the sea covers five-sixths of our globe. That gives us five good reasons for assuming that if a lunar projectile was fired, it's now sitting on the floor of the Atlantic or the Pacific. Unless it got buried in some crevasse during that era when the earth's crust still hadn't hardened sufficiently.”


“Barbicane old boy,” Michel replied, “you have an answer for everything and I bow to your wisdom. All the same here's one theory that suits me better than the rest: since moonpeople are older and therefore wiser than we are, they simply decided not to invent gunpowder!”


Just then Diana butted into the conversation, barking noisily. She was clamoring for her breakfast.


“Ah!” Michel Ardan put in. “While we were arguing away, we forgot about Diana and Satellite.”


They immediately dished out a decent helping of dog chow, which Diana devoured ravenously.


“Look here, Barbicane,” Michel said, “we ought to have turned this projectile into a second Noah's ark and taken two of every domestic animal to the moon.”


“No doubt,” Barbicane answered, “but there wouldn't be enough room.”


“True,” Michel said, “it might be a bit of a squeeze.”


“The fact is,” Nicholl replied, “such ruminants as oxen, cows, bulls, and horses would be mighty useful on those lunar landmasses. It's a shame this coach couldn't be made into a stable or a cowshed.”


“But at least,” Michel Ardan said, “we might have brought a donkey along, just one little donkey, one of those courageous, patient creatures old Silenus liked to ride. I'm partial to those poor donkeys! They're absolutely the unluckiest animals in creation. They get beaten not only while they're alive, but even after they're dead.”


“How do you figure that?” Barbicane asked.


“It's the truth,” Michel put in. “Their hides are used for drums!”


Barbicane and Nicholl couldn't help laughing at this silly statement. But an exclamation from their lighthearted companion cut them off. The latter was stooping over the nook where Satellite lay; he straightened up, saying:


“Fine. Satellite isn't ailing anymore.”


“Good,” Nicholl put in.


“No, he's dead,” Michel went on. “That's going to be awkward,” he added in a doleful tone. “I'm afraid, my unlucky Diana, you aren't going to establish a bloodline in the lunar regions!”


In essence poor Satellite hadn't recovered from his injury. He was stone dead. Very flustered, Michel Ardan looked at his friends.


“This presents a problem,” Barbicane said. “We can't keep this dog's carcass with us for another two days.”


“No, surely not,” Nicholl replied, “but our portholes are on hinges. We can lower them. We'll open one of them and toss his body out into space.”


The Gun Club's president thought for a few seconds and said:


“Yes, that's how we'll proceed, but we'll need to take the most meticulous precautions.”


“Why?” Michel asked.


“For two reasons you'll soon understand,” Barbicane replied. “The first concerns the air inside the projectile—we need to lose as little of it as possible.”


“But we renew our air.”


“Only partially. We renew just the oxygen, my gallant Michel—and pertinent to this, let's take good care the device doesn't furnish an excessive amount of oxygen, because too much could cause us very serious physiological problems. But though we renew the oxygen, we don't renew the nitrogen, this carrier that the lungs don't consume and that needs to stay intact. Now then, this nitrogen will swiftly escape through the open porthole.”


“Oh I see—while we're tossing out poor Satellite,” Michel said.


“Right, so we'll need to act quickly.”


“And how about your second reason?” Michel asked.


“The second reason is that we mustn't let the intense cold outside get into the projectile, otherwise we'll freeze to death.”


“But what about the sun … ?”


“The sun warms our projectile, which absorbs its rays, but it doesn't warm the vacuum in which we're cruising right now. There's no air, so heat can't spread any more than light can, and wherever the sun's rays don't shine directly, it's not only dark, it's cold as well. This temperature, then, is simply what's produced by stellar radiation, in other words, it's what the planet earth would experience if the sun faded out one day.”


“Which isn't a cause for concern,” Nicholl replied.


“Who knows?” Michel Ardan said. “Even so, assuming that the sun doesn't fade out, couldn't the earth move farther away from it?”


“Oh good,” Barbicane put in. “Michel's daydreaming again!”


“Wait!” Michel went on. “Isn't it a fact that the earth passed through the tail of a comet in 1861? Now then, if we ever ran into a comet with a gravitational pull greater than the sun's, our orbit could shift toward this rambling space rock, the earth could become its satellite, and our planet could be dragged so far away that the sun's rays wouldn't have any further effect on its surface.”


“That actually could happen,” Barbicane replied, “but the consequences of such a change needn't be quite as alarming as you assume.”


“And why not?”


“Because heat and cold would remain in balance on our planet. Scientists calculate that if the earth had been carried off by that comet in 1861, we would have felt, even when we were farthest from the sun, a heat barely sixteen times greater than what we get from moonlight—which even the strongest magnifying lens can't increase to any appreciable extent.”


“So?” Michel put in.


“Wait a second,” Barbicane replied. “Scientists also calculate that at the earth's perihelion, when we're closest to the sun, we'll face a heat 28,000 times greater than what we feel during the summer. But this heat, which is enough to fuse solid matter and turn the seas into steam, will form heavy belts of clouds that reduce the intense temperature. Ergo the coldness of the aphelion compensates for the warmth of the perihelion, and we're likely to reach a happy medium.”


“But how cold,” Nicholl asked, “do scientists estimate that it gets in outer space?”


“In the past,” Barbicane replied, “they thought temperatures fell tremendously. In calculating low thermometer readings, they got to the point of juggling figures millions of degrees below zero. It was Joseph Fourier, one of Michel's countrymen and a famous expert at the French Academy of Sciences, who turned these numbers back into reasonable estimates. According to him, the temperature in space isn't any lower than -76° Fahrenheit.”


“Piddling,” Michel put in.


“It's pretty close to the temperature,” Barbicane replied, “that was recorded in the arctic regions at Melville Island and Fort Reliance, hence about -69° Fahrenheit.”


“It remains to be seen,” Nicholl said, “if Fourier's assessments were well founded. If I'm not mistaken, another French scientist, Claude Pouillet, puts the temperature in space at -256° Fahrenheit. However we'll be able to find out for ourselves.”


“Not right now,” Barbicane replied, “because the sun's rays are shining directly on our thermometer, so I'm afraid they would give an overly high temperature. But each side of the moon is dark for two weeks at a time, and once we've landed, we'll have the leisure to conduct this experiment, because the earth's satellite is moving in a vacuum.”


“But what do you mean by a vacuum?” Michel asked. “Is it an absolute void?”


“It's absolutely without air.”


“And the air isn't replaced by anything?”


“Yes. By ether,” Barbicane replied.


“Aha! And just what is this ether?”


“Ether, my friend, is a cluster of infinitesimal atoms, which, according to books on molecular physics, are as far from each other, relative to their dimensions, as celestial bodies are in space. But this distance is less than one 75,000,000th of an inch. It's the vibrating motion of these atoms that generates both light and heat, undulating 430 trillion times per second, though they're only two or three 125,000ths of an inch in size.”


“Billions of billions!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “So they've measured and counted all those fluctuations, have they? These, Barbicane my friend, are typical scientific figures—they grate on the ears and people can't relate to them.”


“But you have to work with figures—”


“No you don't. You're better off comparing them to something. A trillion doesn't mean a thing. Comparisons say it all. For instance: if you keep telling me that Uranus is 76 times bigger than the earth, Saturn 900 times bigger, Jupiter 1,300 times bigger, the sun 1,300,000 times bigger, I won't be much farther along. Accordingly I prefer—and by far—those old-fashioned comparisons in the almanacs that just talk down to you: the sun is a pumpkin two feet wide, Jupiter is an orange, Saturn is a lady apple, Neptune is a black cherry, Uranus is a Barbados cherry, the earth is a pea, Venus is a smaller pea, Mars is a bulbous pinhead, Mercury is a mustard seed, Juno, Ceres, Vesta, and Pallas are simply grains of sand. This way, at least, you know where you stand!”


After Michel Ardan's sally against scientists and the trillions they reel off without batting an eye, it was time to bury Satellite. This was a simple matter of tossing him out into space, just as sailors toss a corpse into the sea.


But as President Barbicane had advised, they needed to work fast so as to lose as little air as possible, since that elastic fluid would quickly pour out into the void. They carefully unscrewed the bolts in the right porthole, whose opening measured about a foot across; in the meantime Michel, full of remorse, got ready to launch the dog into space. Raised by a powerful lever that helped it overcome the interior air pressure on the projectile's walls, the window swung swiftly on its hinges and out went Satellite. Only a few molecules of air had escaped, and the operation was so successful, Barbicane had no qualms later on about likewise dumping any needless rubbish that cluttered the coach.