CHAPTER 11








Fact and Fancy






“HAVE YOU EVER seen the moon?” a teacher sarcastically asked one of his pupils.


“No, sir,” the pupil remarked even more sarcastically. “But I have to admit I've heard about the place.”


In a sense the pupil's humorous answer could be given by the vast majority of mortal beings. How many people have heard about the moon but have never seen her … at least not through the eyepiece of a spyglass or telescope! How many have never even examined a map of the earth's satellite!


When we look at a map of the moon's physical features, one oddity strikes us right off.


In contrast to the arrangement adopted on the earth and Mars, the moon's continents lie primarily in the southern hemisphere of her globe. These continents don't boast the clean, clear outlines of South America, Africa, and India's peninsula. Their angular, erratic, deeply chiseled coasts are full of bays and capes. They're instantly reminiscent of the mass confusion in the Sunda Islands of Malaysia, where the land is extremely broken up. If any ships ever navigated over the surface of the moon, it must have been an exceptionally difficult and dangerous activity, and those lunar seamen and hydrographers were to be pitied—the latter as they surveyed the tortuous shorelines, the former as they made for those hazardous landing places.


You'll also note that on the lunar globe, her south pole is a much fuller landmass than her north pole. This last is nothing but a skimpy


patch of ground separated from the other continents by wide seas.5 To the south landmasses cover nearly the whole hemisphere. So it's possible moonpeople have already planted a flag on one of their poles, while the likes of such terrestrial explorers as Franklin, Ross, Kane, Dumont d'Urville, and Lambert still haven't managed to reach that unknown spot on the planet earth.


As for islands, they're plentiful on the surface of the moon. Nearly all of them are oval or as circular as if drawn with a pair of compasses, and they seem to form a huge group similar to those delightful isles scattered between Greece and Asia Minor, a region mythology once livened up with its most appealing legends. The names of such islands as Naxos, Tenedos, Milo, and Karpathos automatically spring to mind, and you instantly look around for the vessel captained by Ulysses or the “clipper” of the Argonauts. At least that's the effect this region had on Michel Ardan—they were the Greek Isles that he saw on the map. To the eyes of his less fanciful companions, the appearance of these coastlines was more reminiscent of the sliced-up lands of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, and where our Frenchman found the traces of fabled heroes, these Americans were pointing out the most favorable sites for opening trading posts in the interests of lunar commerce and industry.


To finish this description of the landlocked part of the moon, here are a few words on the layout of her mountains. Her chains of pinnacles, solitary peaks, basins, and crevices are easy to spot. The moon's most rugged terrain is confined to this section. Here it's amazingly craggy. You've got an immense Switzerland, an ongoing Norway where volcanic action has affected everything. This deeply carved surface came from consecutive contractions of the moon's crust back when this heavenly body was in the process of being formed. Therefore this lunar disk is a promising locale for studying your major geological phenomena. As certain astronomers have noted, her surface, though older than the earth's, has actually aged less. There are no seas to spoil her primitive features and increasingly smooth everything over, nor any air with a corroding effect that could change the outlines of her mountains. Here the fruits of volcanic activity can be seen in all their original glory, unchanged by water erosion. The earth was like this before swamps and streams coated it with layers of sediment.


After roaming these wide landmasses, a person's eyes are caught by even wider seas. Their organization, location, and appearance are all reminiscent of the earth's oceans; like the earth's, moreover, these seas take up the greater part of the globe. And yet they aren't bodies of water but plains, whose nature the travelers soon hoped to determine.


Astronomers, it must be conceded, have adorned these so-called seas with names that are peculiar to say the least, though science honors them to this day. Michel Ardan was right to compare a moon map to that board game “The Map of the Heart,” which was played by romantic folks like Madeleine de Scudéry or Cyrano de Bergerac.


“Only,” he added, “it's no longer the maudlin map of the 17th century, it's the map of life, quite neatly divided into two parts, one feminine and the other masculine. The right half of the moon's sphere is for women, the left for men!”


Whenever he went on like this, Michel left his matter-of-fact companions shrugging their shoulders. Barbicane and Nicholl looked at a moon map from a viewpoint quite unlike their fanciful friend's. However their fanciful friend may have been right about a few things. You be the judge.


In the left half of the lunar globe sat the “Sea of Clouds,” where human reason so often founders. Not far away appeared the “Sea of Rain,” fed by all the cares of life. Nearby lay the “Ocean of Storms,” where folks wage continual war with their passions, too often losing the battle. Then, exhausted by deceit, treachery, infidelity, and the whole retinue of worldly woes, what do people find at the end of their careers? That vast “Sea of Moods,” barely sweetened by a few drops from the “Bay of Dew.” Clouds, rain, storms, moods—does a human life include anything else, and don't these four words say it all?


The right half, “for ladies only,” contains smaller seas, whose meaningful names take in all the incidents of a feminine existence. There's the “Sea of Serenity,” a mirror into which young women peer, and the “Lake of Dreams,” which reflects a smiling future! There's the “Sea of Nectar” with its waves of affection and breezes of love! There's the “Sea of Fertility,” the “Sea of Crises,” then the “Sea of Low Spirits,” whose dimensions are maybe too modest, and finally that vast “Sea of Tranquillity,” which swallows up every false passion, futile dream, and unquenched desire, and whose waves empty peacefully into the “Lake of Death!”


What an odd sequence of names! What a quaint way of characterizing the moon's two halves, pairing them like husband and wife, fashioning this realm of existence out in space! As for our fanciful Michel, wasn't he right to interpret the old astronomers’ whimsies in this manner?


But while his imagination was “roving the seas,” his earnest companions were looking at things more geographically. They were learning this new world by heart. They were measuring her angles and diameters.


For Barbicane and Nicholl, the Sea of Clouds was an immense hollow in the ground that was dotted with a few circular mountains while largely covering the west side of the southern hemisphere; it took up about 1,150,000 square miles and its center was located in latitude 15° south and longitude 20° east. The Ocean of Storms, Oceanus Procellarum, the widest plain on the moon's disk, embraced a surface area of some 2,050,000 square miles, its center being in latitude 10° north and longitude 45° east. From the heart of it rose those wonderfully luminous mountains named after Kepler and Aristarchus.


More to the north and separated from the Sea of Clouds by lofty mountain chains, the Sea of Rain, Mare Imbrium, had its center point in latitude 35° north and longitude 20° east; it was almost circular in shape and covered an area of over 1,200,000 square miles. Not far off was the Sea of Moods, Mare Humorum, a little bowl only measuring about 275,000 square miles and located in latitude 25° south and longitude 40° east. Finally three bays stood out as well on the shores of this half of the moon's sphere: the Bay of Heat, the Bay of Dew, and the Bay of Rainbows, little plains fenced in by lofty mountain chains.


The “feminine” half—with a mind of its own, naturally—featured seas that were smaller and more plentiful. These were: to the north the Sea of Cold, Mare Frigoris, in latitude 55° north and longitude 0°, boasting a surface area of about 475,000 square miles, and bordering on the Lake of Death and the Lake of Dreams; the Sea of Serenity, Mare Serenitatis, found in latitude 25° north and longitude 20° west and encompassing a surface area of some 537,000 square miles; the Sea of Crises, Mare Crisium, in latitude 17° north and longitude 55° west, well defined, quite round, and embracing a surface area of nearly 250,000 square miles—an honest-to-goodness Caspian Sea hidden inside a belt of mountains. Then at the equator the Sea of Tranquillity, Mare Tranquillitatis, could be seen in latitude 5° north and longitude 25° west, taking up some 759,000 square miles; to the south this sea connected with the Sea of Nectar, Mare Nectaris, an expanse of about 180,000 square miles in latitude 15° south and longitude 35° west, and to the east it connected with the Sea of Fertility, Mare Fecunditatis, the widest in this half of the moon's sphere, taking up around 1,370,000 square miles in latitude 3° south and longitude 50° west. Finally, to the far north and far south, two other seas were visible—the Sea of Humboldt, Mare Humboldtianum, whose surface area was over 40,000 square miles, and the Southern Sea, Mare Australe, with a surface area of more than 160,000 square miles.


In the middle of the lunar disk, straddling the equator and the zero meridian, lay the Bay of the Center, Sinus Medii, a kind of hyphen linking the two halves.


That's how Nicholl's and Barbicane's eyes sorted out the whole visible surface of the earth's satellite. When they added up the different measurements, they found that the area of this half was some 29,610,000 square miles, of which about 20,720,000 square miles were volcanoes, mountain chains, basins, and islands—in short, everything that seemed to make up the solid part of the moon —while about 8,810,000 square miles were seas, lakes, and swamps—everything that seemed to make up the liquid part. None of this, however, was of the slightest interest to our good Michel.


This half sphere, as you can see, is less than a thirteenth the size of the earth's. Even so, lunar scholars have already counted over 50,000 craters! Consequently this surface is blistered, cracked, and as full of holes as a skimming spoon; in other words, it's worthy of that far from poetic designation the English have given it—“green cheese.”


Michel Ardan leaped up when Barbicane spoke this discourteous name.


“So this is the respect,” he exclaimed, “that 19th century Anglo-Saxons show to lovely Diana, fair Phoebe, sweet Iris, charming Astarte, the Queen of the Night, Jupiter's daughter by Latona, and the little sister of glorious Apollo!”