CHAPTER 20








The Susquehanna's Soundings






“WELL, LIEUTENANT, where are we with this sounding?”


“I think the operation's about over, sir,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied. “But who would have expected it to be this deep so close to land, just 250 miles off the American coast!”


“You're right, Bronsfield, it's a huge depression,” Captain Blomsberry said. “In this locality there's an underwater valley cut by the Humboldt Current, which runs down the American coastline as far as the Strait of Magellan.”


“Bottoms this deep,” the lieutenant went on, “aren't much good for laying telegraph cables. A level plateau works better, like the one bearing up the Atlantic Cable between Valentia Island and Newfoundland.”


“There I agree, Bronsfield. And by your leave, lieutenant, how do things stand at this time?”


“Right now, sir,” Bronsfield replied, “we've payed out 21,500 feet of sounding line, and the sinker tugging it still hasn't hit bottom, because it would have come back up on its own.”


“That Brooke device is a clever piece of equipment,” Captain Blomsberry said. “It lets us take highly accurate soundings.”


Overseeing the operation, a helmsman in the bow shouted just then: “We've hit bottom!”


The captain and the lieutenant made their way to the quarterdeck.


“What's the depth?” the captain asked.


“It's 21,762 feet,” the lieutenant replied, writing this figure in his notebook.


“Good, Bronsfield,” the captain said. “I'll record this total on my chart. Now haul in the sounding line. It's several hours' work. In the meantime the engineer can light the furnaces, and we'll be ready to go as soon as you're through. It's ten o'clock, and by your leave, lieutenant, I'm turning in.”


“Go right ahead, sir!” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied obligingly.


Always at his officers' service and a gallant man if there ever was one, the Susquehanna's captain retired to his cabin, downed a brandy toddy that earned his chief steward no end of praise, turned in after complimenting his manservant on his bed-making skills, and fell peacefully asleep.


By then it was ten o'clock in the evening. That day of December 11 would be changing into a magnificent night.


A 500-horsepower sloop of war in the United States Navy, the Susquehanna had been busy taking soundings in the Pacific about 250 miles off the American coast, level with that lengthy peninsula laid out along the coast of Mexico.


The wind had died down little by little. No turbulence was stirring up the layers of air. Motionless, inanimate, the warship's pennant dangled from the mast of the topgallant sail.


Captain Jonathan Blomsberry was a first cousin of that same Colonel Blomsberry who was a stalwart of the Gun Club—the colonel had married the captain's aunt, the daughter of a respectable Kentucky merchant named Horschbidden; Captain Blomsberry couldn't have asked for better weather for seeing his tricky sounding operations through to completion. His sloop of war hadn't felt even a drop of the huge storm that had cleared those piles of clouds away from the Rocky Mountains, making it possible to track the progress of the notorious projectile. Everything had gone to his liking, and with typical Presbyterian fervor he didn't neglect to thank Heaven for his blessings.


This series of soundings carried out by the Susquehanna aimed to locate the most promising parts of the seafloor for laying an underwater cable that would link the Hawaiian Islands with the coast of America.


This was a tremendous scheme, thanks to the initiative of a mighty corporation. Its chief executive officer, shrewd Cyrus Field, even claimed this vast electrical network would cover all the islands in Oceania, an immense undertaking worthy of America's technological genius.


The sloop of war Susquehanna had been entrusted with the initial sounding operations. During that night of December 11–12, the ship lay right in latitude 27° 7' north and longitude 41° 37' west of the


meridian of Washington, D.C. 9


The moon, then in her last quarter, was starting to peek above the horizon.


After Captain Blomsberry's departure, the lieutenant and a few officers gathered on the afterdeck. When the earth's satellite appeared, their thoughts turned to that heavenly body the eyes of a whole hemisphere were contemplating by then. The finest naval spyglasses couldn't have detected the projectile roaming around its half of the moon and yet they were all aimed at that glittering disk, which millions of eyes were ogling simultaneously.


“They've been gone ten days,” Lieutenant Bronsfield said. “What happened to them?”


“They've arrived, lieutenant!” a young midshipman exclaimed. “And they're doing what every traveler does after arriving in a new country —they've gone for a stroll!”


“Of course, my young friend, if you say so,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied with a smile.


“But,” another officer went on, “there's no question about them arriving. The projectile was due to reach the moon at midnight on the 5th, just as she was full. It's now December 11, which makes six days. Now then, in twenty-four hours of daylight times six, you've got a comfortable amount of time for taking up residence. I can see them now, our gallant countrymen—they're camped at the bottom of some valley on a lunar riverbank, next to them the projectile's half buried in volcanic rubble after its crash landing, Captain Nicholl's starting his survey work, President Barbicane's putting his travel notes into final form, and Michel Ardan's perfuming the lunar wastes with the smell of his Havanas … ”


“Yes, it's bound to be like that—just like that!” the young midshipman cut in, excited by his superior's rose-colored description.


“I wish I could believe it,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied, less carried away. “Unfortunately we're still lacking any direct news from the lunar world.”


“Pardon me, lieutenant,” the midshipman said, “but can't President Barbicane write us?”


A burst of laughter greeted this response.


“Not letters!” the young man went on hastily. “The post office isn't involved yet.”


“So they're going to run telegraph lines?” asked one of the officers sarcastically.


“Not that either,” the midshipman replied, unflustered. “But it's very easy to set up visual contact with the earth.”


“How?”


“By using the telescope on Long's Peak. As you know, it brings the moon within a viewing distance of just five miles from the Rocky Mountains, which makes it possible to see objects on her surface that are nine feet across. All right, if our resourceful friends build an alphabet of gigantic letters, if they spell out words 600 feet long and sentences 2½ miles long, that's how they could send us the latest news.”


The young midshipman, who was blessed with quite an imagination, got a hearty round of applause. Even Lieutenant Bronsfield agreed the idea was doable. He added they could also set up direct contact by sending light rays focused into beams with the aid of parabolic mirrors; in fact these rays would be as visible on the surface of Venus or Mars as the planet Neptune is from the earth. He finished by saying that the specks of light already spotted on nearby planets might well be signals aimed at the earth. But he pointed out that though we could get news from the lunar world with such a method, the earthly world couldn't send any news back, unless people on the moon were equipped with decent instruments for long-distance viewing.


“Obviously,” one of the officers replied. “But what happened to the travelers, what have they done, what have they seen? That's got to be the most intriguing thing about this. What's more, if this experiment was successful—which I don't question—they'll try again. The columbiad is still embedded in Florida soil. So it's only a matter of shells and gunpowder, and every time the moon ascends to the zenith, we can send her a shipment of visitors.”


“It's obvious,” Lieutenant Bronsfield replied, “that one of these days J. T. Maston will be rejoining his friends.”


“If he's open to it,” the midshipman exclaimed, “I'm all set to go along!”


“Oh, there'll be no shortage of takers,” Bronsfield remarked. “If we let them, half the people on earth would migrate to the moon in no time!”


The Susquehanna's officers kept up this conversation till around one o'clock in the morning. We can't say what scatterbrained schemes and cockeyed theories these daring thinkers put forward. After Barbicane's endeavor nothing seemed impossible to an American. They were already planning a landing on the moon's beaches, no longer by a committee of scientists but by a whole colony, plus a whole army complete with enough infantry, artillery, and cavalry to conquer the lunar world.


By one o'clock in the morning, they still weren't through hauling in the sounding line. 10,000 feet were out as yet, which meant several hours' more work. In compliance with their commander's orders, the furnaces had been lit and were already up to pressure. The Susquehanna could have gotten under way immediately.


Just then—it was 1:17 in the morning—Lieutenant Bronsfield was all set to go off watch and retire to his cabin, when his attention was caught by a totally unexpected noise, a faraway hissing.


At first he and his comrades thought a steam leak was the cause of this hissing; but when they raised their heads, they could tell this noise was coming from the upper layers of the atmosphere.


Before they had any time to question each other, this hissing became fearfully intense; dazzling the eyes, an enormous meteor suddenly shot into view, on fire from the speed of its descent and from its friction against the layers of air.


This blazing mass grew as they watched, with a thunderous sound struck the sloop of war right on the bowsprit, snapped it off just shy of the stempost, and plunged into the waves with a deafening crash!


A few feet nearer and the Susquehanna would have gone down with all hands.


Just then Captain Blomsberry appeared, half dressed, hurrying to the forecastle where all his officers had rushed.


“By your leave, gentlemen—what happened?” he asked.


And the midshipman, taking it on himself to speak for everybody, blurted out:


“Skipper, it's them—they're back!”