CHAPTER 6








Questions and Answers






ON DECEMBER 4, when the travelers woke up after fifty-four hours of traveling, the chronometers said five o'clock in the morning earth time. As for the scheduled length of their stay aboard the projectile, they'd gone five hours and forty minutes past its halfway point; but as for their flight plan, they'd already covered nearly seven-tenths of its distance. This oddity was due to their gradual decrease in speed.


When they studied the earth through the lower window, it looked like nothing more than a dark patch washed out by the sun's rays. No more crescent, no more reflected light. At midnight the next day, exactly when they would have a full moon, they also would have a new earth. Overhead, that silver orb drew nearer and nearer to the path being taken by the projectile, getting ready to meet up with it at the appointed hour. The dark dome all around them was spangled with shimmering sparks that seemed to be slowly moving. But they were at such considerable distances, their comparative sizes didn't seem to have changed. The sun and stars looked the same as they do from the earth. As for the moon, she was considerably bigger; but our travelers' spyglasses simply didn't have the power to examine her surface, so it was too soon to conduct a productive survey of her topography and geology.


Accordingly they passed the time in endless conversations. They especially chatted about the moon. Each man trotted out his own special brand of knowledge. Barbicane and Nicholl were always in earnest, Michel Ardan always fanciful. The projectile, its position, its heading, possible developments, and what precautions to take while falling to the moon all were unlimited subjects for speculation.


Sure enough, during breakfast one of Michel's questions about the projectile provoked a rather unusual answer from Barbicane, an answer worth quoting.


Michel wanted to know what the consequences would have been, supposing the shell had suddenly come to a halt while it was still going at its fearsome initial velocity.


“But,” Barbicane replied, “I don't see how the projectile could have come to a halt.”


“Suppose it had,” Michel responded.


“That isn't a feasible supposition,” remarked the practical Barbicane. “Unless there was a loss of thrust. But even then its speed would have decreased little by little and it wouldn't have come to a sudden stop.”


“Let's assume it had bumped into an object in space.”


“What object?” “That enormous meteor we met up with.” “Then,” Nicholl said, “the projectile would have been smashed into a thousand pieces and the three of us along with it.”


“Worse than that,” Barbicane replied. “We would have burned up.”


“Burned up!” Michel exclaimed. “By God, I'm sorry it didn't take place, so we could have ‘seen for ourselves.’ ”


“And it would have been something to see,” Barbicane replied. “Nowadays it's a known fact that heat is simply motion converted. When you warm water—in other words, when you add heat to it— that means you set its molecules in motion.”


“Say,” Michel put in, “that's a clever way of looking at it!”


“And it's accurate, my good friend, because it explains every phenomenon associated with high temperatures. Heat is only molecular motion, a simple fluctuation of the particles in an object. When you throw on a train's brakes, the train comes to a stop. But what happens to the motion impelling it? It's transformed into heat and the brakes get hot. Why do they grease the axles of the wheels? To keep them from getting hot, since the loss of motion will transform into heat. Do you understand?”


“I do understand,” Michel replied, “I understand perfectly. To give an example, when I've been running for so long that I'm dripping wet, that I'm sweating in big drops, why do I need to stop? Quite simply because my motion has transformed into heat!”


Barbicane couldn't help smiling at Michel's comeback. Then, continuing with his supposition:


“Hence,” he said, “in the event of a collision, our projectile would have been in the same shoes as a bullet that falls smoking to the ground after hitting a piece of armor plate. Its motion has turned into heat. Consequently I maintain that if our shell had bumped into that meteor, its sudden loss of speed would have created enough heat to turn it instantly into steam.”


“Then,” Nicholl asked, “what would happen if the earth were to suddenly stop orbiting?”


“Its temperature would shoot so high,” Barbicane replied, “it would immediately be reduced to vapor.”


“Fine,” Michel put in. “That's a way for the world to end that thoroughly simplifies things.”


“And what if the earth plummeted into the sun?” Nicholl said.


“It's calculated,” Barbicane replied, “that its fall would generate the same heat as 1,600 lumps of coal the same size as the planet earth.”


“A handy increase in temperature for the sun,” Michel Ardan remarked. “And the residents of Uranus or Neptune surely won't have any grounds for complaint, because they must be freezing to death on their planets.”


“Hence, my friends,” Barbicane went on, “any motion that's suddenly halted will generate heat. And this formulation leads us to believe that the sun's heat is fed by a hailstorm of meteors falling continually on its surface. They've even calculated … ”


“Look out,” Michel muttered, “here come the figures.”


“They've even calculated,” Barbicane went on unflappably, “that each meteor's collision with the sun should generate the same heat as 4,000 loads of coal the same size.”


“And how hot is the sun?” Michel asked.


“As hot as if you'd burned a seam of coal around it that's over sixteen miles deep.”


“And this heat—”


“—could bring 695 billion cubic miles of water to a boil in one hour.”


“And it doesn't roast you?” Michel exclaimed.


“No,” Barbicane replied, “because the earth's atmosphere absorbs four-tenths of the sun's heat. Besides, the amount of heat the earth intercepts is only two billionths of the sun's total output.”


“I can see that all's for the best,” Michel remarked, “and our atmosphere is a handy concoction, because it not only lets us breathe, it also keeps us from cooking.”


“Yes,” Nicholl said. “Unfortunately it won't be the same on the moon.”


“Phooey,” Michel put in, always optimistic. “If creatures live on her, they're breathing. If they've died off, they're bound to have left enough oxygen for three people, if only at the bottom of gullies where it'll accumulate because of its weight. So we won't do any mountain climbing, that's all!”


And getting up, Michel went to study the moon's disk, which was shining with unbearable brilliance.


“Good grief,” he said, “it must be warm up there!”


“Not to mention,” Nicholl replied, “that each day lasts 360 hours!”


“Plus, by way of compensation,” Barbicane said, “the nights are just as long, and since the moon's heat is restored only through solar radiation, her temperature has to be the same as it is in outer space.”


“Not exactly paradise,” Michel said. “Never mind! I wish I was there already! Hoho, my dear comrades, it'll be pretty strange to have the earth as our moon, to see it rise above the horizon, to make out the shapes of the continents, and to tell yourself, ‘There's America, there's Europe,’ then to watch it go and get lost in the sunlight! Speaking of that, Barbicane, do moonpeople ever have a chance to see eclipses?”


“Yes, eclipses of the sun,” Barbicane replied, “when the centers of the three heavenly bodies are in a line and the earth is in the middle. But they're only annular eclipses in which the earth hides just a portion of the sun's disk, leaving a large outer ring still visible.”


“And why aren't there any total eclipses?” Nicholl asked. “Doesn't that conical shadow cast by the earth stretch beyond the moon?”


“Yes, if we don't count the refraction caused by the earth's atmosphere. No, if we do count that refraction. Therefore, if we let delta prime be the horizontal parallax, and p prime the apparent semidiameter—”


“Whew!” Michel put in. “We're back to half of v zero squared! Speak English, you fiend for algebra!”


“All right,” Barbicane replied. “In layman's terms the average distance from the moon to the earth is sixty times the earth's radius, but after refraction the length of the conical shadow shrinks to less than forty-two times that radius. During an eclipse, then, the moon ends up protruding beyond the original conical shadow, and the rays she receives come not only from the edges of the sun but from its center.”


“Then,” Michel said in a mocking tone, “why are there eclipses at all, if there shouldn't be any?”


“Solely because the sun's rays are weakened by the refraction, so most of them fade out after they enter the atmosphere!”


“That's a convincing reason,” Michel replied. “Anyhow we'll find out when we get there. Meanwhile tell me this, Barbicane—do you think the moon was once a comet?”


“Now there's an idea!”


“Oh,” Michel remarked with smug cheeriness, “I get a few now and then.”


“But this particular idea doesn't originate with Michel,” Nicholl responded.


“Great. So I'm plagiarizing it?”


“Without any doubt,” Nicholl replied. “According to the ancients, the Greeks in Arcadia claimed their ancestors lived on the earth before the moon became its satellite. Based on this fact certain scientists have viewed the moon as a comet, a comet whose orbit brought her so near the earth one day, she was caught in its gravitational pull.”


“And is there any truth to this theory?” Michel asked.


“None whatever,” Barbicane replied, “and as proof, the moon doesn't reveal any trace of the gaseous covering that always surrounds a comet.”


“But,” Nicholl went on, “before the moon became the earth's satellite, couldn't she have passed so near the sun during her perihelion that all this gaseous matter evaporated?”


“It could have happened, Nicholl my friend, but it isn't likely.”


“Why not?”


“Because … ye gods, I don't know.”


“Ah, how many hundreds of volumes,” Michel exclaimed, “we could publish about everything we don't know!”


“Oh drat! What time is it?” Barbicane asked.


“Three o'clock,” Nicholl replied.


“How time flies,” Michel said, “when scholars like us put our heads together! No doubt about it, I feel loaded down with learning! I feel like I've become a well of knowledge!”


With that Michel hoisted himself up to the ceiling of the projectile, “to get a better look at the moon,” he claimed. Meanwhile his companions were peering into space through the lower window. Nothing new to report.


When Michel Ardan came back down, he went over to a side porthole and suddenly let out a cry of surprise.


“What's the matter?” asked Barbicane.


The Gun Club's president went over to the window and saw a sort of flattened-out bag floating in space a few yards away from the projectile. This object seemed as motionless as the shell, so it had to be heading upward in the same way.


“What is that thingamajig?” Michel Ardan kept saying. “Is it some sort of space particle our projectile has attracted to us, something that'll go with us to the moon?”


“What amazes me,” Nicholl replied, “is that the specific gravity of this object is clearly much less than the shell's, yet it's staying exactly level with us.”


“Nicholl,” Barbicane replied after a moment's thought, “I don't know what that object is, but I definitely know why it's staying level with the shell.”


“Why?”


“Because we're floating in a vacuum, my dear captain, and in a vacuum objects fall or move—which is the same thing—at the identical speed regardless of their gravity or shape. It's the air resistance that generates differences in weight. When you create a vacuum in a tube pneumatically, the objects you throw into it, whether they're specks of dust or lead pellets, all fall at the same speed. Out here in space you've got the same cause and the same effect.”


“Quite right,” Nicholl said, “and everything we toss out of the projectile will go with us all the way to the moon.”


“Oh, what blockheads we've been!” Michel exclaimed.


“Why do you call us that?” Barbicane asked.


“Because we could have filled up the projectile with useful objects— books, instruments, tools, etc. We could have dumped them all out, and they all would have lined up behind us. But here's a thought. Why can't we ourselves roam around outside like that meteor? Why can't we shoot into space through one of these portholes? What fun it would be to hang out in the ether like that—and we're luckier than birds are, since they always have to flap their wings to stay up!”


“Agreed,” Barbicane said, “but how would we breathe?”


“If there's no air out there, a thousand curses on the stuff!”


“But your density is less than the projectile's, Michel, so if there were air out there, you would soon be left far behind.”


“Then it's a vicious circle.”


“As vicious as can be.”


“And we must stay locked up in our coach?”


“We must.”


“Ah! Of course!” Michel blurted out in a fearsome voice.


“What's wrong?” Nicholl asked.


“Now I see, now I can guess what that so-called space particle is! It isn't an asteroid that's going along with us. It isn't a piece of some planet.”


“Then what is it?” Barbicane asked. “It's our unfortunate dog! It's Diana's mate!”


Shapeless, unrecognizable, reduced to nothingness, the object was indeed Satellite's carcass, flattened out like a deflated set of bagpipes, yet rising higher and higher!