CHAPTER 14










The Night Lasting 354½ Hours






AT THE MOMENT this phenomenon suddenly occurred, the projectile had been skimming the lunar north pole, barely thirty miles up. So it took only a few seconds for them to plunge into the utter blackness of space. This transition happened so swiftly, without any stages in between, any fading of brightness, any softening of light waves, it was as if that silver orb had been blown out by a stupendous puff of air.


“The moon vanished!” Michel Ardan exclaimed, absolutely astounded. “It dissolved into nothingness!”


True enough, there wasn't a glimmer or a shadow. Not another thing was visible of that disk whose light had recently been so dazzling. It was as dark as the pit, and stellar radiation made the darkness even deeper. This was “that pitch-blackness” in which the lunar night is steeped, a period lasting 354½ hours on every part of her hidden disk, a night whose length comes from the equal speeds of her spinning and orbiting motions, one on her axis, the other around the earth. Since the projectile hovered deep inside the moon's conical shadow, the sun's rays didn't have any more effect on it than they had on that whole invisible side of the earth's satellite.


Inside the shell it was, then, as dark as the pit. They couldn't see each other anymore. Ergo they needed to dispel this darkness. As badly as Barbicane wanted to conserve his limited supply of gas, he had to call on it for some artificial light, a costly replacement for that sunshine currently denied them.


“The sun can go to blazes!” Michel Ardan snapped. “Making us spend our gas allowance instead of giving us daylight for free!”


“Don't blame the sun,” Nicholl continued. “It isn't Old Sol's fault, it's the moon's—she came between us and the sun like a shield.”


“It's the sun!” Michel insisted.


“It's the moon!” Nicholl shot back.


This was a pointless dispute, which Barbicane squelched by saying:


“My friends, it isn't the sun's fault or the moon's. It's our projectile's fault—instead of faithfully staying on its flight path, it clumsily veered away. Or to be fair about it, it's the fault of that illomened meteor, which drove us so dismally off our original course.”


“Fine!” Michel Ardan replied. “Since that settles the matter, let's eat breakfast. After being on the lookout all night, it's time we had a little sustenance.”


This proposition met with no resistance. In a few minutes Michel had fixed their meal. But they ate for the sake of eating, they drank without proposing any toasts or rounds of cheers. Carried off into these gloomy regions, lacking their usual escort of light rays, our bold travelers felt a vague uneasiness coming over them. Those “savage shadows” so dear to Victor Hugo's pen were clawing at them from all sides.


Meanwhile they chatted about this endless night of 354½ hours— hence nearly two weeks—that the laws of physics had inflicted on moon dwellers. Barbicane gave his friends some information on the causes and consequences of this unusual phenomenon.


“Unusual is the word for it,” he said. “During her long nights, each half of the moon goes without sunlight for two weeks, and the side we're over right now can't enjoy even the sight of the earth brilliantly lit up. In short, only one side of the lunar disk has a big heavenly body in the sky—I'm referring to our planet. Now then, suppose this were the case on the earth; suppose, for example, the moon never beamed on Europe and she was visible only in the Antipodes, can you imagine how amazed Europeans would be when they arrived in Australia?”


“Folks would make the trip just to see the moon!” Michel replied.


“Well,” Barbicane continued, “this same amazement lies in store for moonpeople who live on the lunar face that looks away from the earth, a face that's never visible to our countrymen down on the ground.”


“But which we ourselves would have seen,” Nicholl added, “if we'd arrived here during a new moon, in other words, two weeks later.”


“To even things up,” Barbicane went on, “I'll add that residents of the visible face are exceptionally blessed by nature at the expense of their brethren on this invisible face. As you can see, the latter have absolute darkness for 354 hours without a single glimmer cutting through the nighttime. By contrast, after the sun has shone for two weeks and sunk below the horizon, the former see a brilliant orb rise on the opposite horizon. It's the earth, thirteen times bigger than that small-scale moon we're familiar with; the earth, looking as wide as two lunar degrees, bathing the moon in a light thirteen times brighter than any light filtered through its own layers of atmosphere; the earth, which only vanishes just as the sun reappears in its turn!”


“Very eloquent,” Michel Ardan said, “though maybe a bit technical.”


“It follows from this,” Barbicane continued without missing a beat, “that the visible face of the lunar disk must be quite pleasant to live on, since this side is always lit up, either by the sun when the moon is full, or by the earth when the moon is new.”


“But,” Nicholl said, “this advantage must be totally offset by the unbearable heat the light brings with it.”


“That particular drawback is the same for both faces, because light reflected by the earth obviously has no heat. Even so, this invisible face will still experience more heat than the visible face. I say this for your benefit, Nicholl, because Michel isn't likely to understand.”


“Thanks,” Michel put in.


“In essence,” Barbicane went on, “when this invisible face gets light and heat from the sun simultaneously, it's because the moon is new, in other words, she's in conjunction, she's located between the sun and the earth. So in relation to where she's located when she's in opposition—when she's full—she's situated closer to the sun by twice her distance from the earth. Now then, we can put this distance at 1/200 of the distance separating the sun from the earth, or in round numbers, 500,000 miles. Therefore this invisible face is 500,000 miles closer to the sun when she gets its rays.”


“Quite right,” Nicholl replied.


“On the other hand …,” Barbicane continued.


“Just a second,” Michel said, interrupting his earnest companion.


“What is it?”


“I insist on continuing the explanation.”


“Why is that?”


“To prove that I do understand.”


“Go ahead,” Barbicane put in, smiling.


“On the other hand,” Michel said, mimicking President Barbicane's tone and gestures, “on the other hand, when the sun shines on the moon's visible face, it's because the moon is full, in other words, she's located opposite to the sun in relation to the earth. So the round number for the distance separating her from that shining orb is 500,000 miles greater, and the heat she gets has to be a little less.”


“Well put!” Barbicane exclaimed. “You know, Michel, for a showman you've got some sense!”


“Yes,” Michel replied nonchalantly, “we all do around the Boulevard


des Italiens.”6


Barbicane solemnly shook hands with his easygoing companion, then continued to spell out some of the benefits in store for residents of the moon's visible face.


Among others he mentioned the sight of solar eclipses, which take place only on that side of the moon's disk, since she needs to be in opposition for them to occur. Caused by the earth's intervening between the moon and the sun, these eclipses can last two hours; during this time, thanks to the rays refracted by the earth's atmosphere, our planet looks like nothing more than a black dot on the sun.


“Thus,” Nicholl said, “there's half of the moon, this invisible half, that nature has really shortchanged, really neglected!”


“Yes,” Barbicane replied, “but not completely. In fact, by a kind of swaying motion, by a kind of swinging on her midpoint, the moon shows somewhat more than half of her disk to our planet. She's like a pendulum whose center of gravity tends toward the earth and fluctuates rhythmically. What's the source of this fluctuation? The fact that her spinning motion on her axis stays at a uniform speed, whereas her orbiting motion—along an oval path around the earth— isn't uniform. At her perigee, the moon's closest point to the earth, her orbiting speed wins out and she shows a portion of her western edge. At her apogee, by contrast, her spinning speed wins out and a piece of her eastern edge appears. These slivers, which cover about eight lunar degrees, sometimes appear to the west, sometimes to the east. Consequently 56.9% of the moon is on view.”


“It makes no difference,” Michel replied. “If we ever change into moonpeople, we'll live on the visible face. Me, I like the limelight.”


“Unless,” Nicholl countered, “the atmosphere happens to have condensed on the other side, as some astronomers claim.”


“We'll take that into consideration,” Michel merely replied.


Meanwhile, breakfast over, the moon-watchers went back to their posts. They tried to see through the murky portholes by quenching all light in the projectile. But in the darkness outside, nothing so much as glimmered.


One bewildering fact bothered Barbicane. Since they'd passed so close to the moon—within about thirty miles of her—why hadn't the projectile fallen to her surface? If their speed had been tremendous, it was understandable that such a fall wouldn't occur. But since their speed was comparatively moderate, this resistance to the moon's gravity remained baffling. Was the projectile subject to some foreign influence? Was some sort of alien entity keeping it out in the ether? Obviously it wasn't destined to reach any part of the moon. Where was it heading? Was it getting closer to the lunar disk or farther away? Would it be carried off into that black night and across infinity? How could they learn the truth, how could they figure it out in the midst of this darkness? All these questions worried Barbicane, but he couldn't answer them.


Though invisible, the earth's satellite was definitely there, maybe no farther away than a few geographic leagues, a few miles; but neither he nor his companions could see her anymore. If her surface gave off any noises,


they weren't audible. There was no air, no sound-conducting medium, to transmit any rumblings from the moon, which Arabic legends characterize as “a living, breathing human being who's already half granite.”


It was enough, you must admit, to aggravate the most patient skywatchers. Nothing less than this whole unknown side of the moon was hidden from their eyes! The face that the sun's rays brilliantly light up— as they had two weeks earlier and would two weeks later —was currently lost in utter darkness. Where would the projectile be in another two weeks? Where would these different forces of gravity chance to take it? Who could say?


Thanks to the findings of lunar scholars, it's generally conceded that our satellite's invisible half has absolutely the same makeup as her visible half. In fact about a seventh of this side is revealed by that swaying motion Barbicane spoke of. Now then, on those slivers that have been glimpsed, there were simply plains, mountains, basins, and craters—similar to the ones already recorded on the maps. So we can expect the same sort of world, the same dry, dead habitat. And yet what if the moon's atmosphere had taken refuge on this face? What if a combination of air and water had brought life to this reborn landscape? What if vegetation continued to thrive here? What if animals populated these lands and seas? What if such good living conditions meant that man still existed hereabouts? So many intriguing questions were left to be clarified! So many answers could be derived from studying this half of the moon! How enthralling to take a look at this world no human eyes have ever glimpsed!


The reader can imagine, then, how annoyed the travelers felt in the midst of this pitch-black night. All scrutiny of the lunar disk was prohibited. Only the constellations made a bid for their attention, and it must be acknowledged that not even such astronomers as Faye, Chacornac, or Father Secchi ever found such promising conditions for studying them.


In fact nothing could match the magnificence of that starlit world bathing in the translucent ether. Set in the dome of the skies, those diamonds sparkled with superb fire. A person's eyes took in the firmament from the Southern Cross to the North Star, those two constellations that in another 12,000 years, thanks to the precession of the equinoxes, will relinquish their roles as pole stars, one to Canopus in the southern hemisphere, the other to Vega in the northern hemisphere. A person's imagination could get lost in this sublime infinity where the projectile was revolving, a new heavenly body created by the hand of man. Due to natural causes, the constellations gleamed with a gentle glow; since there wasn't any atmosphere, they didn't twinkle, which is caused by intervening layers of air that differ in density and humidity. Those stars were gentle eyes, gazing into that deep night through the absolute stillness of space.


Our travelers were speechless for a good while, in this state examining that star-spangled firmament where the huge shield of the moon made an enormous dark hole. But a painful sensation finally tore them away from their contemplating. It was bitterly cold, and thick coats of ice were soon covering the insides of the glass portholes. In essence there was no longer any direct sunlight to warm the projectile, which, little by little, was losing the heat stored between its walls. This heat was radiating into the void and swiftly evaporating, and the result was a significantly lower temperature. Coming in contact with the glass windows, the moisture in the shell had consequently changed into ice, which made it impossible to see outside.


Nicholl checked the thermometer and saw it had dropped to 1.4° above zero. Therefore, despite all the reasons for practicing thrift, Barbicane had to call on their gas not only for light but for heat. The shell's low temperature was no longer bearable. Its guests would have frozen to death.


“We can't complain that this trip has been monotonous,” Michel Ardan pointed out. “We've had plenty of variety, at least in temperature! Sometimes we're blinded by the light and suffocated by the heat, like Indians on the Pampas! Sometimes we're surrounded by absolute darkness in the middle of an arctic chill, like Eskimos at the pole! No, we really haven't any right to complain, and nature has put on quite a show in our honor.”










“But,” Nicholl asked, “what's the temperature outside?”


“Exactly that of interplanetary space,” Barbicane replied.


“Then,” Michel Ardan went on, “wouldn't this be the time to conduct that experiment we couldn't attempt when the sun's rays were flooding over us?”


“It's now or never,” Barbicane replied, “because we're in a viable position to verify the temperature in space—and to see whether it's Fourier's or Pouillet's calculations that are correct.”


“It's cold in any event,” Michel replied. “Look how the moisture inside is condensing on the glass portholes. If the temperature drops even a little more, the steam of our breath will turn into snowflakes and fall all around us!”


“Let's get a thermometer ready,” Barbicane said.


As you can easily imagine, a standard thermometer wouldn't have been any help under the conditions the instrument would soon be exposed to. The mercury would have frozen in its bulb, since it can't stay liquid below -38° Fahrenheit. But Barbicane had come equipped with a discharge thermometer based on Walferdin's design, which gives the minimum readings of extremely low temperatures.


Before starting the experiment, they compared this instrument to a standard thermometer, then Barbicane got set to use it.


“How will we manage this?” Nicholl asked.


“Nothing could be simpler,” Michel Ardan replied, never at a loss. “We quickly open the porthole; we toss out the instrument; it follows the projectile with exemplary obedience; fifteen minutes later we yank it back in—”


“With your hand?” Barbicane asked.


“With my hand,” Michel answered.


“Well, my friend, that's a risk you'd better not run,” Barbicane replied. “Because the hand you'll yank in will be nothing more than a stump, frozen and deformed by this frightful cold.”


“Really!”


“You'll feel a dreadful burning sensation, as if from a white-hot iron; because whether heat abruptly leaves or enters our flesh, the effect is absolutely the same. Besides, I'm not certain the objects we tossed outside the projectile are still escorting us.”


“Why not?” Nicholl said.


“Because if we're passing through any sort of atmosphere, even if it has very little density, those objects will lag behind. Now then, this darkness keeps us from verifying whether they're still floating around us. So to avoid any risk of losing our thermometer, we'll attach it, then we can pull it back inside more easily.”


They took Barbicane's advice. Through a quickly opened porthole, Nicholl tossed out the instrument, which was on the end of a short string so it could be quickly yanked back in. The porthole was open only a second, but that second was enough to let the intense cold get into the projectile.


“Damnation!” Michel Ardan yelled. “It's cold enough to freeze a polar bear!”


Barbicane waited till half an hour had gone by, ample time for the instrument to drop to the temperature level out in space. At this point, then, they quickly yanked the thermometer back inside.


Barbicane calculated the amount of alcohol discharged into the tiny vial that was soldered to the instrument's lower end, then he said:


“It reads -220° Fahrenheit!”


Claude Pouillet was right and not Joseph Fourier. This was the alarming temperature of interstellar space! And maybe this was the figure for those lunar landmasses, when, after basking in two weeks of sunlight, that silver orb lost all her heat by its radiating into the void.