JULES VERNE








AROUND THE






MOON






In New, Complete Translation by






FREDERICK PAUL WALTER










Lifelong thanks to








WALTER JAMES MILLER






poet, teacher,


mentor, friend, and


father of Verne studies


in North America










JULES VERNE








AROUND THE






MOON






A SEQUEL TO: FROM THE EARTH TO THE MOON










First published in 1869






Here Verne tackles one of the trickiest technical challenges for a storyteller: Around the Moon takes place in a severely restricted setting. His whole travel narrative unfolds inside a projectile ten feet high and with fifty-four square feet of floor area—not much bigger than an elevator with a high ceiling. Looking out the portholes of their space capsule, his characters are almost as confined as if they were aboard an amusement park ride. To spin a lively, varied tale under these claustrophobic conditions will take stupendous skill—what can Verne do? A good deal, as it turns out: he milks every action and suspense possibility from his material … mines it for gags and fascinating tidbits … makes the most of the moon's scientific mysteries … gives full play to his theatrical and comic instincts … and keeps us on tenterhooks about the outcome.


His concerns are different from those in the earlier moon novel: no more antiwar satire, no more gallows humor, though he still has plenty of hijinks up his sleeve. His three astronauts—two stiff-necked Yankee engineers and a motor-mouthed French adventurer—return from the first book, and their lopsided interactions are a prime source of comedy. The Americans view things with scientific fussiness, the Frenchman lets his imagination run away with him. So when the former get too technical, the latter steps in with a zany analogy for the general public—explaining, for instance, the relative sizes of the sun and planets with a lineup of pumpkins, apples, peas, and other produce.


Verne hatches plot complications both inside and outside his space capsule. Outside, his projectile is twice threatened by near collisions with meteors, the second one resulting in a gorgeous light show. Inside, meanwhile, his astronauts discover that their takeoff speed was miscalculated, cope with an outer-space burial, suffer a respiratory catastrophe, and grapple with temporary weightlessness. This last they treat blasphemously: floating above the floor, the Frenchman compares the experience to the Virgin Mary's assumption into Heaven; to which one of the Yankees replies: “This assumption isn't likely to hold up.”


And all the while Verne peppers his yarn with question marks. Is there air on the moon? How about water? Active volcanoes? Does she have any colors or are they optical illusions? Are there any plants, animals, or sentient creatures? Did sheever have any life? Verne hems, haws, cops out, and keeps his options open. Finally he stages an amusing academic inquiry in Chapter 18 and emerges with some cunningly phrased conclusions. The upshot is that we can read this story today and still find it plausible, whereas the luscious floral descriptions, top-heavy moonpeople, and B-movie chase scenes in Wells's First Men in the Moon (1901) come off as fantasy.


Underneath it all Verne keeps us wondering how the journey will turn out. Will they reach the moon? Get back to earth safely? Or orbit our satellite forever? Verne seems to set this last possibility aside in his Preliminary Chapter, calling it “a total contradiction of the laws of rational mechanics.” Yet he keeps revisiting the issue, suggesting that his projectile will “sweep in an elliptical orbit around the moon,” that his astronauts will be left “revolving forever around that silver orb.” We remain on pins and needles.


The book stumbles only when its factual tidbits and educational passages aren't dramatized or enlivened but simply doled out: the rundown of moonwatchers tacked onto Chapter 10, for example, or the stats on moon mountains versus earth mountains at the close of Chapter 16. Otherwise this oracular little novel has many marvels and few missteps. That metaphor above of an amusement park attraction is completely appropriate: for the vast majority of us, Verne's tale is the closest we'll ever come to an authentic aerial tour of the moon. And he takes us on quite a ride.