The First Half Hour






WHAT HAD HAPPENED? What was the result of that awful lurch? Had the projectile's manufacturers brought about a favorable outcome with their clever safeguards? Had the impact been deadened by the springs, the four buffers, the cushion of water, the collapsible partitions? Had they tamed the fearful thrust of that initial velocity of 12,000 yards per second, which was fast enough to cross Paris or New York City in the blink of an eye? Clearly these were the questions worrying the thousand witnesses of this gripping drama. They forgot about the trip's purpose and thought only of the travelers! And if one man among them—J. T. Maston, for instance— could have taken a look inside the projectile, what would he have seen?


Nothing just then. It was completely dark inside the shell. But its cylindro-conical walls had held up splendidly. Not a gash, dent, or bulge. The wonderful projectile wasn't even affected by the gunpowder's violent combustion, nor, as some seemed to fear, had it changed into liquid and rained aluminum.


All in all there was little disorder inside. A few items had been roughly hurled to the ceiling; but the most important didn't seem to have suffered from that jolt. Their fastenings were intact.


The movable disk had sunk to the bottom of the shell after the partitions had collapsed and the water escaped; on it lay three motionless bodies. Were Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan still breathing? Was the projectile nothing more than a metal coffin carrying three corpses into space?


A few minutes after the shell's departure, one of these bodies stirred; it moved its arms, raised its head, and managed to get on its knees. It was Michel Ardan. He checked himself for broken bones, uttered a resonant “ahem,” then said:


“Michel Ardan is present and accounted for. Let's see about the others!”


The courageous Frenchman tried to get up but couldn't keep his balance. His head was spinning, the blood was rushing violently to his brain, he couldn't see, he was like a man who'd had one too many.


“Whew!” he said. “I feel like I've polished off two bottles of Corton. Only it maybe didn't go down as smoothly!”


He mopped his brow several times, massaged his temples, then called out in a forceful voice:


“Nicholl! Barbicane!”


He waited anxiously. No answer. Not even a groan to show that his companion's hearts were still beating. He repeated his appeal. The same silence.


“Holy smoke!” he said. “They act like they've fallen on their heads from a fifth-floor window. Phooey,” he added with that unflappable confidence nothing could shake. “If a Frenchman can get on his knees, two Americans won't have any trouble getting on their feet! But first of all let's shed some light on the situation.”


Ardan felt life coursing through his veins again. His blood settled down and resumed its normal circulation. With additional exertions he got his balance back. He managed to stand, took a match out of his pocket, struck its phosphorous tip, and watched it flare up. Then he went over and lit the gas jet. The container hadn't suffered in the slightest. No gas had escaped. If it had, the smell would have given it away, the place would be full of hydrogen, and Michel Ardan wouldn't be waltzing around match in hand with impunity. Mixed together, the air and gas would have formed an explosive combination, and maybe the blast would have finished what the jolt hadn't.


After lighting the gas, Ardan stooped over his companions’ bodies. They'd toppled on top of each other, inanimate objects, Nicholl above, Barbicane below.


Ardan sat the captain up, leaned him against a couch, and gave him an energetic massage. Shrewdly executed, this back rub revived Nicholl, who opened his eyes, instantly came to his senses, and clutched Ardan's hand. Then, looking around:


“What about Barbicane?” he asked.


“One at a time,” Michel Ardan replied serenely. “I started with you, Nicholl, because you were on top. Now let's move on to Barbicane.”


With that Ardan and Nicholl picked up the Gun Club's president and dropped him off on the couch. He seemed to have suffered more than his companions. There had been some bleeding, but Nicholl was relieved to confirm that it was only from a mildly hemorrhaging cut on Barbicane's shoulder. A mere scratch, which the captain dressed carefully.


Nevertheless Barbicane didn't come to for a good while—which alarmed his two friends, who didn't skimp on the massaging.


“He's breathing, though,” Nicholl said, putting his ear close to the ailing man's chest.


“Yes,” Ardan replied, “he's breathing like a man who's fairly used to that everyday operation. Let's rub him harder, Nicholl, harder.”


And the two makeshift healers worked so long and so well, Barbicane recovered the full use of his faculties. He opened his eyes, sat up, clutched the hands of his two friends, and delivered this opening remark:


“Nicholl,” he asked, “are we in motion?”


Nicholl and Ardan traded looks. As yet they hadn't given a thought to the projectile. Their primary concern hadn't been the vehicle but its passengers.


“Are we actually in motion?” Michel Ardan repeated.


“Or still sitting quietly on the ground in Florida?” Nicholl asked.


“Or on the floor of the Gulf of Mexico?” Michel Ardan added.


“By thunder!” exclaimed President Barbicane.


And this twofold theory suggested by his companions had the immediate result of snapping him back to reality.


Be that as it may, they still couldn't say what the shell's circumstances were. Its seeming stillness and the lack of any outside contact didn't allow them to settle this issue. Maybe the projectile was tooling along its flight path through space; maybe, after a brief ascent, it had fallen back to the earth—or even into the Gulf of Mexico, a real possibility given the narrowness of Florida's peninsula.


The situation was serious, the problem intriguing. It needed to be settled before much longer. Stirred into action, overcoming his bodily weakness with strength of mind, Barbicane got up. He cocked an ear. It was totally silent outside. But the padding on the walls was heavy enough to block any sounds from the earth. But one circumstance struck Barbicane. The temperature inside the projectile was unusually hot. The Gun Club's president took a thermometer out of its case and checked it. The instrument read 113° Fahrenheit.


“Yes!” he exclaimed. “Yes, we are in motion! This suffocating heat is seeping through the projectile's walls. It comes from our friction against the layers of air. It will soon cool down, because we're already cruising in space; then, after nearly suffocating, we'll be subjected to intense cold.”


“What!” Michel Ardan asked. “Barbicane, are you saying we're already outside the bounds of the earth's atmosphere?”


“No doubt about it, Michel. Hear me out. It's 10:55. We left about eight minutes ago. Now then, if the friction hadn't reduced our initial velocity, we would have taken only six seconds to pass through the forty miles of atmosphere around our globe.”


“Exactly,” Nicholl replied, “but how much has the friction reduced our velocity, do you figure?”


“By a third, Nicholl,” Barbicane replied. “It's a considerable reduction, but according to my calculations, that's the truth of the matter. So if our initial velocity was 12,000 yards per second, by the time we'd left the earth's atmosphere, we would have slowed down to 8,018 yards per second; be that as it may, we've already crossed this expanse, and—”


“—and in that case,” Michel Ardan said, “our friend Nicholl has lost his other two bets: $4,000 since the columbiad didn't blow up, $5,000 since the projectile has risen higher than six miles into the air. Come on, Nicholl, fork over.”


“Let's verify it first,” the captain replied, “then I'll produce the money. It's quite possible Barbicane's analysis is correct and I've lost my $9,000. But another theory occurs to me, and it could invalidate the wager.”










“What?” Barbicane asked instantly.


“The theory that for some reason or other, the gunpowder never got ignited, and we haven't left.”


“By God, captain,” Michel Ardan exclaimed, “that theory isn't even worthy of my brain! You can't be serious! Didn't that jolt knock us half silly? Didn't I revive you? Isn't our president's shoulder still bleeding from something it banged into?”


“Agreed, Michel,” Nicholl echoed, “but I've got one question.”


“Ask it, my good captain.”


“There had to have been a fearsome explosion—did you hear it?”


“No,” Ardan replied, quite surprised. “As a matter of fact, I didn't hear any explosion.”


“How about you, Barbicane?”


“I didn't either.”


“Well then?” Nicholl put in.


“It's true,” muttered the Gun Club's president. “Why didn't we hear an explosion?”


The three friends looked at each other with rather flustered expressions. They were faced with a bewildering phenomenon. Yet the projectile had left, consequently there should have been an explosion.


“First let's lower the panels,” Barbicane said, “and find out where we are.”


This extremely simple operation instantly got under way. Using a monkey wrench, they loosened the nuts securing the bolts of the plate outside the right-hand porthole. They pushed the bolts out, and india-rubber plugs stopped up the holes that admitted those bolts. Instantly the outside plate fell back on its hinges like a hatch lid, revealing biconvex glass inset in the porthole. There was an identical porthole in the heavy wall on the opposite side of the projectile, another in its dome above, and finally a fourth in the middle of its base. So they could look out in four different directions—at the firmament through the side windows, and closer to hand, at the moon or the earth through the shell's openings overhead or underneath.


Barbicane and his two companions instantly rushed to the uncovered window. Not a single ray of light livened things up. Utter darkness surrounded the projectile. Which didn't keep President Barbicane from exclaiming:


“No, my friends, we haven't fallen back to the earth! And no, we aren't submerged under the Gulf of Mexico! And yes, we're ascending into space! Look at those stars twinkling in the night, and that impregnable darkness coming between us and the earth!”


“Hooray, hooray!” Nicholl and Michel Ardan shouted in unison.


In essence this intense blackness proved the projectile had left the earth, because if the travelers were still sitting on its surface, then the ground would have been visible in the bright moonlight. This darkness also showed that the projectile had gone through the atmospheric layers, because the diffuse light scattered in the air would have reflected off the metal walls, an effect also lacking. This light would have shone on the porthole window, but the window was dark. There was no more room for doubt. The travelers had left the earth.


“I've lost,” Nicholl said.


“And I offer my congratulations!” Ardan replied.


“Here's your $9,000,” the captain said, pulling a roll of dollar bills out of his pocket.


“Would you like a receipt?” Barbicane asked, taking it all.


“If you don't mind,” Nicholl answered. “It's just good business.”


As seriously and stoically as if he'd been at his desk, President Barbicane took out his notebook, tore off a blank page, wrote an official receipt in pencil, dated, signed, and initialed it, then handed it over to the captain, who placed it carefully in his wallet.


Michel Ardan tipped his hat and bowed to his two companions without saying a word. These financial formalities under such unusual circumstances left him literally speechless. He'd never seen anything so American.


This transaction completed, Barbicane and Nicholl took their places again by the window and looked at the constellations. The stars stood out like brilliant sparks against the black background of the sky. But from that side they couldn't see the earth's satellite, which was moving from east to west while gradually rising to the zenith. Accordingly her absence caused Ardan to remark:


“What about the moon?” he said. “By any chance will she miss our appointment?”


“Rest assured,” Barbicane replied, “our future world is in position, we just can't see her from this side. Let's open the opposite porthole.”


Just as Barbicane was about to leave the window and start uncovering the porthole on the other side, a glowing object came into view and caught his attention. It was an enormous disk whose dimensions were too colossal to calculate. It was facing the earth and shining brightly. You would have sworn it was some smaller moon reflecting light from the bigger one. It was coming on with prodigious speed and seemed to be orbiting the earth along a route that would intercept the projectile's flight path. As it followed its orbit, this moving object was spinning on its axis. So it was behaving like any heavenly body running loose in space.


“Hey!” Michel Ardan called out. “What's that? Another projectile?”


Barbicane didn't reply. The appearance of this enormous object surprised and alarmed him. A collision was possible and it would have had deplorable results: either the projectile would be driven off course, or the impact would break its momentum and knock it back down to the earth, or it would end up being irresistibly dragged along in the asteroid's gravitational field.


President Barbicane was quick to grasp the consequences of these three theoretical possibilities, which, one way or another, meant that his endeavor was doomed to failure. His speechless companions looked out into space. The object grew prodigiously as it came nearer, and by some sort of optical illusion, the projectile seemed to be rushing to meet it.


“Ye gods and little fishes!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “It's going to be a real train wreck!”


Instinctively the travelers shrank back. They were in tremendous fear, but not for much longer than a few seconds. Several hundred yards away from the projectile, the asteroid shot by and vanished— which was due less to its speed and more to the fact that it faced the moon and was suddenly lost in the absolute darkness of space.


“Good riddance!” Michel Ardan called, heaving a sigh of relief. “Imagine that! Infinity isn't big enough for this poor little shell to take a carefree stroll in! Drat, what was that overbearing sphere that almost ran us down?”


“I know what it is,” Barbicane replied.


“Of course. You know everything.”


“It's simply a meteor,” Barbicane said, “but an enormous one that the earth's gravity keeps up here in the capacity of a satellite.”


“It can't be!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “So the earth has two moons like Neptune?”


“That's right, my friend, two moons, though it's generally believed to have only one. But this second moon is so small and fast moving, people on earth can't see it. By accounting for certain disturbances, a French astronomer named Frédéric Petit was able to detect the presence of this second satellite and to determine its characteristics. His findings indicate that this meteor will orbit the earth in just three hours and twenty minutes, which implies a prodigious rate of speed.”


“Do all astronomers,” Nicholl asked, “accept the existence of this satellite?”


“No,” Barbicane replied, “but if they'd met up with it as we just did, they wouldn't have any further doubts. In fact, though this meteor could have caused major problems if it had hit the projectile, I think it will allow us to pinpoint our position in space.”


“How?” Ardan said.


“Because its distance is a matter of record, so when we met up with it, we were exactly 5,058 miles from the surface of our planet.”


“Over 2,000 geographic leagues!” Michel Ardan exclaimed. “Which would be a tall order for express trains back on that pitiful globe we call the earth.”


“I imagine so,” Nicholl replied, checking his chronometer. “It's eleven o'clock, just thirteen minutes since we left the continent of North America.”


“Only thirteen minutes?” Barbicane said. “Yes,” Nicholl replied, “and if we've kept up our initial velocity of 12,000 yards, we'll have been doing nearly 25,000 miles per hour.”


“That's all well and good, my friends,” said the Gun Club's president, “but we're still left with that unanswered question. Why didn't we hear the columbiad's explosion?”


No reply was forthcoming, so the conversation ground to a halt; his thoughts elsewhere, Barbicane set about lowering the lid from that second porthole on the opposite side. He was successful in this activity and radiant moonlight poured into the projectile through the uncovered glass. Nicholl, a thrifty fellow, turned off the gaslight, now unnecessary and furthermore too bright to allow any scrutiny of interplanetary space.


At that point the lunar disk was shining with incomparable clarity. No longer diluted by the earth's hazy atmosphere, moonlight filtered through the glass, and the air inside the projectile was steeped in silvery glimmers. The black curtain of the firmament actually heightened the moon's brightness—though, since there isn't any diffuse light in this ethereal void, she didn't outshine the stars nearby. Viewed under these conditions, the heavens had a whole new look no human eye could have anticipated.


The reader can imagine how intently these daredevils contemplated that silver orb, their journey's ultimate destination. Moving along her orbit, the earth's satellite was inching closer to the zenith, the mathematical point she was to reach some ninety-six hours later. Her mountains, her plains, and all her surface features didn't stand out any more clearly than if the men had been eyeing them from somewhere on the earth; but her light radiated through space with incomparable intensity. Her disk was shining like a platinum mirror. Already our travelers had forgotten about the earth, which was now receding beneath their feet.


It was Captain Nicholl who first reminded them about their vanishing planet.


“Yes,” Michel Ardan replied, “let's show it a little gratitude! Since we're leaving our homeland, we owe it one last look. I want to see the earth again before it's completely out of sight.”


To fulfill his companions’ wishes, Barbicane set about uncovering the window in the projectile's base, which would give them a direct view of the earth. Not without some difficulty, he dismantled the movable disk, which the powerful thrust at takeoff had driven to the bottom of the shell. Set carefully against the walls, its separate parts could still come in handy on occasion. A circular opening then appeared, about twenty inches across and cut into the shell's underside. It was covered by six-inch glass reinforced with brass fastenings. Attached underneath was an aluminum plate secured by bolts. Once the nuts were unscrewed and the bolts removed, the plate fell open, and visual contact was restored between inside and outside.


Michel Ardan knelt on the glass. It was so dark, it seemed opaque.


“Well,” he exclaimed, “what happened to the earth?”


“The earth,” Barbicane said, “is over there.”


“What!” Ardan put in. “That skinny sliver, that silvery crescent?”


“Undoubtedly, Michel. In four days, right when we reach her, the moon will be full and the earth will be new. Our planet will be visible only in the form of a slender crescent, which will soon vanish and be submerged for a few days in impregnable blackness,”


“That's the earth?” Michel Ardan repeated, his eyes popping at that skinny remnant of his home planet.


President Barbicane's explanation was correct. In relation to the projectile, the earth had entered its last phase. It was in its octant and looked like a lightly sketched crescent against the black background of the sky. Tinted a bluish color by the heavy layer of atmosphere, the light it gave off wasn't as bright as that from a crescent moon. This particular crescent boasted considerable dimensions. It reminded you of an enormous longbow stretching across the firmament. A few parts—especially in its concave portion —were brightly lit and proclaimed the presence of lofty mountains; but they sometimes vanished behind dense patches unlike anything seen on the surface of the moon's disk. These came from belts of clouds forming concentric rings around the earth.


However, due to a natural phenomenon—identical to what occurs on the moon during her octants—you could make out our planet's full contours. The shape of its entire disk was fairly easy to see, thanks to an effect comparable to earthshine on the moon but less pronounced. And the reason for this lesser intensity is simple to understand. When earthshine occurs on the moon, it's caused by the sun's rays reflecting off the earth onto its satellite. Here the opposite applies: the sun's rays reflect off the moon onto the earth. Now then, light coming from the earth is about thirteen times stronger than that from the moon, due to the different sizes of these two entities. Ergo the result that in this phenomenon of reflected light, the dark part of the earth's disk is less clearly outlined than that of the moon's disk, since the phenomenon's intensity is directly proportional to the illuminating power of these two heavenly bodies. We should add that the earth's crescent seemed to form a longer curve than that of its


disk. Simple irradiation at work. 1


While the travelers were trying to peer through the intense darkness of space, a dazzling bouquet of shooting stars blossomed in front of their eyes. Ignited by contact with the atmosphere, hundreds of meteors streaked the blackness with their light trails, scrawling fiery stripes across the dark part of the earth's disk. During this time the earth was at its perihelion, and the month of December is so conducive to the appearance of shooting stars, astronomers have counted up to 24,000 per hour. But Michel Ardan, sneering at all scientific logic, preferred to think the earth was saying good-bye to three of its children with a glittering display of fireworks.


In short, this was all they saw of that sphere vanishing into the darkness, that minor member of the solar system, which rises and sets on the horizons of the bigger planets like a humble morning or evening star! A barely visible speck in space, it was nothing more than a fading crescent, this globe where they'd left everything they loved!


For a good while the three friends kept watch, silent but single-minded, while the projectile moved farther away at a speed that was steadily decreasing. Then an irresistible drowsiness came over them. Were they exhausted in body and mind? Surely, after the high excitement of those last hours spent on the earth, a reaction was bound to set in.


“Well,” Michel said, “since we're sleepy, let's sleep.”


And stretching out on their pallets, all three of them were soon deep in slumber.


But they hadn't been dozing for more than fifteen minutes, when Barbicane suddenly sat up and roused his companions with a fearsome shout:


“I've got it!” he yelled.


“Got what?” Michel Ardan asked, bounding from his pallet.


“The reason why we didn't hear the columbiad's explosion.”


“And it's because … ?” Nicholl put in.


“It's because our projectile traveled faster than the speed of sound!”