34


The sun came out and beamed cheerfully at them. A bird sang. A warm breeze wafted through the trees and lifted the heads of the flowers, carrying their scent away through the woods. An insect droned past on its way to do whatever it is that insects do in the late afternoon. The sound of voices lilted through the trees followed a moment later by two girls who stopped in surprise at the sight of Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent apparently lying on the ground in agony, but in fact rocking with noiseless laughter.
  'No, don't go,' called Ford Prefect between gasps, 'we'll be with you in just a moment.'
  'What's the matter?' asked one of the girls. She was the taller and slimmer of the two. On Golgafrincham she had been a junior personnel officer, but hadn't liked it much.
Ford pulled himself together.
  'Excuse me,' he said. 'Hello. My friend and I were just contemplating the meaning of life. Frivolous exercise.'
  'Oh, it's you,' said the girl. 'You made a bit of a spectacle of yourself this afternoon. You were quite funny to begin with but you did bang on a bit.'
'Did I? Oh yes.'
  'Yes, what was all that for?' asked the other girl, a shorter round-faced girl who had been an art director for a small advertising company on Golgafrincham. Whatever the privations of this world were, she went to sleep every night profoundly grateful for the fact that whatever she had to face in the morning it wouldn't be a hundred almost identical photographs of moodily lit tubes of toothpaste.
  'For? For nothing. Nothing's for anything,' said Ford Prefect happily. 'Come and join us, I'm Ford, this is Arthur. We were just about to do nothing at all for a while but it can wait.'
The girls looked at them doubtfully.
'I'm Agda,' said the tall one, 'this is Mella.' 'Hello, Agda, hello, Mella,' said Ford.
'Do you talk at all?' said Mella to Arthur.
'Oh, eventually,' said Arthur with a smile, 'but not as much as Ford.'


'Good.'
There was a slight pause.
'What did you mean,' asked Agda, 'about only having two million years?
I couldn't make sense of what you were saying.' 'Oh that,' said Ford, 'doesn't matter.'
  'It's just that the world gets demolished to make way for a hyperspace bypass,' said Arthur with a shrug, 'but that's two million years away, and anyway it's just Vogons doing what Vogons do.'
'Vogons?' said Mella.
'Yes, you wouldn't know them.' 'Where'd you get this idea from?'
  'It really doesn't matter. It's just like a dream from the past, or the future.' Arthur smiled and looked away.
'Does it worry you that you don't talk any kind of sense?' asked Agda. 'Listen, forget it,' said Ford, 'forget all of it. Nothing matters. Look, it's a
beautiful day, enjoy it. The sun, the green of the hills, the river down in the valley, the burning trees.'
  'Even if it's only a dream, it's a pretty horrible idea,' said Mella, 'destroying a world just to make a bypass.'
  'Oh, I've heard of worse,' said Ford. 'I read of one planet off in the seventh dimension that got used as a ball in a game of intergalactic bar billiards. Got potted straight into a black hole. Killed ten billion people.'
'That's mad,' said Mella.
'Yes, only scored thirty points too.' Agda and Mella exchanged glances.
'Look,' said Agda, 'there's a party after the committee meeting tonight.
You can come along if you like.' 'Yeah, OK,' said Ford.
'I'd like to,' said Arthur.


Many hours later Arthur and Mella sat and watched the moon rise over the dull red glow of the trees.
'That story about the world being destroyed . . .' began Mella. 'In two million years, yes.'
'You say it as if you really think it's true.' 'Yes, I think it is. I think I was there.' She shook her head in puzzlement.


'You're very strange,' she said.
  'No, I'm very ordinary,' said Arthur, 'but some very strange things have happened to me. You could say I'm more differed from than differing.'
  'And that other world your friend talked about, the one that got pushed into a black hole.'
'Ah, that I don't know about. It sounds like something from the book.' 'What book?'
Arthur paused.
'The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy,' he said at last. 'What's that?'
  'Oh, just something I threw into the river this evening. I don't think I'll be wanting it any more,' said Arthur Dent.
OceanofPDF.com


















LIFE, THE UNIVERSE AND EVERYTHING






OceanofPDF.com


















For Sally
OceanofPDF.com






Foreword
by Simon Brett




I am unique in the history of the world - and indeed of the entire universe. I am the only person who ever got a manuscript from Douglas Adams on time. The reason for this rare distinction is that I was the BBC producer who commissioned the first radio script for The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, and since the pilot episode could not be recorded until we had some words to record, Douglas duly delivered on time. Thereafter, of course, his propensity towards procrastination and missed deadlines became legendary.
  I had first met Douglas with a bunch of other Cambridge revue writers and performers, including John Lloyd, Griff Rhys Jones and Mary Allen. He had contributed a few surreal sketches (including a classic about an unsuccessful kamikaze pilot) to a Cambridge Footlights revue to which a group of young radio Light Entertainment producers (including me) had paid a visit. I subsequently produced a radio version of that stage show.
  So I saw a lot of Douglas round the BBC. I was aware of his comedy potential, but also of his huge frustration that he couldn't find a niche for his unusual talents. Most radio comedy round that time was very stratified. Sketches were carefully structured with beginnings, middles and punchlines, and formats like that didn't suit the sprawling, insatiable intellectual curiosity of Douglas's mind.
  I was also then producing the topical comedy programme Week Ending, and tried to get him to contribute to that. Never had there been a greater mismatch between programme and writer. A brain like Douglas's is singularly incapable of writing wacky thirty-second quickies about Margaret Thatcher. Some of his material did appear in The Burkiss Way, another show I was producing, and that was closer to the Adams style. But the show's main writers, David Renwick and Andrew Marshall (both subsequently to have stellar careers in television comedy), were developing the programme in a way which left little room for outside contributions.


  I still thought there was untapped potential in Douglas Adams, and so I asked him to come up with some ideas for a show of his own. On Friday 18 February 1977 we met for lunch in a Japanese restaurant, where he presented me with three ideas. I said that I thought the most promising was the science-ction comedy which he had entitled The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, and that I would try to persuade my bosses in the Light Entertainment Department to commission a pilot script. The rest, as they say, is history. (And, incidentally, neither Douglas nor I could ever remember what the two ideas we rejected were.)
  So, on Tuesday 28 June 1977, in the Paris Studio in Lower Regent Street, we recorded the pilot script of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It was to be the first and last episode that I produced. Not that I wouldn't have wanted to continue, but I had recently agreed to take a new job at London Weekend Television. And the ensuing series couldn't have been in better hands than those of the person I recommended should take over from me - Geoffrey Perkins, a brilliant comedy producer, whose death, like Douglas's own, came far too early.
  On the 12 July I played back the edited recording of the pilot to my immediate bosses. The three of them sat in stony silence for the full half- hour. At the end of the playback the Head of Light Entertainment, Con Mahoney, recognizing that what he had just heard was rather different from the department's usual output, asked me, 'Simon, is it funny?' I assured him it was, and from that moment on he gave the project his full support.
  Of course it was from that pilot script that The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy developed into an international publishing sensation, the 'trilogy of five', of which Life, the Universe and Everything is volume three.
  In this book you will find all of the trademarks of Douglas Adams's writing, of which probably the most striking is his sheer glee in the potentialities of the English language. Sometimes the effects are very simple, as when he says of the party spaceship, 'It tried to right itself and wronged itself instead.' Other images are more complex, but always note- perfect. Here's a description of the Norse god Thor: 'He expanded his chest to make it totally clear that here was the sort of man you only dared to cross if you had a team of Sherpas with you.'
  Then there are the words Douglas makes up. In a characteristic scene where a mattress engages in conversation with Marvin the Paranoid


Android, we encounter 'flolloped', 'globbered' and 'vollued', none of which would have been out of place in Lewis Carroll's Jabberwocky.
  I think Douglas's was the most original mind I've ever encountered. He had a unique ability to make connections between disparate ideas. In the world of Hitchhiker it appears quite logical that a drinks party should hurtle endlessly through space, or that a new mathematical system should be based on people's behaviour in restaurants.
  Life, the Universe and Everything is the book in which Douglas gets closest to actually having a plot. But as he would readily admit, he wasn't really good at plots, and it isn't a very good plot. That couldn't matter less, though. You don't read Douglas Adams for his plots any more than you read Raymond Chandler for his. You read both authors for their language and the imaginative world that they create.
  So enjoy this book. The writing process for Douglas was an agonizingly slow one, but the results were always worth waiting for. And Life, the Universe and Everything has another rare distinction. It is one of the very few books featuring cricket ever to have been a success in the States.


SIMON BRETT
Producer of the Radio 4 pilot episode of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy
OceanofPDF.com