DEATH’S END






Cixin Liu




Start Reading










About this Book










About the Author










Table of Contents










www.headofzeus.com










About Death’s End










Half a century after the Doomsday Battle, the Dark Forest Deterrence keeps the Trisolaran invaders at bay.


It is an uneasy balance, but the infusion of Trisolaran knowledge has triggered an era of unprecedented prosperity on Earth. With human science advancing and the Trisolarans adopting Earth culture, it seems that the two civilizations can co-exist peacefully as equals without the terrible threat of mutually assured annihilation. But has peace also made humanity complacent?


Cheng Xin, an aerospace engineer from the 21st century, awakens from hibernation into this new age. She brings knowledge of a long-forgotten program dating from the start of the Trisolar Crisis, and her presence may fatally upset the delicate balance between two worlds.


The universe is a dark and dangerous place, devoid of mercy or sentiment. Will humanity reach for the stars or die in its cradle?






Contents






Cover


Welcome Page


About Death’s End


A Brief Note from the Translator


Table of Eras


Excerpt from the Preface to A Past Outside of Time


Part I


May 1453, C.E. The Death of the Magician










Crisis Era, Year 1 The Option for Life










Crisis Era, Year 4 Yun Tianming










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Infantilism at the Start of the Crisis










Crisis Era, Year 4 Yun Tianming










Crisis Era, Years 1–4 Cheng Xin










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Hibernation: Man Walks for the First Time Through Time










Crisis Era, Years 1–4 Cheng Xin










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time The Staircase Program










Crisis Era, Years 1–4 Cheng Xin










Crisis Era, Years 5–7 The Staircase Program










Part II


Deterrence Era, Year 12 Bronze Age










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Nyctohylophobia










Deterrence Era, Year 12 Bronze Age










Deterrence Era, Year 13 Trial










Deterrence Era, Year 61 The Swordholder










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time The Ghost of the Wallfacers: The Swordholder










Deterrence Era, Year 61 The Swordholder










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Cultural Reflection










Deterrence Era, Year 61 The Swordholder










Deterrence Era, Year 62 Gravity, in the Vicinity of the Oort Cloud










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time More Indirect Evidence for the Dark Forest: Sophon-Blind Regions










Deterrence Era, Year 62 Gravity, in the Vicinity of the Oort Cloud










Deterrence Era, Year 62 November 28, 4:00 P.M. to 4:17 P.M. Deterrence Center










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time The Choice of the Swordholder: Ten Minutes Between Existence and Annihilation










Deterrence Era, Year 62 November 28, 4:00 P.M. to 4:17 P.M. Deterrence Center










The Final Ten Minutes of the Deterrence Era, Year 62 November 28, 4:17:34 P.M. to 4:27:58 P.M. Deterrence Center










Post-Deterrence Era, First Hour A Lost World










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Reflections on the Failure of Dark Forest Deterrence










Post-Deterrence Era, First Hour A Lost World










Post-Deterrence Era, Day 60 A Lost World










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Technology Explosion on Trisolaris










Post-Deterrence Era, Day 60 A Lost World










Post-Deterrence Era, Year 2 Australia










The Final Ten Minutes of the Deterrence Era, Year 62 November 28, 4:17:34 P.M. to 4:27:58 P.M. Gravity and Blue Space, Deep Space










Post-Deterrence Era, Year 2 The Morning After the Great Resettlement, Australia










Post-Deterrence Era, Day 1–Day 5 Gravity and Blue Space, Deep Space Beyond the Oort Cloud










Part III


Broadcast Era, Year 7 Cheng Xin










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Delusions of Cosmic Persecution The Last Attempt to Invalidate Dark Forest Theory










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Cheng Xin










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time A New Model for the Dark Forest










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Sophon










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time The Cosmic Safety Notice: A Lonely Performance Art










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Sophon










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time The Long Staircase










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Yun Tianming










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Yun Tianming’s Fairy Tales










The First Tale of Yun Tianming “The New Royal Painter”










The Second Tale of Yun Tianming “The Glutton’s Sea”










The Third Tale of Yun Tianming “Prince Deep Water”










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Yun Tianming’s Fairy Tales










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time The Bunker Project: An Ark for Earth Civilization










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Yun Tianming’s Fairy Tales










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Motion Through Bending Space










Broadcast Era, Year 7 Yun Tianming’s Fairy Tales










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Three Paths of Survival for Earth Civilization










Broadcast Era, Year 8 Fate’s Choice










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Space Sentries: The Solar System Advance Warning System










Broadcast Era, Year 8 Fate’s Choice










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time Terror of the Endless Night










Broadcast Era, Year 8 Sun-Earth Lagrangian Point










Part IV


Bunker Era, Year 11 Bunker World










Bunker Era, Year 11 Lightspeed II










Bunker Era, Year 11 Halo City










Part V


Bunker Era, Year 67 Orion Arm of the Milky Way










Bunker Era, Year 67 Halo










Bunker Era, Year 66 Outside the Solar System










Bunker Era, Year 68 Pluto










Bunker Era, Year 68 The Two-Dimensional Solar System










Part VI


Galaxy Era, Year 409 Our Star










About Seventeen Billion Years After the Beginning of Time Our Star










Outside of Time Our Universe










Excerpt from A Past Outside of Time The Stairs of Responsibility










Outside of Time Our Universe










Translator’s Postscript


About Cixin Liu


About the Translator


About The Three-Body Problem Series


An Invitation from the Publisher


Copyright










A Brief Note from the Translator








Chinese and Korean names in this text are rendered with surnames first and given names last, in accordance with the customs of these cultures. For example, in the name “Yun Tianming,” YUN is the surname and TIANMING is the given name.


CHARACTERS FROM THE THREE-BODY PROBLEM AND THE DARK FOREST


(Chinese names are written with surname first.)


Ye Wenjie


Physicist whose family was persecuted during the Cultural Revolution. She initiated contact with the Trisolarans and precipitated the Trisolar Crisis.


Yang Dong


Physicist; daughter of Ye Wenjie.


Ding Yi


Theoretical physicist and the first human to make contact with the Trisolaran droplets; Yang Dong’s boyfriend.


Zhang Beihai


Officer in the Asian Fleet who hijacked Natural Selection during the Doomsday Battle, thus preserving a flicker of hope for humanity during their darkest hour. Possibly one of the first officers to understand the nature of dark battles.


Secretary General Say


UN secretary general during the Trisolar Crisis.


Manuel Rey Diaz


Wallfacer; he proposed the giant hydrogen bomb plan as a defense against the Trisolarans.


Luo Ji


Wallfacer; discoverer of the dark forest theory; creator of dark forest deterrence.










Table of Eras










Common Era Present–201X C.E.


Crisis Era 201X–2208


Deterrence Era 2208–2270


Post-Deterrence Era 2270–2272


Broadcast Era 2272–2332


Bunker Era 2333–2400


Galaxy Era 2273–unknown


Black Domain Era for DX3906 System 2687–18906416


Timeline for Universe 647 18906416–...










Excerpt from the Preface to A Past Outside of Time








I suppose this ought to be called history; but since all I can rely on is my memory, it lacks the rigor of history.


It’s not even accurate to call it the past, for the events related in these pages didn’t occur in the past, aren’t taking place now, and will not happen in the future.


I don’t want to record the details. Only a frame, for a history or an account of the past. The details that have been preserved are already abundant. Sealed in floating bottles, they will hopefully reach the new universe and endure there.


So I’ve written only a frame; someday, the frame may make it easier to fill in all the specifics. Of course, that task won’t fall to us. I just hope such a day will come for someone.


I regret that day didn’t exist in the past, doesn’t exist in the present, and will not exist in the future.


I move the sun to the west, and as the angle of the light shifts, the dewdrops on the seedlings in the field glisten like countless eyes suddenly popping open. I dim the sun so that dusk arrives earlier; then I stare at the silhouette of myself on the distant horizon, in front of the setting sun.


I wave at the silhouette; the silhouette waves back. Looking at the shadow of myself, I feel young again.


This is a lovely time, just right for remembering.