1


THE REAR SEAT, where the ﬂight oﬃcer would be in charge of electronic warfare duty, had been empty ever since the old Yukikaze was shot down.
Naturally, Major Booker planned to rectify the situation. Now that Rei was fully recovered and ready for combat, a new ﬂight oﬃcer had to be chosen, and fast. But at the moment, he was so shorthanded that he could ﬁnd nobody qualiﬁed for the position.
The job of the ﬂight oﬃcer riding in the ﬁghter’s rear seat was to conduct tactical reconnaissance and electronic warfare duty while in the combat airspace, and it was a job even more exhausting than the pilot’s. Once they were in the combat zone, he would be so busy conﬁrming the plane’s position and safety while giving guidance instructions to the pilot, selecting and operating a variety of radar systems for tactical recon, and conﬁrming in real time the transmission sources of the massive amounts of comm traﬃc being collected in the background that he had no time to even look out past the cockpit bubble. And all the while he was locked inside of this insular environment, he’d have to endure violent maneuvers as well.
The SAF currently had eleven electronic warfare specialists. As they had twelve ﬁghter planes in use, not counting the unmanned Rafe, in the event that they conducted an operation requiring all their planes, the mission would be a man short. The SAF normally would never send all of their planes out at once, but now, even if such a deployment ever became necessary, it would be


impossible because Yukikaze was missing essential personnel.
As a general rule, you try to pair up a pilot and a ﬂight oﬃcer who’ll be able to work together as a good team, thought Major Booker. However, with Rei back in combat, the major was having to assign him a diﬀerent ﬂight oﬃcer for each individual mission, which was only increasing the burden on the electronic warfare operator. That was something he wanted to avoid.
He needed a new man assigned to the squadron immediately. If he worked well with Rei, then all of his problems would go away. And even if he didn’t, another man in the talent pool meant he wouldn’t have to increase the burden on his EWOs. If Booker couldn’t get a good team formed and had to keep assigning a ﬂight oﬃcer for each mission, he could still have Captain Foss, the doctor charged with their psychological care, do something about the mental strain it was causing. In any case, he wanted a new man, and had gone to plead with General Cooley for one.
“It can be anyone,” he said as he stood in front of her desk. He’d come to her oﬃce to make a direct appeal. “Just please, get me somebody to use.”
“You know perfectly well it can’t be just anyone, Major,” she replied.
“Okay, yeah. Yeah, you’re right. If they can’t be used immediately, then there’s no point in even discussing it. Our unit doesn’t have time to carefully train anyone. One person, though. All I’m asking for is one person. Please, transfer someone in from somewhere, from some other unit. Anyone, as long as they’re not a JAM duplicate. You know, I wouldn’t even mind one of them at this point. We’d probably be able to learn about their strategy.”
“You don’t know what you’re saying anymore, do you? We don’t have an EWO we can throw into battle immediately, and it’s suddenly all you can think about. You


wouldn’t mind having a JAM? What kind of nonsense is that? If you want the numbers to balance out, I could do it for you easily. Back when Captain Fukai was still a lieutenant, if he hadn’t made it back and had been killed by the JAM along with his ﬂight oﬃcer, Lieutenant Burgadish, we wouldn’t have this problem now. If that had happened, you would have complained about losing two men and a plane, but you’d have said you would deal with it somehow.”
Major Booker couldn’t speak for a moment.
“General,” he said at last. “I can’t just let something like that pass. Are you saying you think it would have been better if Rei— if Captain Fukai hadn’t made it back, because if you are—”
“No, that’s not what I’m saying at all. This whole matter is giving me a headache too. Personnel selection is my responsibility. I’m just saying that this isn’t simply a matter of throwing a warm body into the unit. Major, take a moment and calm down a little. This isn’t like you.”
General Cooley rose from her desk and motioned to Major Booker to take a seat on the sofa in her lounge suite.
“I don’t have much time, and there’s something I’d like to consult you about,” General Cooley said, her tone changing slightly, becoming a bit friendlier.
“Yes, General.”
Although she’d said she didn’t have much time, she rang her secretary on the intercom and ordered tea and cocoa for them.
“We both do this so often that I know what you like, don’t I? It’ll be here soon.”
The general usually drinks tea with lemon. The cocoa must be for me, Major Booker thought as he sat down, preparing himself for the worst. Whenever she does this, it means the general has a little problem for me to deal with.
“How are things with Captain Fukai?” she asked.


“Like I reported to you a few days ago, he’s recovered about 85 percent of his physical strength, so no problems there.”
“His mental state still seems unstable. I’ve heard he has some anxiety about his plane, Yukikaze.”
“I put down in my report that his relationship with the plane would better be described as psychological growth for him. Captain Foss agrees with me. In my judgment, he should have no problem in combat.”
“You’re saying he’s developing a pleasant personality?” Cooley asked.
“Personality doesn’t change. He’s not an obedient soldier and never will be. Considering the duty the SAF has to carry out, that’s for the best.”
“In other words, we can still use him, right?” “Exactly.”
“You still haven’t submitted a report on the conclusions of the investigation into Yukikaze’s unmanned sortie. How is that proceeding?”
“The investigation’s tentatively complete, but we’re going to need to keep a constant eye on how our combat intelligences behave,” Major Booker said. “I’m not sure if they’re going to be willing to accept it. We can’t use the computer network to distribute the report, since the CIs will be able to read it. Of course, I can’t say for certain they won’t overhear us talking about it like this either.”
“You’re studying what to do if that happens, aren’t you?”
“Yeah, although, on my part… At ﬁrst glance, I think taking a hostile stance toward the CIs will just backﬁre on us. It’s the JAM, not humanity, that’s the enemy. We know that clearly enough. All we have to be on guard for is whether they’ve been contaminated by the JAM or are being


manipulated by them. Of course, the ﬁnal decision in this matter will be yours, General.”
“The SAF depends on its computers. If we can’t rely on them, we can’t ﬁght the JAM. Are you saying, for now at least, that their reliability hasn’t been compromised?”
“Yes, in my judgment.”
“I trust you, Major, so I’m leaving this matter in your hands. I’m sure you’ll handle this without getting our own computers pissed oﬀ at us.”
“Thank you, General.”
“It seems strange to me to be asking you not to piss oﬀ some computers. Do you think so as well, Major?”
“You have a point there,” the major said. “You know, if we hadn’t been paying attention to the relationship between Rei and Yukikaze, we probably never would have thought to pay attention to the combat awareness of the computers as well. I doubt it ever would have occurred to me. Yukikaze has changed radically. Or, rather than changed, I think—”
“You think that she’s revealing her true nature?”
“I think she’s grown as a combat intelligence, and we humans are seeing that manifested in her behavior. It’s possible that we’ll see more incidents similar to the one that just occurred, and Captain Fukai is the only one who can control her. We have to make sure that he doesn’t fail at that task. If they can build a relationship of mutual trust, then through Yukikaze we can build a similar relationship with our computers. Whether we try to curry favor with the computers or not, we’re still at war with the JAM. But there’s no doubt in my mind that doing so will be much easier if we can establish mutual trust with each other. The only hitch is that we’re trying to build trust with things that aren’t human. These are autonomous ultra-high speed computers. You can express reliability with a number, but you can’t do the same for a concept like mutual trust.”


Even as he was speaking, Major Booker thought that Rei and Yukikaze wouldn’t have been able to ﬁght the JAM unless they already had a perfect level of mutual trust beyond that which could be expressed through numbers. That trust was immediately reﬂected in the way she maneuvered in combat. There was no time to wonder what would happen if a maneuver didn’t work. Rei fussed and worried over his relationship with his beloved plane so much that it made other people laugh, but that was because his very existence depended on her. Nobody could laugh at that, any more than they could help. It was a question that operated on a diﬀerent level than just being satisﬁed with the SAF maintenance staﬀ putting enthusiasm into maintaining Yukikaze’s airframe and electronic hardware perfectly.
“You’re right,” replied General Cooley, nodding. “I’ll try not to forget that.”
The usual tea and cocoa arrived, the cocoa with lots of whipped cream and moderate sugar. The general’s secretary, a young man who looked quite dashing in his uniform, set the drinks down, saluted, and then left the oﬃce. After he did, General Cooley’s tone changed again.
“We are getting replacement personnel, but we can’t wait for a new ﬂight oﬃcer to be assigned to us. I had a list drawn up of several candidates from other units that might be ready for duty with the SAF and tried to grab one of them for us.”
This conversation we’ve been having was just to kill time. The main topic was about to come, Major Booker thought as he picked up his cup and waited for what she’d say next.
“Our forces are shorthanded everywhere. Nobody wants to lose a good pilot if they have one. Besides that, even someone with superior skills may not be suited for duty in the SAF. I put out the word that we’ll take anyone, no matter


how disliked they are, but when I checked into the candidates, none of them had the skills we need. After this went on for a while, my list was whittled down to nothing.”
“So, I guess I’ll just have to wait a little longer then,” Major Booker said.
“We can’t just wait for new talent to arrive. I hate not knowing exactly when we’ll get someone as much as you do. Besides that, in two months the SAF is going to lose an excellent EWO, Captain N’mudo, when he retires. He’s already extended his military service out to nearly six years. I want to let him go, and he wants to go. Same thing for Captain Kozlov in seven months. We know which people we’ll be losing, but no replacements are scheduled to come. Sitting around waiting for them isn’t an option.”
“I’ll try to ﬁnd some candidates from my end again,” the major replied.
“Right, and I hope you’re always on the lookout for those, but another unit contacted me with a man they hope we can use. In other words, he’s a giveaway. What I wanted to consult with you about was whether or not I should accept him. I’d like to hear your opinion on the matter.”
“Who is he? Does he want to join the SAF? Does he have any personality problems? I’d welcome a guy with a personality like Captain Fukai’s, but people like that don’t usually oﬀer themselves to us.”
“He wasn’t the one asking us to use him. It was Colonel Rombert.”
“Colonel Rombert? From the Intelligence Forces?” asked Major Booker, the cup of cocoa up at his mouth.
“Right. Ansel Rombert. He says that if we’re shorthanded, to please use one of his men. The candidate has electronic warfare experience and doesn’t seem to have any problems as far as competency goes. But he comes with another problem.”


“Yeah…the Intelligence Forces probably want to ﬁnd out what’s going on in the SAF and maybe get some intel from us as well. I think Colonel Rombert sees our situation presenting itself to him as a chance to get some quid pro quo. Did he say anything like this guy he’s oﬀering wouldn’t be an SAF transfer but just an Intelligence Forces member on loan to us?”
“Yeah, that’s basically the impression I got from him. Rombert’s attitude toward us will probably change depending on what moves we make. For now, though, he seems to be friendly to us,” General Cooley said.
“The colonel seems to be planning to start openly collecting intel on what goes on in the SAF. This personnel recommendation may just be a bluﬀ. In any case, I think this is a declaration from him that the Intelligence Forces aren’t just going to leave the SAF to its own devices. We should take it as a warning.”
“I don’t want Colonel Rombert and his forces interfering with what we do here. The last thing we need is them breathing down our necks. I want to avoid anything that endangers our autonomy. Normally, I’d reject the oﬀer out of hand, but right now, we’re really hurting for personnel, so I’m thinking of accepting it,” said Cooley.
“Accept an intel forces guy with strings attached, huh? All combat intel will end up getting passed straight to Colonel Rombert. Are you saying you’re okay with that?”
“So says the man who was just saying he wanted anyone, even a JAM.”
“That was just a ﬁgure of speech, General.”
“I didn’t think so. You sounded pretty serious to me when you said a JAM human could get us info on the JAM.”
“A JAM human. What Colonel Rombert refers to as a Jammy. Well, maybe this would be better. If the colonel’s recommending this guy, it’s pretty much a guarantee that he won’t be a Jammy,” Booker said.


“I can imagine that Colonel Rombert has been watching us for any strange moves ever since we told him that we’ve already been inﬁltrated by a duplicate once before. It’s only natural that he can’t disregard any actions the SAF takes now. We were prepared for that already.”
“True, but I ﬁgured he’d do it behind closed doors. I never expected him to openly send in a…well, spy may be too strong a word. How about observer?”
“No, Colonel Rombert sends in his right-hand man who will then report on what happens here to him. But at the same time, we’ll know about it. With that in mind, I want you to stay on your toes. This is also a good chance for us to learn about what the Intelligence Forces are up to. What I’d like to ask your opinion about is if you think we can do that, Major Booker.”
So, that’s what she wanted to consult me about, thought Major Booker as he sipped his cocoa. The general was right; they couldn’t just ignore Colonel Rombert’s activities and speculations. If they left this to lie, the Intelligence Forces would certainly be investigating the SAF in secret. But the colonel had shown his cards; he wanted to gather information through this guy they were sending over, so that the arrangement would be an exchange of information between the SAF and the Intelligence Forces. In that respect, Colonel Rombert had made a fair proposal.
But there was no mistaking that the colonel thought that he’d be getting the better end of the deal. Would Booker be able to handle this talented soldier Rombert was sending over? He was a spy, an expert in information warfare, while the major wasn’t. To be honest, Booker didn’t really want to take on any duties outside of the war with the JAM. Still, they weren’t going to get anywhere with the war unless they had the manpower to ﬁght it.
“Colonel Rombert has good people working for him, and so do I,” said General Cooley as she looked at Major Booker.


“I know you can handle this.”
“Hm. Well, I’d like some details on the man he’s recommending.”
“Colonel Rombert arranged to have a hard copy of his ﬁle sent over. It looks like he didn’t want the computers knowing about it.”
“He probably has the ﬁle memorized anyway. That’s the safest way. It’s kind of amazing how he’s able to do that.”
“The colonel’s abilities aren’t that praiseworthy. I have a feeling that you’d be able to tell me the detailed personal histories of our personnel and the current condition of their planes immediately if I asked you to,” the general said. “You’d do well not to overestimate the man.”
“It’s an objective evaluation of him, General. The fact that the colonel has his position in the Intelligence Forces is evidence of his ability in itself. My saying it’s dangerous to make light of him is another way for me to say I’m ready for anything he dishes out. It doesn’t mean he’s got me shaking in my boots.”
“As a member of the SAF, you know that we can’t let our guard down with Colonel Rombert, right?”
“The same way we can’t get sloppy with the JAM. Anyway, I want to know about this guy they’re sending before he gets here. He can’t be a total mystery man, can he?”
“We’re still waiting on his detailed personal ﬁle, but I’ve been given a brief précis of it.”
“Then could you please start by telling me what you know?” Major Booker asked. “Colonel Rombert may be distracting us with this guy while he thinks of some other measure to use against us, but I can’t make any judgments without data to work with. I want that data and some time to consider all this.”


“Very well. If you judge that he won’t ﬁt our needs, then I’ll turn down the colonel’s oﬀer. Don’t take too long, though. We should decide if we’re taking him as soon as we can.”
“What’s his name?”
“Akira Katsuragi. Second lieutenant, currently assigned to the electronic warfare analysis division of the Intelligence Forces. He comes from Japan and originally enlisted in the Japanese Air Force. So he’s Japanese, not a Jammy. Why don’t we pair him up with Captain Fukai?”
“You’re saying their coming from the same country will make them more compatible? That’s—”
“Compatibility has nothing to do with it. First of all, Yukikaze needs a ﬂight oﬃcer. Second, we’ll need Rei’s and Yukikaze’s help if we’re going to outwit the colonel. Rei won’t let a new guy do as he pleases, and neither will Yukikaze. Particularly Yukikaze, since she’ll be recording every single thing the ﬂight oﬃcer does while aboard her. He won’t be able to interfere with any SAF computer without her knowing about it.”
Booker paused a moment, considering his options.
“You know what, General? Let’s take Colonel Rombert up on his kind oﬀer. Right now, ﬁguring out the JAM’s strategy is more important than speculating on the Intelligence Forces’ intentions. After that is ﬁguring out what our unit’s CIs are up to. I’m also interested in Yukikaze on that front, but I know what she’s doing from Rei’s reports. He’s working hard to get that information out of her. Compared to that, this little intrigue on Rombert’s part is a minor annoyance, and we’re going to let him know that through the new guy.”
“I’ll give you a little time to consider this.” “Ma’am?”
“Take some time to enjoy your cocoa, Major. If you don’t want to do it here, you can take the cup to your oﬃce.”


Booker thought it over, then replied, “I’ll do it here, General.”
“I know you think you need a private secretary too, but there’s nobody qualiﬁed available. Getting a bad candidate in there will probably just cause more trouble for you, but I want to help you with that if I can.”
“I appreciate your concern, General. I’m ﬁne, though. My coﬀee and cocoa tastes best when I ﬁx it for myself.”
But as he slowly sipped his drink, Major Booker thought that cocoa made for you by another person didn’t taste so bad.
“We need to get Captain Fukai and Yukikaze to work on this new strategy against the JAM,” General Cooley said conversationally as she sipped her tea. “I’ll be expecting you to do your best with it.”
“I’ve broached the subject with him, but I’d like for this Lieutenant Katsuragi character to get used to Yukikaze ﬁrst. We can get to the other thing later. No need to rush. The JAM aren’t going anywhere. We can take our time looking for them.”
“The SAF was originally formed to carry out tactical reconnaissance, but now we seem to be moving into the realm of strategic reconnaissance,” Cooley said.
“It’d be better if we didn’t keep pursuing autonomy for our unit. The nail that sticks up is the one that gets hammered down, you know.”
“I never set out to start playing internal FAF power games,” the general replied. “But I can’t help but think that having a bit more inﬂuence would help us to avoid problems like the ones we’re facing now.”
“The thing is, you’re still the big gun here. You run things from the shadows,” the major replied. “It’d be better if you didn’t move into the foreground. From the very start, the SAF was never simply a tactical recon unit. Right now, we’re operating as a joint tactical-strategic intelligence unit.


There’s a lot of know-how we need from Colonel Rombert. The way we need to think about this information exchange is not as a strategic recon force, but as another intelligence force. Now, of course, Colonel Rombert will probably be on guard for this. And then there are the internal power games we need to play. All these family squabbles within the FAF may be just what the JAM wanted.”
“Humans really are bizarre life-forms, aren’t we?” “Completely. In the face of an enemy threat, we still
waste our time with these internal power struggles. There are those who think we have better things to do, but they usually turn out to be the losers. I used to think it was basic instinct for every life-form to seek hegemony over its environment, but now I’m not so sure. There are special groups within humanity where that idea doesn’t hold sway. The SAF is one of them. We really do occupy a special position within the mass of humanity. I can only guess at the troubles it causes you,” the major said.
“Your sympathy doesn’t help much, but I think it makes me feel a bit better.”
“As does yours for me.”
Draining the last of his cocoa, Major Booker rose from the sofa.
“Please tell me as soon as you get a hard date for Lieutenant Katsuragi’s arrival. I’ll be placing Captain Fukai in charge of bringing him up to speed on Yukikaze, so I need to make plans.”
“Understood.”
General Cooley, cup still in hand, nodded her head. Saluting the general as she sipped her tea, Major Booker exited her oﬃce.
He didn’t know what kind of guy Katsuragi was going to be, but now Yukikaze’s rear seat was ﬁlled. That was one major problem solved. The next thing to prepare for was the strategic reconnaissance mission to be carried out by Rei


and Yukikaze, which could lead to a major turning point in the war with the JAM. They were going to have to carry out that mission with their new ﬂight oﬃcer.