5


“I’M NOT SURPRISED you didn’t know,” Lieutenant Mayle thought he heard Lieutenant Burgadish say. “The FAF is working with the JAM.”
“Am I really dead?” asked Lieutenant Mayle, rubbing his face. He felt nothing.
“While we were risking our lives ﬁghting, the FAF brass successfully entered into an agreement with the JAM.”
Was that feeling of dying while help never arrived real? This body a duplicate?
“The FAF isn’t telling Earth about any of this. The reason, of course, is that they want to monopolize the economic value of planet Faery for themselves.”
“For themselves…?”


Were they saying that this body of his was theirs as well?
“Yes. The FAF’s aircraft fuel is sent from Earth. The food as well,” Burgadish said. “But they predicted early on that there were petroleum reserves here on Faery, and mineral resources. If not for the war with the JAM, they could search for and exploit them in earnest. Earth wanted to send in a survey team, but the FAF rejected the idea, saying they couldn’t spare the manpower to protect them. Then they did it themselves, a long time ago. They’ve also been doing exploratory drilling. That’s what the front-line bases are for. They aren’t just being used simply as forward bases in the ﬁght against the JAM. In reality, they’re drilling for oil.”
“I never knew that…” Mayle said.
“Of course you didn’t. It’s top secret. The Intelligence Forces keep the news under control. Very few people know. Colonel Rombert is in charge of it. Eventually, the plan is for the FAF to declare independence and then sell the resources back to Earth. If Earth tries to intervene, they’ll be up against the JAM. Even now, Earth is being drained by this war. They’re not getting anything out of it, thanks to the FAF. They’ve nearly done it. Just a little more, and they can declare independence.”
“We’re not going to let them get away with it, are we?” To this, Lieutenant Burgadish smiled and nodded to
Lieutenant Mayle.
“Of course we won’t let them.” “How do you know that?”
“Because we’re not going to sit by quietly. We’re going to teach them a lesson for trying to keep all the shares for themselves.”
“We should join forces too.”
“As fellow corpses,” Burgadish said. “I’m alive. But you… What are you?”


“A dead man. A dead man resurrected to take revenge upon the living. And so are you, Lieutenant Mayle.”
“I just can’t believe that. I don’t believe it.” Lieutenant Mayle looked around. He was in a vacant warehouse. The men of the retraining unit silently surrounded him. “You guys really believe this bullshit? Lieutenant Lancome, you… You’re…”
The man Mayle knew should be dead nodded sadly to him.
“No, this is wrong,” Lieutenant Mayle muttered. “Something somewhere just doesn’t add up. But that doesn’t matter.”
Lieutenant Mayle took a deep breath and continued.
“I don’t know about you guys, but I’m alive. I’m outta here. Back to my old unit. Now step aside!”
Lieutenant Mayle pushed past Lieutenant Burgadish and headed for the exit. “How unfortunate,” he heard Burgadish say behind him. He was turning to look back when he felt the shock of something slamming into his back. Then he heard the gunshot.
“You son of a bitch, you…!”
He couldn’t say another word. Lieutenant Burgadish spoke, the pistol in his hand still leveled at Mayle.
“It’s also unfortunate that you really aren’t a duplicate. I don’t think I’ll ever understand you living humans. Goodbye, Lieutenant Mayle. May you rest in peace.” And with that, he ﬁred the killing shot, extinguishing Lieutenant Mayle’s consciousness once and for all.
“It was a mistake to have brought you here,” Lieutenant Burgadish said to the dead body. “Colonel Rombert’s mistake. Colonel…”
From a corner of the warehouse, Colonel Rombert stepped casually forward.


“What were you thinking in selecting this man? That wasn’t part of our plan.”
“Unlike you,” the colonel said, “I am not a JAM. I have motivations of my own. I’ve now seen what you’re capable of. Your methods are savage. Well, that’s war, I suppose. It’s inevitable that someone will have to die. Lieutenant Mayle, I’ll arrange for you to receive a medal and a two-rank advancement. I obtained valuable information thanks to your actions.”
“Colonel Rombert—”
“The FAF is drilling for oil, huh? You should have ﬁshed a little deeper for something Lieutenant Mayle actually cared about. JAM really don’t understand humans at all, do they?”
Lieutenant Lancome, clenching his ﬁsts and trembling, leapt at Lieutenant Burgadish. “You didn’t have to shoot Lieutenant Mayle, did you?” he shouted. “He was a good man! A good man!”
He knocked Lieutenant Burgadish to the ﬂoor. Everyone moved to grab Lieutenant Lancome. Another shot rang out. Everyone stopped.
“Colonel Rombert…”
Colonel Rombert had shot Lieutenant Burgadish in his dominant arm. He held an automatic pistol. It was his personal property, not FAF standard-issue, although it could chamber a standard FAF 9mm round.
“Why did you do that, Colonel? Are you betraying us? Or were you not working with us from the start?”
“The ones I wish to work with are the JAM, Lieutenant Burgadish. All you are is their messenger boy. Even so, I’ve learned quite a number of the JAM’s strategies from you. Still, I’m afraid I can’t let you get away with this, Lieutenant Burgadish. Or rather, Burgaduplicate.”
“But…you could control the FAF. Why would you throw all that away?”


“Because my goal in life isn’t to become an oil baron. Good God, you JAM really have no appreciation for the complexities of humans. Or the complexities of our organizations or how ﬂexible we can be. Declare independence and then sell resources to Earth? Don’t make me laugh. If we were going to do that, we’d be doing it already.”
“Then what do you want, Colonel?”
“Nothing extravagant. To go home, throw a log on the ﬁre, and read a good mystery, maybe.”
“What do you mean?” Burgadish said.
“Literally that. I don’t have a ﬁreplace in my home back on Earth.”
“If you kill me, you’ll be losing a lot.”
“I don’t think you’ll be helping me anymore, and I have no intention of helping you. I never regret the things I lose.”
“You’re a fool.”
“You’re right. I never expected you to shoot Lieutenant Mayle,” Rombert said. “I honestly thought you were smarter than that. That was a mistake. Now, take the anguish he felt when you murdered him and go to hell.”
Colonel Rombert emptied the automatic into him, spent cartridges ﬂying as he ﬁred again and again. The duplicate of Lieutenant Burgadish fell silent.
“Now then, gentlemen,” Colonel Rombert said as he holstered the gun. “I believe you came here with your hearts burning with anger and a lust for vengence against the living. I’m not here to extinguish those ﬂames. You may each carry out your mission from the JAM.”
“What are you talking about?” one of the duplicates said. “You do this and expect us to let you walk out of here alive?”
“This man was taking vengeance on Lieutenant Mayle’s behalf,” Lieutenant Lancome said. “We could make an


exception for him.”
“You people can’t live very long,” said Colonel Rombert. “You’re not alive. I can’t do anything to save you from that.”
“What, so you’re saying we should resent the JAM for our condition?” said another man. “We don’t need your sympathy.”
“And you won’t get it,” said the colonel. “I think there’s little diﬀerence between you and all the humans here on Faery.”
“What do you mean?” asked Lieutenant Lancome.
“They say that everyone has a right to enjoy their misery. You should enjoy all the misery you’re experiencing to your hearts’ content. I just enjoyed correcting my own mistake, which was overestimating Lieutenant Burgadish. Well, it’d be dull if things always proceeded according to plan, wouldn’t it?”
“You’re not sane. You’re mad.”
“I am conscious of the fact that I am not like most people. It gives me pleasure to live that way. But do not doubt my sanity. If you’d like to have a bit more fun with this situation, I can show you how.”
“What do you mean?” asked Lieutenant Lancome. “Honestly apply yourselves to the retraining unit’s
curriculum. It’s fun. Who knows? Maybe the Systems Corps will really ﬁnd a way to bring people back to life,” Rombert said.
“I’m afraid we can’t do that,” said the man who’d spoken ﬁrst. He now seemed to be a leader. “I’m afraid the cuisine here isn’t to our taste.”
“Hmm,” said the colonel. “You don’t have time, huh? Your bodies are made from optical isomers, aren’t they? That means you can’t digest human food.”
“Precisely.”


The proteins comprising the bodies of these JAM humanoids weren’t proteins, strictly speaking. They were composed of polypeptides, the optical isomers of proteins—three-dimensional mirror images of the proteins that made up normal human beings. Colonel Rombert could imagine how diﬀerent their sense of taste must be from humans, and he sympathized with how awful the food must have seemed to them.
“Take action immediately or grow so hungry you can’t move.” They must have been purposely made that way. “I see. Nicely done. Then you’d better act at once, hadn’t you?”
“You really aren’t going to try to stop us?” “I won’t,” Rombert said.
“Then why did you shoot Lieutenant Burgadish? Because you overestimated him?”
“I’m the better man to lead you all. One group doesn’t need two bosses. I’m far more familiar with the inner workings of the FAF, and with humans. Lieutenant Burgadish couldn’t even persuade one man to follow him.”
“Our targets are the key members of the FAF high command, beginning with General Laitume,” the leader of the duplicates said. “If we kill them, what will you do? Use the Intelligence Forces to take over the FAF?”
“That’s what I’m planning.”
“No, I don’t believe you. Remember what you said to Lieutenant Burgadish a few minutes ago?”
“I said that I didn’t want to be an oil baron. What I want is a modestly peaceful life. Well, I suppose that’s old age talking.”
“What are you really after, Colonel Rombert?”
“To toss out the war-weary fools in the FAF high command. They don’t live for the FAF.”


“The FAF has no future. Surely you know that too, Colonel. You’ve been used. You may have thought you could use the JAM to your own ends, but if you really think that’s going to work, then the one who should doubt your sanity is you.”
“I’ll keep your advice in mind, thank you,” Colonel Rombert replied. “Anyway, good luck to you all. I’ll use the Intelligence Forces to let you move more easily.”
“Colonel, what’s your real objective here? Please tell us.”
“You want to know anyway, even though you don’t have to?” Colonel Rombert looked around at them all. Everyone’s attention was on him. “Well,” said the colonel. “As with all things, you don’t know what you can do until you try. Even I don’t know if this will work or not. However, gentlemen, if you must know what my objective is, then in deference to your history, I’ll tell you. What I’m after isn’t control of the FAF. That’s only a means to an end. What I’m after is control of the JAM.”
Not one of them moved or spoke.
“What’s wrong?” asked the colonel. “You can laugh if you like, men.”
“We don’t share your sense of humor,” said the leader. “I’d have thought that the JAM would ﬁnd it easier to
understand me. There’s not much diﬀerence between the JAM and me. If you think me a fool, then I think the same of you. We’re the same. While our goals may be diﬀerent, for now our objective is the same. So, what will you do? Shoot me here?”
“Set the Intelligence Forces in motion, Colonel. As planned.”
“Very well. Follow me.”
As the colonel came out into the corridor, the ghost unit began to move. The colonel was joined only by Lieutenant


Lancome and the duplicates’ leader in the Systems Corps’ central systems command center. The rest of the group split up in preparation for seizing control of the corps’ armaments. Only six Systems Corps personnel were at work in the command center. They saluted Colonel Rombert and asked what he wanted.
“I have some representatives from the retraining unit with me,” Colonel Rombert replied. “I wanted to teach them about the practical applications of the FAF computer network. This is good timing. You can help me. I want to issue simultaneous test directives to the Intelligence Forces from here.”
“Understood,” nodded one of the controllers, clearing a console for the colonel to use.
“Now then, gentlemen,” Colonel Rombert said as he sat down. “The FAF computer system really is very well designed. I can access my control computer from anywhere. The method for validating authorized users varies from system to system, and these methods are not public knowledge. However, since I don’t trust computer validation, I issue my instructions to a human subordinate, not the computer. Everyone in the Systems Corps probably laughs at me for using this advanced computer as a gloriﬁed videophone, but…”
The face of a man from the Intelligence Forces appeared on the console monitor. The colonel spoke to him.
“Today London, tomorrow the world. Countersign.” “Today the FAF, tomorrow the JAM. Countersign,
complete.”
“Very well. Initiate Operation Lost Sheep.” “All lost sheep have been located, Colonel.” “Very well. Capture them at once.”
“Roger. Beginning capture.” The monitor went dark.


“See?” said the colonel. “Easy. Still, it was hard to get this far.”
“What are the Intelligence Forces doing, sir?” asked one of the Systems Corps personnel.
“The simultaneous exposure and arrest of people who have been using the FAF for their own personal gain,” said Colonel Rombert. “Collecting the evidence took a long time, but we’ve ﬁnally reached the point where we can move in.”
“Who are you arresting?”
“The commanders of Faery, Troll, Sylvan, Brownie, Valkia, and Siren bases, as well as the commanders of the main corps attached to Faery base. The Systems Corps is no exception.”
“What?” asked the man from the Systems Corps. “You’re talking about a coup d’état, aren’t you? A coup by the Intelligence Forces. Colonel, have you lost your mind?”
“It’s a test, right, Colonel?” said another man. “You’re just putting us on, aren’t you?”
“I don’t personally have the authority to arrest these people who have turned the FAF into their own personal plaything,” the colonel said as he checked his watch. “Even with the evidence, I’d just end up being crushed. I suppose it wouldn’t aﬀect the FAF too much if I left them alone. It’s not like they’re conspiring to take it over. However, it would look very bad for us if Earth learned about their individual activities. Once it gets out that FAF higher-ups are using their positions to enrich themselves, the FAF will be under attack by global public opinion. I’m here to protect the FAF from that, but it demands a drastic solution.”
“Don’t tell me you’re serious about this,” the ﬁrst man said.
“I’ve run simulations on this over and over,” Colonel Rombert answered. “But no matter what I do, I can’t ﬁnd a good solution. No matter what I or the Intelligence Forces do, we can’t clean up the Faery Air Force. Not so long as it’s


under the operation of human beings. The intentions the higher-ups had when they came here to work have nothing to do with the overall operations of the FAF. Using your position to enrich yourself may sound bad, but it’s only natural that they came here looking to proﬁt. Even I have to acknowledge that no elite goes anywhere without expecting something in return, be it money or pride.”
“What are you trying to say? Is this a simulation?”
“I did, however, ﬁnd a clean solution. As an individual, I don’t have the authority to clean up the FAF. But that isn’t a problem for the JAM. So, if I use them—”
“That’s…that’s even worse than a coup. That’s treason. Colonel, you need to have your head examined. That’s crazy. I don’t understand what you’re saying.”
“The sheep will be brought here in less than an hour. They will then be judged by the JAM.”
“That’s insane. Without the commanders, the FAF will collapse. You’re a JAM!”
“Don’t worry. Their subordinates will take over their duties. However, the FAF doesn’t really need anyone to stand in for them. It’ll ﬁght on even without humans. The computers will do it.”
“Security!” one of the men shouted.
“Don’t move,” said the colonel. “Gentlemen, if you wish to live, stay right where you are. You’re now under my command. This isn’t a drill. My men are really doing this. They’ve all been anxiously awaiting this moment. Well, it’s possible their dream may end in only an hour. Anyone who wants to enjoy reality and not a dream had better do what I say.”
“You’re insane. Security, arrest them.”
Gunshots rang out from outside, with the thuds of a heavy machine gun mixed in. The entryway doors blew


apart and what appeared to be a stocky bipedal robot walked through the ruined doorway.
“A BAX-4,” said one of the Systems Corps personnel. “Dammit, you have the powered armor. That’s just a test prototype. You have no authorization to—”
“The FAF belongs to me,” said Colonel Rombert. “If they resist, kill them.”
“Just shoot them,” said the ghost unit’s leader.
“Hold it. Obey me,” the colonel said. “We shouldn’t waste ammunition.”
“You’re right,” the ghost unit’s leader said. “We don’t need to use the BAX-4’s ammunition to kill you.”
“You don’t need me anymore, is that it?” Rombert said, surprised.
“I admire your resolve, Colonel. The targets you ordered to be brought here will never arrive. We’ll send out Systems Corps ﬁghters to shoot them down. We’ll also be ﬁnishing oﬀ a few people here that you left oﬀ your list. So, no, we don’t need you anymore.”
“You guys are forgetting something important,” Colonel Rombert said calmly.
“The SAF.”
“That’s right,” said Lieutenant Lancome. “I was killed by that ﬁghter of theirs, Yukikaze. I’m going to kill that thing. I’ll smash the SAF.”
“That won’t be easy,” the colonel said. “You guys will never beat the SAF by yourselves.”
“We’ll have their commander in custody,” said the leader.
“She never made it onto my list,” the colonel replied. “Because I never found any evidence of wrongdoing by General Cooley.”
“Order your men to do it. It doesn’t matter what reason you give them,” said Lieutenant Lancome. “Even Lieutenant


Mayle was pissed oﬀ at the SAF.”
“Do it,” said the leader. “Order the Intelligence Forces to kill the SAF’s general.”
“All right,” said the colonel. “I can’t say that’s a very smart way of going about it, though.”
“Meaning what?”
“I mean that when the SAF moves, they won’t need General Cooley. We really should get them on our side, although they’d probably reject the oﬀer.”
The man from the Intelligence Forces appeared on the monitor again. After being told that things were proceeding smoothly, the colonel ordered him to access the SAF network.
“Summon General Cooley. She’ll come if you say that it’s me.”
“Roger,” the man replied, but no connection was made. “What’s wrong?” the colonel asked.
“It’s gone,” the intelligence oﬃcer replied. “I can’t ﬁnd the SAF network.”
“You what?”
“The computer’s telling me that there’s no such network. The SAF’s disappeared.”
“The SAF… They’ve ﬁgured out what’s going on,” the colonel said, leaping up from the console. “They’re launching their own attack.”
The colonel headed for the hole blasted open by the BAX-4, heedless of the calls for him to stop, and ran out into the corridor.
“Colonel, where’s the SAF located? Show us where it is.” The man paused. “Colonel Rombert? Where’d he go?
“Where is he?” the ghosts shouted. “I don’t see him.” “Dammit, he has to be around here somewhere. Shoot! Don’t let him get away! Kill him!”


The machine gun mounted on the BAX-4’s right arm roared. The colonel ran, expecting to be torn in half at any moment, but he wasn’t hit once. Bullets sprayed in every direction. They could no longer see him, the colonel realized.
It had to be the work of the JAM, manipulating the sight of the ghosts so that they could no longer perceive him. The JAM must still need me, Ansel Rombert thought happily. He was going to get to enjoy his life a little longer. And what a thrilling life it had become.