2


THE ALARM BEEPING on his wristwatch reminded Rei that he had a short lunch meeting scheduled with Major Booker that afternoon.
Three days had passed since he’d been ordered onto standby. The major had told him about the meeting the previous afternoon but had remained tight-lipped about the agenda or with whom Rei would be meeting. Rei hadn’t pushed the subject. The major’s attitude told him that nothing more would be revealed before the meeting. Not that it really mattered.
Rei wanted to know what it was that Yukikaze was doing in the background as they waited, but his enthusiasm for the project hadn’t yielded proportionate results.
Yukikaze’s central computer seemed to be constantly tracking the mission status of all the SAF’s planes, demanding the data on them from the computers in


headquarters as it came in. For that reason, Rei could see where all the other planes were and follow what they were doing on Yukikaze’s main display.
But what was it all for? Rei asked himself. Perhaps this was just one of the functions that had been programmed into her. To put it simply, maybe this was a purely mechanical reaction, she had no consciousness at all, and he was just overestimating his beloved plane to the point of full-scale delusion.
Well, it’s too soon to reach any conclusions, thought Rei as he pushed the headset he was wearing down onto his neck and, after yanking the plug from the comm systems, climbed down from Yukikaze’s cockpit. The major had been very speciﬁc about him showing up on time. He wouldn’t know where the lunch meeting would take place unless he came to the oﬃce. The details of the meeting would be given there.
Neither the SAF nor the FAF in general had anything like a fancy restaurant on base—at best, this meeting would
have to be taking place in a ﬁeld oﬃcer’s private dining room. Even so, it’s so human of Major Booker to adopt such an air of importance about this, thought Rei. He didn’t attach any distaste to the notion. He’d known the major long enough to realize that he wouldn’t be making such a big deal about this unless there was good reason to. If anybody else had copped an attitude like Booker’s Rei would have chalked it up to simple vanity. In the end, similar human attitudes would inspire entirely diﬀerent emotional responses from Rei, depending on how well he knew the person. It must have been the same regarding Yukikaze. He still didn’t know her at all.
Other SAF planes were lined up in the hangar bay. Like Yukikaze, they had cables like umbilical cords dangling from their undersides. The cables supplied them with power and connected them to the SAF’s vast data network. They were


like fetuses. No, that’s not right, Rei thought. They were more like cattle grazing in a ﬁeld. Having wriggled out of danger once again and sharing the information they’d gathered, they were now back here, calmly ruminating. Only the cud they chewed was data, not grass.
He admired the planes all lined up in their rows as he walked by. They’re like living things, Rei thought. Living, growing creatures who absorbed information and then changed as they made it a part of themselves. And what would they grow into? That, no man could say. The ﬁghters’ computers, sitting side by side, probably didn’t know either. Even as they stood next to each other, Rei didn’t sense that they perceived themselves as a group.
Along the way, he noticed the ﬂight crew of Unit 3 at work aboard their plane. Their attitude told him that they were preparing for a single-ﬁghter mission.
Rei didn’t call out to them. Shouting hello when he had no reason to would just make him a bother. It wasn’t like the members of his squadron didn’t share information with each other, but while they were well attuned to gathering data they tended to be indiﬀerent to the very existence of other people. The members of the SAF might have been a unit, but they weren’t an actual group. The SAF didn’t function as one. They were founded on the idea of ﬂying missions independently, without any expectation of backup from headquarters, even in combat. In a ﬁght, all they had to depend on was their own skill, and so there were no “leaders” or “subordinates” here. The only people they trusted were themselves, and putting yourself ﬁrst was a trait to be admired. Those were the sort of people who comprised the Special Air Force.
And, like the humans who operated them and whose actions they continually learned from, so too behaved the central computers of their ﬁghter planes. It was possible, Rei thought, that the computers work together with the humans


at a level we can’t comprehend to form a sort of synthetic machine intelligence. But if you accepted that premise, you could argue further that they and the human members of the squadron also formed a group consciousness that comprised the SAF, which was why the ﬁghter planes’ computers couldn’t be said to operate in a group. Each SAF computer operated individually, with none assuming a leadership position. They wouldn’t interfere with one another’s work, similar to the machine intelligence in the tactical computer at SAF headquarters. Rei had made sure that the other ﬁghter intelligences wouldn’t interfere with Yukikaze, but they couldn’t interfere even if they wanted to. The system had been constructed to prevent it.
The SAF’s computers had been given the strongest level of self-preservation functionality in order to prevent outside interference by the JAM. Even if something considered an ally tried to forcibly move against an SAF computer, it would select a method to counter the attack. If its autonomy could not be maintained, it would self-destruct. In short, the computers of the SAF, like its human personnel, did not operate as a group. Noninterference meant not expecting any backup from anywhere else. Within the FAF, these machine intelligences formed a unit that was truly “special.”
As Rei drew near the hangar bay exit, now musing that the planes had the appearance of giant cats, listening to each other in a silent assembly, a warning siren sounded inside. The same sort of siren that warned when a plane was about to leave.
Unit 7, having taxied to the central area of the bay, was being towed by an unmanned spotting dolly over to the three-sided central elevator. The plane was a Super Sylph. Aboard her was a pilot and his ﬂight oﬃcer.
“Hey, Captain Fukai.” The pilot aboard the plane leaned forward as he called out to Rei. This was extremely unusual.


The pilot’s name was Vincent Bruys, and he held the rank of ﬁrst lieutenant.
“What’s up, Lieutenant,” Rei called back. “Am I in your way?”
“Just wanted to warn you to be careful not to get shot by Llanfabon.”
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
Llanfabon was the name of Lieutenant Bruys’s ﬁghter, Unit 7.
“This lunch meeting you’ve been invited to,” replied Lieutenant Bruys. “I’ve been assigned escort and surveillance duty for it.”
“The meeting’s going to be in-ﬂight, you mean?”
“The details are being kept top secret. They’re not even entered into the computers in HQ. Looks like it’s a special mission. You’ll ﬁnd out what it is when you go. Major Booker must be afraid that the JAM might slip into the meeting. If you turn out to be a JAM, I’m shooting you down. That’s all there is to it.”
“Do you want to shoot me? Then what are you doing talking to me? If the mission’s top secret, then shut up about it.”
“While I was checking out Llanfabon before, I saw Yukikaze making repeated requests for direct access. You must have known that Llanfabon is on this special mission. It’s supposed to be a secret, so I was wondering how you found out.”
“I didn’t know about it,” Rei replied. “You’re saying Yukikaze was trying to access Llanfabon?”
“Are you saying you weren’t having her do it, Captain Fukai?”
“Nope, wasn’t me.”
“If I were to believe you, that would mean that Yukikaze herself wanted to know about the details of this mission. A


special mission whose details weren’t even entered into the tactical computer at headquarters. If Yukikaze wanted to know the details of Llanfabon’s mission, she’d have to ask me directly. That’s real interesting behavior on her part. After this mission’s done, I’ll be reporting it to Major Booker. This mission’s already begun. If you are a JAM, then I hope you either get killed by Yukikaze or that this lunch today will be your last. See you.”
Rei checked his watch; a little over three minutes had passed since the alarm had sounded. He quickly returned to Yukikaze’s cockpit and ﬂipped the main switch on for the display cluster. As he had before, he set the main display to monitor mode to show the operation of the plane’s central computer,         selected         DISPLAY         EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS from the menu, then hit the execute button. The response came quickly:
Watch         on         B-7/mission         unknown/request contents… STC.
So Yukikaze had been interested in this secret lunch meeting.
Apparently, Major Booker hadn’t entered details of the meeting into any of the SAF’s computers, which explained why even Yukikaze hadn’t known it was happening. However, she’d noticed that Llanfabon had been assigned the sortie code number B-7 in regards to its operational actions and had cross-referenced that with the ﬂight schedule. That was when she’d probably noticed that there were no details pertaining to the mission anywhere and had begun to doggedly search for them.
Until Lieutenant Bruys had called him out about it, Rei had no idea she was doing it. A little earlier, all Yukikaze had done was display the readout B-7 mission unknown on the monitor. However, now that Llanfabon had actually begun to move, Yukikaze had requested the details of her mission from the tactical computer in SAF headquarters. In


addition to that, she’d displayed Watch on B-7 to indicate that she was beginning her own observations of Llanfabon’s movements.
A new message scrolled up onto the display.
Request sortie… STC/get permission to sortie… Captain FUKAI.
Yukikaze was asking for permission to take oﬀ. He hadn’t been expecting that, but he understood what it meant. But what was with the “Captain Fukai” bit at the end? Yukikaze had never referred to him by his name before. Was Yukikaze personally asking him, her pilot, to get permission from headquarters to take oﬀ? Before he could think about it, a new message scrolled up.
STC: permit/set 20908107-sp-mission/ready.
That had come from the tactical computer in HQ. Permission granted for sortie, mission ID number assigned.
STC: trace and watch on B-7…B-1.
Order from the tactical computer: Pursue, trace, and keep watch on Llanfabon, Yukikaze.
Roger, Yukikaze acknowledged. STC: enter 20908107-sp-mission.
Initiating special mission number 20908107. Action…Captain FUKAI.
Let’s get this show on the road, Captain Fukai.
Rei knew exactly what Yukikaze was asking of him. He reﬂexively ﬂipped the master arm switch on, bringing all available weaponry online. This was the ﬁrst time he’d ever done it inside of the hangar bay. Naturally, Yukikaze wasn’t loaded with any cannon ammo or missiles, but all of her electronic warfare systems were now active. The tracking system activated automatically. There was a faint hum from the rear of her fuselage as Yukikaze’s auxiliary power unit started up. The cables on her underside linking her to headquarters disconnected automatically, and Yukikaze


entered fully independent combat mode. All ﬂight systems started up.
An alarm warning of a taxiing plane sounded. An automatically controlled spotting dolly approached Yukikaze and linked up to her front landing gear. The sortie sequence began automatically.
Rei instinctively grabbed the ﬂight stick. It felt unnatural to him, likely because he was touching it with bare skin. In ﬂight, he’d be wearing ﬂight gloves. At the moment, he wasn’t wearing a ﬂight suit, G-suit, or his escape chute. Without a helmet on, he couldn’t connect his oxygen hose. He had to tell Yukikaze that he wasn’t in any condition to ﬂy. She must have already known that. But there was no way to stop the takeoﬀ sequence at this point.
Yukikaze began moving toward the elevator. Rei could still climb down out of her, but he didn’t. There would be more opportunities to get oﬀ along the way—when they stopped to take on arms and ammunition and again when they reached the surface. If he got oﬀ, Yukikaze could sortie unmanned. He didn’t want to let her do that, but he couldn’t ﬂy with her as he was now. She would have to wait until he was ready.
But would Yukikaze wait for him?
He had to be at that lunch meeting. Not showing up for it would be a serious act of insubordination. But Yukikaze had been cleared for sortie, so what exactly was going on here?
A voice suddenly sounded from the speakers in the headset he was wearing around his neck.
“Rei, what the hell are you doing?!” Major Booker demanded. “Are you taking Yukikaze to the picnic?”
Picnic?
“Rei, answer me. Captain Fukai, I know you’re aboard Yukikaze.”


Rei pulled the headset up to his ears. It was plugged into Yukikaze’s onboard communications port, making him look like he was probing Yukikaze with a stethoscope. The message he’d just received had been an external signal. The display showed that it was originating from the terminal in Major Booker’s oﬃce.
“This is B-1,” Rei responded. “Mission ID 20908107. Making preparations to sortie and execute special mission to observe Llanfabon. Sortie sequence engaged.”
“What are you babbling about?” Major Booker said. “I ordered you to attend a lunch meeting. I never said anything about observing Llanfabon.”
“This is the result of Yukikaze wanting to ﬁnd out about the mission Llanfabon is ﬂying out on. You gave her clearance to sortie, Major.”
“I did no such thing.”
“Then who did? The tactical computer authorized this on its own? I thought the machines couldn’t make operational actions without human consent.”
“Are you telling me you’re not just doing this on your own, Rei?”
“Jack, I don’t know what’s going on here either. What does it show on your end? Does it say that I requested sortie clearance?”
“Yeah. The tactical computer says Captain Fukai issued an urgent sortie request, and that they initiated an on-the-spot mission plan due to the high-level nature of the emergency.”
“Then who gave the ﬁnal clearance?”
“SSC: the SAF strategic computer. The name on the orders is General Cooley, like it ought to be, but the general says she never issued them.”
“Which means that Yukikaze shouldn’t be able to take oﬀ. The thing is, she’s engaged in a sortie sequence right


now. That’s reality. So who’s in charge of this mission?” “You, Captain Fukai. Rei, this is all on you.”
Yukikaze had now been towed completely into the elevator. The ﬁre door closed behind them and they began to ascend.
“Of course,” Rei whispered. “Now I get it.”
Yukikaze sending a request to sortie by herself wouldn’t have gotten clearance, which was why she’d been so insistent that he, her pilot, should request it. At the same time, she’d been telling the tactical computer that Captain Fukai was requesting permission to sortie. Now he understood what that Get permission to sortie…Captain FUKAI business had been about.
“What did you agree to do on your own? This is gross insubordination and completely unauthorized. Just how do you expect to take responsibility for this? Answer me, Captain Fukai!”
The reception was crystal clear, even inside of the elevator.
“Yukikaze can take responsibility. She made the sortie request in my name.”
“You’re telling me Yukikaze used your name to trick us?” “Yukikaze knew that I’d agree with her ﬂying out there.” “You just told me you didn’t know what was going on!” “I do now, and I need to sortie. Yukikaze doesn’t like not
knowing what Llanfabon’s mission objective is. That’s all she wants to know. The tactical computer agrees with her, which is why it’s sending her out. My theory is that they’ve made it out that a human—me in this case—is making the demand so that they’re technically not ignoring us and doing this on their own. The tactical computer in HQ is probably doing this so that it can amend the mission related to this lunch meeting of yours and add in a mission outline at least. That’s probably what’s going on here.”


“Amend the mission? You’re saying the tactical computer would just arbitrarily amend the contents of a mission?”
“It’d have to add it as an amendment to the special mission related to the meeting,” Rei said. “There are times when pilots on a mission have to request changes to their mission details. It’s never happened before a sortie, but the tactical computer must have judged that Yukikaze was facing that sort of situation. It was able to initiate the sortie sequence by following that protocol. This all happened because you were treating this mission as special and didn’t behave the way you would normally. In other words, your secrecy is to blame for this, Jack. If you’d just told the computer about the meeting, Yukikaze would have accepted it. So what do we do, Major? Try to forcibly abort this takeoﬀ? That won’t be easy, since Yukikaze’s set on doing
this. Even if we explained things to her now, she’d still want to check it out herself. In other words, she is going to take oﬀ and follow Llanfabon.”
“Roger,” Major Booker replied.
“Roger? Are you saying I can get ready for takeoﬀ?”
“In regards to Yukikaze’s sortie, headquarters recognizes that it accepted a request from you, Captain Fukai. I just need you to conﬁrm that the request came from you. That way, there’ll be no problem. You’ll be at that lunch meeting, as scheduled, and that you are Captain Rei Fukai. Do you get what I’m saying? Now, reconﬁrm that for me, Captain Fukai.”
“This is Captain Fukai,” Rei replied. “I will be attending the meeting. I made the request for Yukikaze to sortie. Reconﬁrmation, over.”
“Very good.”
“I’m going to send Yukikaze out in automaneuver mode. Is that okay, Major?”


“There’s nothing else we can do. We can’t predict what she’ll do out there, but we can analyze this and ﬁgure out how to deal with you after the mission’s over. Stand by in there and then deplane once you’re on the surface. I’m sending Captain Edith Foss up to meet you. Follow her instructions. She’ll show you where you need to go.”
“Captain Foss? Do I really need a doctor to chaperone me to this meeting? Or is she invited to it too?”
“I have no comment about who’s invited, what it’s about, or any other details. Just follow the tactical computer’s plan for Yukikaze’s weapons and fuel loadout. I’ve checked it out and it’s basically the same as Llanfabon’s. Don’t interfere.”
“This is B-1, roger. Captain Fukai, over and out.” “Okay. Over and out.”
B-1 was Yukikaze’s sortie code number. The B was for Boomerang, the SAF’s nickname, while the number one indicated that it was Unit 1 in the squadron. Captain Fukai referred to Rei himself, of course. It was the ﬁrst time he’d ever used this particular classiﬁcation response.
This will be the ﬁrst time Yukikaze and I will be taking separate actions, Rei thought, then corrected himself. Yukikaze has always acted on her own. I just never noticed before.
Exiting the elevator into the weapons loadout bay, Rei watched from the cockpit as she was armed and fueled. It was the same as the usual procedure to prepare a plane for sortie, except this was the ﬁrst time he realized that it was fully automated. It gave him a feeling of excitement mixed with a little fear.
An automatic crane hanging from the ceiling lowered a huge drum full of autocannon ammunition into the upper side of Yukikaze’s fuselage while four short-range missiles were loaded onto her underside, two on each side. Fuel was pumped into her tanks, though Rei couldn’t be sure if the


tanks were being ﬁlled completely since he didn’t know how much fuel she was cleared to carry. That was a new experience for him as well. The most he could ﬁgure out was that the fuel tanks in the wings weren’t being ﬁlled, so she wasn’t expected to ﬂy very far.
The entire loadout procedure was completed automatically. It wasn’t just Yukikaze who was acting without any care for his thoughts on the matter. The combat intelligence in SAF headquarters didn’t seem to care either.
But he was heartened to see she wasn’t just ignoring him when a message appeared on Yukikaze’s display. The warning said that his oxygen hose and ejection seat weren’t properly set. In short, she couldn’t take oﬀ until he’d taken care of that. Rei reminded himself not to be too happy when he realized that was the point of concern.
Maybe she was telling him that he, unprepared for ﬂight as he was, was now an obstacle. Once they reached the surface, she might decide he wasn’t needed anymore and just activate the ejection sequence. He deﬁnitely didn’t want to get thrown out in his seat. Without his parachute or even being properly strapped into it, a stunt like that would be hazardous to his health. Normally, the crew safeguards wouldn’t allow the ejection sequence to initiate if the ejection seats weren’t properly set; however…
The dolly began towing Yukikaze back to the elevator so that she could exit to the surface. Rei seriously began to think he should deplane right here. He was considering what would be safest for him. Before he’d made a decision, another message appeared on Yukikaze’s warning display:
Action…Captain FUKAI.
The message was blinking, as though Yukikaze was irritated and asking him why he was still dicking around inside of her. And he, even as he was thinking there was no way that she’d understand, told her that he wasn’t coming with her.


“I, Captain Rei Fukai, will be participating in the lunch meeting that Llanfabon has been assigned to escort. Yukikaze, you will protect me. When I reach the surface, I’ll deplane. Do you understand?”
Yukikaze did not answer. He knew she wouldn’t, but Rei didn’t feel discouraged. He’d said what he’d wanted to say. All that was left to do was pray that he’d be able to get out safely. Giving full control to Yukikaze was dangerous. He hoped his fears would prove baseless.
The sunlight from Faery’s skies streaming into the exit of the elevator building was dazzling. It was nice weather today. A little ahead of him, he could see Llanfabon. She was stopped.
Outside, Captain Edith Foss approached the newly emerged Yukikaze.
Rei tensely ﬂipped the automaneuver switch on, declaring “You have control, Yukikaze.” She was now free to ﬂy as she pleased.
And then Yukikaze replied. All of the warnings vanished from her display, a new message taking their place:
I have control/I wish you luck…Captain FUKAI.
Rei was scrambling up out of his seat to deplane when the second half of the message caught his eye. He stared at it, unable to look away.
“I wish you luck” was nothing more than a clichéd phrase, carrying no more meaning than “roger.” But was that the case here? Rei had never seen Yukikaze display a message like that before. There was really no need for it, was there? He considered the possibility that her speciﬁc choice to display that message meant that she understood human speech and was going out of her way to convey that to him. He should be happy about that, shouldn’t he? No, if that was the case, he was going to have to rethink his entire method of interacting with Yukikaze. This wasn’t something he could simply be happy about.


Still, he didn’t have time to consider any of that.
“Don’t close the canopy till I’m out,” he said. “You got that, Yukikaze?”
No message was displayed as a reply. The fact that the canopy isn’t automatically closing was Yukikaze’s answer, Rei thought as he yanked his headset cord and climbed down from her. He folded up the collapsible ladder into her fuselage and locked it down.
He looked up at the canopy but saw no sign that it was closing. Rei was surprised, and just as he was wondering if he was going to have to close it manually, he heard a warning chime from the cockpit. As if Yukikaze had read his mind. The tone indicated that the missiles could not be ﬁred. Of course, Rei realized. The safety pins. Yukikaze was asking him to pull them out of the missiles.
There were weapons control personnel also there on the surface, but Rei personally walked Yukikaze’s perimeter and pulled the safety pins from all four of her short-range missiles. Once he’d ﬁnished, the canopy automatically lowered and locked. She was now ready to take oﬀ without a pilot.
“Good luck, Yukikaze,” Rei murmured.
“Yukikaze is your best friend,” said Captain Foss to Rei as she approached.
“My best friend?” he replied. “Or perhaps your lover?”
Rei turned to face Captain Foss. “You’re wrong,” he said. “It must be reassuring to have such a powerful friend,
Captain Fukai.”
Yukikaze’s onboard engine starter system activated, despite the fact that Llanfabon’s engines weren’t started yet. Her vertical stabilizers unfolded from their horizontal storage position and rose into place. Her twin turbofan


engines then started up, ﬁrst the right, then the left. Rei and Captain Foss stepped away from her.
“Yukikaze isn’t my friend either. Lover? That’s ridiculous.”
“So then, what is she to you?”
As the scream of Yukikaze’s engines nearly drowned out Captain Foss’s question, Rei raised his voice to answer her, as though not wanting to let his plane have the ﬁnal say.
“Yukikaze is the most dangerous combat machine on this planet,” he yelled. “She has a combat awareness that’s uniquely hers! Human relationships don’t apply to her!”
If she was anything, Yukikaze was a wild animal.
He didn’t say that, but that was what Rei thought. She was a partner with whom he was entangled in a dangerous relationship. One in which she cooperated only so long as they sought a common prey. Or perhaps, rather than a partner, he could more accurately be thought of as a trainer, teaching her how to hunt. A coach, instructing her how to ﬁght.
Yukikaze was neither a best friend nor a lover. She was a being beyond human understanding. And he was going to get closer to her.
She wheeled around and stopped, lowering her nose. Her cannon was ﬁxed on Llanfabon nearby, her stance now saying that she could ﬁre at any time. Rei could just imagine the look on Lieutenant Bruys’s face as he sat aboard his plane. He must have felt like he was being stalked by a wild animal.
Yukikaze’s airframe was a little smaller than Llanfabon’s. But the Maeve aiming at the graceful body of the Super Sylph somehow seemed larger and more ferocious.