3


IT WAS QUIET in the SAF command center, with even the main screen along the front wall switched oﬀ. No ﬁghters were out on sortie; as soon as the missing Yukikaze had been discovered, General Cooley had recalled all the search


planes and ordered their crews to get some rest. Instead, the only ones who were busy were the data analysts. Everyone had been called in, even the oﬀ-duty staﬀers, and they’d been gathered there along with Major Booker and Captain Foss to begin the analysis of the data Yukikaze had returned with. Once the ﬁrst stage of analysis was complete, General Cooley had her staﬀ take a break. She’d told the pair in charge of data analysis and aircraft maintenance that they shouldn’t leave, and so the general had stayed behind in the center with them. She waited for Major Booker and Captain Foss to make their reports after going oﬀ to check on Captain Fukai and Lieutenant Katsuragi.
The data were even more useful than we’d hoped, General Cooley thought as she took a light meal of a sandwich and black tea before turning to check in on the work being done.
The method the JAM had used to lure in Yukikaze, the existence of that unknown space, the JAM voice, Captain Fukai’s response to it, the actions Yukikaze had taken to escape… It was all shocking. Lieutenant Katsuragi, who’d come to them from the Intelligence Forces, had reacted the most normally by getting angry when what the JAM, Captain Fukai, and Yukikaze did seemed to defy common sense. Well, perhaps I understand his reaction, considering I also lost my composure when I saw the data, thought General Cooley. They’d brought back a great deal of data about the JAM, but put another way, it meant that the SAF just dramatically increased what they didn’t know about the enemy. Faced with the sheer volume of confusing data, she supposed it was only natural for her to temporarily lose her cool. She wasn’t a machine, after all.
God damn it, she thought as she replayed Captain Fukai’s conversation with the JAM over and over. Just what were the JAM?




Captain Fukai: Just what are you people? Living things? Beings that consist only of intelligence, will, and data? Do you have physical forms? If so, then where are they?


JAM: I cannot explain in a way that would be comprehensible in your terms. I am that I am.


She couldn’t make heads or tails of it. It hadn’t denied having a physical form. The voice calling itself the whole of the JAM was broadcast from the duplicate of the old Yukikaze, but it was hard to imagine that their true form had been riding within the plane itself. She wondered if the JAM’s intentional nonanswer had been a strategic ploy to avoid revealing their physical selves.
At the very least, it seemed that the JAM did possess the
general concept of “I.” The JAM had the power to diﬀerentiate between itself and others. It seems obvious, but it’s likely a vital point, thought General Cooley. The question was, while the JAM could make the distinction, apparently humans could not. They were just going to have to deal with not knowing where the JAM existed, what a JAM was, and exactly what deﬁned them.
The general recalled a conversation Captain Foss had had with Major Booker during the analysis. It had been recorded and already transcribed. General Cooley searched for the page it was on.
“The JAM didn’t respond when Captain Fukai asked where it was,” Captain Foss had said. “If we believe the rest of what it says, then we can conclude that the JAM have no concept of place or space, or if they do, that it’s outside the realm of human understanding. Considering that they’re beings capable of creating spaces like the Passageway and that so-called ‘mysterious battle zone,’ that seems likely.”
“The question Captain Fukai asked would be diﬃcult for even the JAM to answer, Captain Foss,” Major Booker had replied. “He wasn’t simply asking what their location was.


He was asking them where they really existed. For example, where are you, Edith?”
“Ah, you mean is the thing that’s called me my physical body? The consciousness inside my body? Do I have a soul and, if so, where does it go when I die? Yes, that is what he was asking, wasn’t it? A typical Captain Fukai move.”
“I think I would have asked the same thing if I’d been in that situation. And if you asked me that, I’d probably reply, ‘I’m right here.’ ” Booker said. “Simple, accurate, and doesn’t waste ten thousand words trying to elaborate on it. No matter what the meaning of the question might be, the normal answer to ‘Where are you?’ would be ‘I’m right here,’ wouldn’t it? But the JAM didn’t say that. They must have judged that the person they were speaking to wouldn’t have understood if they said, ‘I’m right here.’ ”
“You mean the only way the JAM could put it was ‘I am that I am’?”
“Yes, I think so. It’s not the same as them saying ‘I’m here.’ The JAM deﬁnitely exist, but they may not be able to decide if they exist nowhere or everywhere, and they didn’t have the words to explain it.”
“At the very least, that applied to the JAM Fukai communicatd with,” Foss said. “There was no physical entity there face to face with Captain Fukai or Yukikaze that they could understand. It was like it was talking to them on a telephone. But then you can’t say that the JAM have no physical form.”
“You once claimed to Captain Fukai that the JAM were imaginary. Can you still make that claim, Edith?”
“I only said that I couldn’t deny the possibility that they were.”
“I’m not trying to be sarcastic by asking you that. The JAM may be some sort of virtual species. That’s what we humans would have to call an entity we cannot actually perceive. We don’t really have a general concept to describe


something that we absolutely cannot perceive. That’s why the JAM couldn’t answer. I’ll bet that if the JAM asked us where our true form is, they couldn’t directly perceive us with whatever senses they have, simply owing to the nature of their own existence. To the JAM, humans probably seem like virtual beings too.”
“When I said that they might be imaginary, all I meant was that they were an illusion that had been dreamed up by humans,” Foss said. “But that isn’t the JAM that’s shown up here. It’s deﬁnitely a being you could either believe in or not. Does that still make it a virtual being?”
“A being you could believe in or not may still be an illusion, Edith.”
“What do you mean?”
“It’s a philosophical question,” Major Booker said. “I’m not sure I’m following you.”
“The philosophical question of what exactly is something that you can believe in or not. In short, what deﬁnes a being that absolutely exists and how do you integrate such a thing into yourself. Aside from Asian philosophies, the philosophies we’re familiar with have a long history of grappling with the question of whether or not beings can absolutely exist.”
“You mean the JAM really may not exist?”
“In one sense, that is possible. There are a number of ways that you can put it. There’s also the idea that the question of what is absolute existence is nothing but a play on words. Put another way, the ability for humans to think about such things and develop such questions makes the questions themselves meaningless. From there, a new way of thinking emerges.”
“What sort of way?”
“That absolute existence, which is perhaps a god, or an agreement between subjective and objective perception—


there are many ways to express it, anyway. The long and the short of it is that this way of thinking doesn’t aﬀect how we exist. It’s a momentary thought—yes, truth is informed by human cognition, and anything beyond that is simply an individual question.”
“So, those who believe in them should believe and those who don’t shouldn’t, you mean?” Foss asked.
“Well, I suppose you could put it that way. But an ephemeral way of thinking could distort the perceptions of what’s right in front of you.”
“Of course it would. The JAM can’t simply be dealt with as a personal matter.”
“Which is why we’re here asking that question. I guess what I’m getting at is that we can’t avoid asking philosophical questions as we ask things like what is it that makes us so certain that the JAM exist? What are they? What is their true nature and what is the essence of it? If we accept the fact that their true nature is beyond human understanding, then all we’re doing is groping for a new general philosophical concept. The JAM have been working out what humans are from their end. I’m sure that what they think of us is entirely diﬀerent from how we think of ourselves. But what we know for certain is that they’re searching for features common to all humans. That’s why they made contact with Captain Fukai.”
“Except that we don’t have time to be arguing philosophy here. There’s no way to answer philosophical questions, anyway,” Foss said.
“That isn’t true. Philosophy is the study of how to question the meaning of existence and how to live happily. Happiness varies according to the era and the individual, which is why there are no universal answers to philosophical questions. However, you can verify them for yourself. If your philosophy can let you accept death, you’ll know. And if philosophy is too grandiose a way of putting it, then call it


your worldview. In order to counter the JAM, we need to change the worldview we’ve held till now. Captain Fukai has managed to do that; he’s said so repeatedly. As his doctor, you know that, Edith. And it was Yukikaze that changed his worldview, not the JAM.”
“Major, it’s almost as if you’re saying that the JAM are like gods, and that we need to think about whether or not they exist.”
“It certainly seems that way, doesn’t it?” Booker said. “I’m surprised. I always ﬁgured you were an atheist, like
everyone else in the SAF.”
“Whether gods exist or not, we can still live, all the same. That’s what I think, and I believe it’s the same with the JAM, whether they exist or not.”
“I beg your pardon?” Foss said.
“If you don’t agree, then you’re telling me that you’ve accepted the JAM as gods with an objective existence; you’re preaching the religion of JAMism.”
“Hold on there, Major. Then what is it that you’re doing here?”
“I’m explaining to you that if the JAM can’t be directly perceived by humans, then I believe that we can’t ﬁght them without bringing up certain philosophical questions. If the JAM are not physical entities, you can’t simply say that they exist whether you believe in them or not.”
“So how do we make this more deﬁnite, Major Booker?” “We search for exactly what the JAM threat is. If we ﬁnd
that it’s an illusion, then we don’t have to ﬁght.”
“The SAF can’t just abandon the battle now, surely.” “That’s General Cooley’s job to decide, not yours, and
your profacting report on the JAM will be used by her as a major ingredient in determining what decision she makes. Now add in data Yukikaze has brought back. It may be possible now to verify the threat the JAM pose. I have a


feeling that we won’t be able to immediately verify your suspicions about the JAM’s true nature. And even if humans in the future judge what we do here as a complete waste of time and history decides that we made a mistake, it’s all we can do now. History’s verdict has nothing to do with us. Either way, we won’t be alive to see it, and that’s true if we die content or cursing our bad fortune. I couldn’t care less about the future. All we can do now is what we believe is best, and that’s how anyone with a brain in their head has lived and died throughout all of history.”
“You think the JAM are like gods, huh?”
“The same way that humans must appear to them,” Booker said. “We’re equal in that respect, and there’s nothing to fear from it.”
General Cooley stopped reading there and took a sip of her tea.
Even if the JAM were like gods, it was nothing to fear—How very typical of Major Booker, Cooley thought. The JAM and humanity were equal in his view. If the JAM are gods, then so are we, he’d told Captain Foss. He’d explained that she should leave out the god angle as much as she could. And even when Captain Foss had still brought it up, he’d told her not to be afraid. Don’t fear the JAM, don’t blindly accept them, just determine the true nature of the threat they represent. That was his way of lending the young doctor support.
But the truth was that their relationship with the JAM wasn’t equivalent, because humans formed collectives. Indeed, Captain Fukai and Yukikaze had fought the JAM on equal terms and had returned to tell about it. Major Booker, too, could argue with the JAM on equal terms with his philosophy. But there was no way that every human was capable of such accomplishments. I put the SAF together to place us on equal footing with JAM, General Cooley thought, and to do that I created a group of individuals with a single


purpose, just I supposed the JAM to be. There was no way they could equal the JAM unless not a single person in the group deﬁed her.
Almost from the day she was born, General Cooley had wanted one thing: power. Overwhelming, unquestionable power. Power that would let her declare that the world was hers, that would allow her to argue on equal terms with the gods. From the typical desire for authority most people have, the feeling grew into a palpable sensation inside her. It was probably a base instinct in humans, born out of being social animals. If she were like a cat, a natural loner, then she’d only rely on herself to hunt for food or defend herself from enemies. But wolves and humans weren’t like that. Without a good leader, the entire group would be threatened. We create gods out of our desire for an external leader. A life-form that lives independently has no gods because it doesn’t need them.
Thinking back, the general realized that she’d been defying, even ﬁghting, godlike beings since childhood. Back then, her father had seemed like a supreme being. Whatever he said was right and had to be obeyed. She was the middle child between two brothers, and when she’d complained that he treated her diﬀerently, his reply was that it was because she was a girl. Her mother said the same thing. It wasn’t as if being a girl was something to be ashamed of, but the reasoning just seemed so absurd to her. She wished to grow up as quickly as she could but found that things weren’t very much diﬀerent as an adult.
“General Cooley,” Captain Foss had once asked her, “what did you do before you joined the FAF?” The doctor had been gathering data on the SAF members, and she made no exceptions, even for her own commanding oﬃcer.
“I did a number of things, all of them related to ﬁnance. Right before I joined up, I was aiming to be a top-level broker in a securities ﬁrm.”


“Tough work, but rewarding all the same. Is that the career you wanted, and then the FAF grabbed you?”
“No, I came here of my own accord. You wouldn’t expect someone whose skills lie in ﬁnance to be assigned to a combat unit, but it was what I wanted.”
“What was it that brought you here seeking a new world, Lydia?”
“I’d appreciate it if you didn’t call me by my ﬁrst name here, Captain Foss.”
“I beg your pardon, General Cooley.”
“What was it? I think young Lydia Cooley just decided to abandon her old world because she found it irrational.”
“I’m not entirely familiar with what goes into being a stockbroker, but the really high-level ones can move the world on their say-so, can’t they?” Foss said.
“Money is just numbers. None of it is real, although that may be an extreme position to take. Still, money does have practical power. It can disrupt an entire nation. To control it, to manipulate it freely, can be thrilling. And when things go well, it can even be fun. But I couldn’t reach that level. I don’t think it was a question of my abilities, but the world wasn’t kind enough to let me get by on just those. I ﬁnally understood. You might say that I saw the limits of my world.”
“You experienced sexual discrimination?”
“Oh, naturally,” General Cooley said. “Plenty of that. But that wasn’t what made me abandon it.”
What young Lydia Cooley had realized was that the true source of the irrationality she’d always experienced wasn’t from her being born a woman, but from her having been born a human being.
“Humanity is divided into two classes: bosses and everyone else. Even if a woman controlled the world, no one


would accept it. I was being a fool in trying to be a boss that no one would accept.”
“A fool…”
“Yes. Where would be the fun in becoming the boss of people who’d treat me like that?” Cooley replied. “I realized how empty it would be. However, I didn’t want to resign myself to being one of ‘everyone else,’ either. So what was I to do? For a while there, I was seriously considering becoming a nun.”
“So in the end, you began to doubt the rat race and the values of the harsh world of the money game.”
“I suppose so…When I think back, there were all sorts of paths I could have taken. I might have become a researcher, like you, or a talented psychologist who’d make a fortune and win acceptance from the world. Or I could have married and become a mother. But there before young Lydia were beings called the JAM, who threatened the whole of human society.”
“And you felt that a job ﬁghting invaders from another world, ones with values completely diﬀerent from our own, would be a rewarding career?” Captain Foss asked.
“Maybe I did. It’s ancient history now.”
Captain Foss had nodded, jotted down something in her notebook, and asked nothing more about it.
She had thought it would be a rewarding job, but as General Cooley looked back at the person she was at that time, she realized that she hadn’t been burning with hope. The FAF had been an escape for her. Yes, just like a convent. The JAM were there. The JAM, which she could believe in in place of God. She’d never been aware of it until now, when
she’d realized that what Major Booker had said applied to her. Then, she asked herself, did I come here to learn that overwhelming power was a necessity? And with that, I could oppose the JAM?


No, that wasn’t it. The JAM’s attitude had made that clear.
True, it would be an ideal situation to gain absolute authority over the FAF and ﬁght the JAM that way. While humans did operate as collectives, it was necessary to win power struggles within that collective. That fact put them at a disadvantage vis-a-vis the JAM, and they’d be sure to exploit it. The JAM must have understood humanity’s Achilles’ heel. Their analysis must have also shown them that a weak point could be turned into a strong point. For example, conﬂict within a collective might be necessary to replace a bad boss with a superior person.
The JAM had admitted that the SAF was beyond their understanding. They might as well have said that it was Cooley herself that they didn’t understand, since she was the one who’d set the SAF up in this way. That was the JAM’s weakness. The FAF and the JAM might not be equally matched, but it could be said that the SAF was now in the same position as the JAM. It was a position she couldn’t abandon. The one thing she couldn’t aﬀord to do was behave as her opponents expected.
What she needed to make clear to the JAM was that humanity didn’t merely consist of the types of people that they could comprehend.
“The JAM are like gods?”
Major Booker had said that regarding the JAM as an
unknowable enemy called to mind words and concepts like god. Booker told Captain Foss that he’d prefer to avoid seeing the JAM as gods, but also feared that it might be impossible. General Cooley understood how he felt. But, she thought, a part of her hoped that they literally were godlike beings. Because to stand up and ﬁght against the gods was something that young Lydia Cooley had always hoped she could do.