4


CONTRARY TO REI’S expectations, Major Booker received his news calmly and then, after considering it for a moment, told him “Good work. That was probably the best way to handle it.” The major didn’t smile when Rei told him that Captain Foss might be a JAM. He instead nodded and replied that anyone whose history was unknown to them had to be suspected. Considering that, taking her out into an actual combat zone was a good idea, the major said.


If she were a JAM, she was extremely dangerous, but only the SAF could deal with it. And even though she likely wasn’t a JAM, having her spreading the idea that they weren’t real was going to cause chaos in the FAF. It wouldn’t aﬀect those in the SAF, but it might aﬀect people in other units. For that reason, they couldn’t just expel her. And if she simply had an interest in advanced ﬁghter planes and the abilities of the people who ﬂew them, then she needed to get it through her head that reality wasn’t as simple as she thought it was, or else she’d never be of any use to the SAF as a military doctor.
“I’ll draw up a plan to get Captain Edith Foss into combat,” Major Booker said. “If she’s a JAM, she’ll show her true colors.”
“She may not and just come back here to stay,” Rei replied.
“I’ll keep my eye on her,” the major said. “Let’s hope this turns Captain Foss around.”
“She’s got a ﬁghting streak in her, the same as we do. She won’t be an easy nut to crack.”
“ ‘We,’ huh? You really have changed. I just hope that hasn’t made you less eﬀective in battle.” Having a medical specialist aboard the plane with him to make sure of that was a reasonable choice, thought Major Booker. Captain Edith Foss was going to have an important duty to bear.






TWELVE DAYS LATER, wearing ﬂight suits and with helmets in hand, Rei and Captain Foss were back in the sortie brieﬁng room. Their mission brieﬁng had already been completed. They’d been told that their mission was to reconnoiter the environs of one of the JAM’s main bases, code-named Richwar, which the FAF had hit recently. Major Booker had decided to commit two SAF planes to the task. He hadn’t been able to determine if the FAF strike had


knocked it out completely, and he was sure that there were survivors still there. They’d probably made contact with the other bases and summoned support. Naturally, the SAF had already conducted recon of the area, but hadn’t been able to tell for certain what was going on. The human pilots didn’t know how the JAM communicated with each other or how they organized support lines. Because of that, a JAM base that had been struck could one day spring back into action without any warning. The only way they’d ever learn how the JAM regenerated so quickly was to keep an apparently dead base under surveillance. These chances didn’t come very often, and they had one now. Major Booker was just barely managing to send out continuous surveillance missions while balancing them with the squadron’s other duties. They’d also dropped a recon pod in the area, and part of this mission was to collect the data it had gathered.
Captain Foss participated in the brieﬁng as well, and Major Booker gave her speciﬁc instructions to keep careful watch on Rei’s condition and report on it as the mission’s medical specialist. These were orders from General Cooley, he added.
Their preﬂight brieﬁng had covered the details of their ﬂight plan, weather conditions, ﬂight route, navigation support environment, fuel stores, and weapons loadout… All simple stuﬀ, but it wasn’t simple to Captain Foss. Her job of observing Rei had already begun, but the task at hand was ﬁrst and foremost to deal with her fear of entering a combat zone for the ﬁrst time. Worse for her, there wasn’t anyone else on the sortie team with whom she could share the fear she felt. Rei was the subject of her observations, so she naturally couldn’t conﬁde in him, but the other plane teamed up for this mission with Yukikaze was an unmanned drone ﬁghter. It was nicknamed the Rafe, a name Major Booker had chosen. This truly unmanned ﬁghter, newly


supplementing the squadron as its thirteenth plane, was the Maeve prototype: the FRX99.
Major Booker never sent out an unmanned plane to operate alone. There was much to learn about their performance, and that data was vital. Even so, he’d wanted at least one of the new drones sent out as the backup plane for this mission. If the SAF judged that this mission was too dangerous for Yukikaze to ﬂy alone, they could use the drone. He was aware of the possibility that the drone could become a danger to Yukikaze’s crew as well, and acknowledged that part of the SAF’s job was to monitor just such a situation.
As she settled into Yukikaze’s rear seat, Captain Foss also felt some trepidation at the sound of the engines starting up on the black-skinned Unit 13, although her fear was diﬀerent from Major Booker’s. She wondered if the unmanned plane charged with escorting Yukikaze and providing backup could be trusted not to abandon them if things got rough. After all, wasn’t that how SAF planes normally operated? Even their manned planes would do that. In that respect, the humans in the SAF were much like their machines. She’d never really realized that before. Rei had said as much during their exchanges, but only now, in this situation, did the reality of Rei’s words sink in.
Yukikaze’s engines spun to life with power supplied by a support truck outside.
“Contact,” Rei declared.
Fire screamed inside of Yukikaze’s Super Phoenix engines. Captain Foss tensed up as the plane changed its posture, the front tire shock absorber compressing as it bore the enormous thrust from the engines. Yukikaze was roaring like a wild animal preparing to leap onto its prey.
Rei looked back. Captain Foss realized that he wasn’t checking on her. His helmet visor was raised, and she could see that in his gaze. He was just making sure that Yukikaze’s


vertical stabilizers had unfolded into their proper conﬁguration. He then checked to make sure that all of the plane’s control surfaces were operating normally. Preﬂight checks, completed. All systems, normal. The ground crew pulled the safety pins from the missiles loaded onto the plane. The sortie crew chief then pulled the pin of his headset from the jack on Yukikaze’s side and gave them the “Go” sign.
“Let’s go, Yukikaze,” Rei said.
The canopy lowered and locked in place. Releasing the brakes, Yukikaze moved forward. Captain Foss felt the plane’s tires bumping along. To her, each thump seemed to be an ampliﬁed version of her own pounding heart.
Rei hadn’t said, “Let’s go, Captain Foss.” She made a note of that on a small memo pad, similar to the ones used by test pilots, aﬃxed to her thigh. She then regained her composure. Rei called back to her.
“Tell me right away if you feel sick. I’ll try to compensate if I can.”
“I’ve had some training, you know. I’ll be ﬁne. Don’t worry about me.”
“Okay, good to hear that you’re ready for this. I’ll be counting on you.”
“Counting on me?” Foss said.
“Of course. You aren’t a guest back there; you’re ﬂight crew. In battle, it’s nice to have an extra eye. Lucky for me, you’ve got two.”
“My eyesight isn’t that great, so—”
“That doesn’t matter, Edith. Any creature whose life is in danger can see its enemy. Let’s go, partner.”
The Rafe made a mad dash down the runway and began to climb. Yukikaze followed a moment later, her engine output at maximum. The acceleration was so intense that Captain Foss couldn’t even speak.


A formation takeoﬀ. Rei wondered if his ability to sense the enemy was still as sharp as it had been, but forgot about that once they were in the air.
“Hang in there, Yukikaze. The wolf’s going to leave you behind.”
They soon reached cruising altitude and the planes began to speed along high above the ground. Freed from the G-force pressure of acceleration, Captain Foss took a breath, then asked Rei about the wolf he’d just mentioned so urgently.
“I meant the Rafe, Unit 13,” he replied. “The name means ‘counsel of the wolf.’ It’s like a hobby for Major Booker. He knows the weirdest things.”
Captain Foss looked for the plane. It was ﬂying a few hundred meters oﬀ their port side, matching their altitude.
“You don’t want to lose to it?”
“Yukikaze is a manned ﬁghter whose design is based on the Rafe. She’s not as maneuverable, so I was just shouting a little encouragement. Nothing really more meaningful than that.”
“Who were you encouraging? Yourself or Yukikaze?” “Both, probably. I guess you could theorize that it’s hard
to tell where I end and Yukikaze begins.” “Does that concern you?”
“Analyze that and give me a diagnosis when we get back. It’s dangerous to distract me up here. It aﬀects your safety too.”
Captain Foss stopped talking. The forests of Faery spread out below her, mostly gleaming a metallic purple. With its undulations, eddies, and striped patterns, she felt
as though she were looking at some sort of abstract painting. Like peeking directly into somebody’s mind, she thought. It was an incoherent mass of shapes, and yet


beautiful. Would the JAM be as wondrous and beautiful if they came from somewhere in there?
Rei responded to the few external communications they received with silence. A warning chimed twice, indicating a group of FAF planes crossing beneath them. A diﬀerently toned warning chimed, signaling that they’d reached their mission air space.
“Edith, I want you to please stop observing me for a while and keep watch on our surroundings.”
“Roger,” replied Captain Edith Foss.
The forest was now gone. A desert of pure white sand spread out around them. Not ﬂat, but undulating.
The Rafe activated its high-powered look-down radar and began searching for the enemy. As Yukikaze monitored the electromagnetic environment of their surroundings, she transmitted her IFF (Identify Friend or Foe) signal to the reconnaissance pod deployed onto the ground below to transmit its collected data to them. The pod had been placed there by the SAF after Richwar base had been destroyed, and it had been searching its surroundings from ground level. It should have responded to the SAF plane’s IFF signal.
“That’s funny,” Rei muttered. There was no response. There was an area on the ground that looked like a long,
thin mirror with a crack running across its surface. It was the remains of Richwar base’s center and shattered runway. The recon pod should have been planted somewhere around there, and Rei was about to bank Yukikaze to try to make
visual contact when the pod’s connection-ready tone chimed. It was responding now. The powerful ground search radar the Rafe was using had probably disrupted the IFF signal, Rei thought. Still, he wasn’t totally convinced that something wasn’t wrong here.
They had to recover the information contained in the pod, and so he transmitted the command code for it to


begin uploading its data to them. It seemed to be working, but then Yukikaze sounded a warning tone and ﬂashed a message onto the main display screen:
TRP32157: decode error.
The pod wasn’t answering the command code correctly, so Yukikaze couldn’t decode the data it was transmitting.
Had the pod malfunctioned, or had the JAM contaminated it? If the JAM had gotten to it, they were probably trying to introduce false data into the FAF. In that case, it was a lucky thing that Yukikaze couldn’t decode the probe’s data transmissions—it meant that the JAM hadn’t cracked the FAF’s data encryption.
Engage, Yukikaze ﬂashed on the screen, declaring her intention to attack. She now recognized tactical reconnaissance pod 32157 as an enemy and was suggesting that they destroy it. Rei authorized the action and sent the Rafe to do the deed.
The Rafe followed Rei’s orders from Yukikaze. Readying itself for battle, it designated the recon pod as its target. Diving swiftly down, it strafed the pod with its gun. One shot, and the target exploded.
Just as Rei was banking to conﬁrm its destruction with his own eyes, he heard Captain Foss’s tense voice in the back. Yukikaze sounded a warning as she spoke.
“Below, right, to our rear! Two JAM ﬁghters, closing!” Yukikaze did a barrel roll. Rei conﬁrmed for himself, then
sent them into a sudden Immelmann turn. Yukikaze initiated an auto-attack, locking onto the targets and immediately releasing her short-range missiles. The lock wasn’t steady and the shots missed.
Yukikaze quickly pulled her nose up as she turned to pursue the JAM, suddenly spinning her fuselage. The maneuver was beyond her design limitations. Without Rei doing any of the work, Yukikaze operated her control surfaces at maximum eﬃciency and quickly recovered, but


Rei sensed that she was about to accelerate and killed the auto-maneuver switch. He pulled the throttle back to IDLE. The exhaust temperature was already fairly high, and if he didn’t pull back, the engines could superheat and destroy themselves. Rei set the dogﬁght switch to ON, telling Yukikaze that he would handle this threat.
Yukikaze. This plane isn’t a Super Sylph. It’s a Maeve. The data on your old airframe doesn’t apply here. Leave this to me.
Yukikaze didn’t object.
They had altitude to spare. Pushing the throttle as high as he dared, Rei took them into a nearly vertical dive. Conﬁrming that the engines had cooled down, he cautiously increased their output. It was just like swimming. If you rushed and messed up the timing of your breathing, you’d drown.
Rei’s eyes found the enemy ﬁghters. Having for a moment evaded Yukikaze’s attack, the JAM banked steeply and turned toward Yukikaze. They’d predicted the optimum attack course to take. Rei heard the warning buzzer sound as Yukikaze picked up their weapons lock. Rei instantly selected gun mode. Taking Yukikaze into a loose climbing turn, he waited till it felt right, then recklessly snapped over into a sharp bank. The high-G forces caused him to black out for a few moments. When his vision cleared, just as he’d ﬁgured, the JAM ﬁghters were crossing right in front of him. His intuition was as sharp as ever. The enemy ﬁghters were still turning.
Cross attack. Firing time: 0.5 seconds. An instant later, the targets were behind him. Rei craned his neck around to conﬁrm his hit.
The Rafe ﬂew through the smoke of their explosions and rejoined Yukikaze as the fragments of the two JAM planes fell to the ground. The Rafe had shot one of them down, apparently having imitated Yukikaze’s tactics.


Rei conﬁrmed their fuel stores. They could stay here a while longer. There were probably more JAM buried under the desert sands, searching for the SAF. Perhaps they were testing out using the recon pod to talk to us and only attacked when we rejected their overture, he thought. Suddenly, Rei was roused from this fantasy.
In all the commotion moments before, he’d completely forgotten about Captain Foss. Noticing that her breathing sounded far weaker than it should have, Rei looked back and saw that she’d taken her mask oﬀ. She’d vomited inside of it. He quickly brought Yukikaze down to a lower altitude and told Foss how to clean out the blockage and reset the mask.
He wondered what she had made of the battle just now. Despite having seen them, maybe she still thought the JAM were imaginary. Still, whatever she thought, what she now felt in her body was real. There was no way she could deny that. That goes for me as well, Rei thought.
For now, this was good enough. A lot of information had been gathered for analysis, for both the SAF and Captain Foss.
“Mission complete,” Rei said to her. “Returning to base.”


OceanofPDF.com