5


BLACKOUT. REI HAD no sense of losing consciousness, but he ﬁgured he might have blacked out for a moment. He heard the sound of a distant alarm. He swallowed saliva as his hearing normalized. He was clearly conscious but could see nothing of his surroundings. Nothing but gray all around. He raised his helmet visor and checked his instruments. A white vapor was rising in the cabin. He thought it was a ﬁre


at ﬁrst, but the alarm was all wrong for that. It was water. Mist.
“Lieutenant Katsuragi, give me a damage report. Lieutenant, wake up!”
“I hear you. Running diagnostics now… Flight systems are all green,” he answered, breathing rapidly.
“Fix the cabin environment.”
“The defogger’s running. Current position: unknown.”
There must have been a sudden, temporary loss of pressure in the cabin, Rei thought. That was the cause of the mist. Thinking the canopy might have been blown oﬀ, Rei rolled Yukikaze through one turn, conﬁrming her ﬂight responses as well as trying to determine which way was up. Even so, his instruments weren’t telling him anything. Not knowing which way was up, he reversed the roll in case he’d unexpectedly changed course during the initial one.
The alarm indicated TARGET PLANE LOST. Canceling it, Rei checked to see if the wide area search radar was still operating.
Lieutenant Katsuragi noticed that the barometric and radar altimeters were now at wide variance in their readings, way more than the usual measurement error. He looked out the now-clearing canopy to see which reading was more accurate. He had a feeling that both were probably wrong. Yukikaze was ﬂying nearly level, very close to the ground.
It was a strange scene. Dim, with thick clouds spreading overhead as far as the eye could see. Below them was exactly the same. The lieutenant suddenly realized that the “ground” below them was just another cloud formation. Yukikaze was ﬂying through a clear layer between two thick cloud banks above and below. Far ahead of them on the horizon he could see a band of blue light, probably a break in this sea of clouds. Craning his head around to make sure that Yukikaze’s tail stabilizers hadn’t been damaged, he saw


that the brightly shining gap extended completely around them. It was colored red behind them. Katsuragi’s entire ﬁeld of view showed only a ring of light, sandwiched between two layers of clouds.
“No visible damage to the wings. Current altitude is around three thousand meters, and I don’t think this is Faery’s environment, either,” Lieutenant Katsuragi informed Rei. “I think this is some sort of artiﬁcially created space. Our altimeter readings are unreliable here.”
“Yeah,” replied Rei. “There’s also a huge cloud layer above us that reﬂects back radio waves.”
“Holy shit…” Katsuragi murmured. The clouds above and below weren’t so much like the ground than gigantic walls, with this clear area suspended between them. “This is a spatial pathway the JAM use to transport themselves around Faery.”
“Maybe.”
“If we keep ﬂying, will we come out of it, Captain Fukai?” “I don’t know, but I think we’re going to make contact
with the JAM before we leave here. Keep your eyes peeled.” The engines were running smoothly, but there was no
real sense that they were moving forward. It was quiet. The situation was bizarre, but Rei was relieved to see that Lieutenant Katsuragi in the rear seat was dealing with it calmly and not falling into a panic. Yukikaze was silent except for the message on the main display, which declared that she was searching for the enemy. No doubt she was using every means at her disposal to search the skies surrounding them.
“Where’d the target plane disappear to?” Lieutenant Katsuragi asked. “It looks like it didn’t come in here with us.”
“You’re probably right, seeing as it’s not here. It was probably just sent to guide us in,” Rei replied.


“Did you know this was going to happen?”
“Are you asking me if I knew beforehand that we’d be lured into this weird space?”
“Well, that too…”
“You said before that this is an artiﬁcially created space. How do you know that?” Rei asked.
“Because I doubt anything like this would exist naturally. If the JAM control it, then it stands to reason that they created it too.”
“That’s a cool assessment to make.”
“What are you planning to do here, Captain?”
“Learn what the JAM’s intentions are,” Rei said. “That’s why the SAF put this operation in motion, although the JAM seem to have made the move before we could. I guess you could say we got our wish. Saves us a bunch of work, this way.”
“Did the SAF get some overtures beforehand that the JAM would be open to contact like this?” Lieutenant Katsuragi asked.
“It’d be natural to think that.”
“To think? Are you avoiding the question?”
“You don’t work for Colonel Rombert anymore, meaning you have no right to cross-examine me. Keep your position in mind, Lieutenant.”
“I’m just asking out of personal curiosity, Captain.”
There’s a way of asking things when you genuinely just want to know about them, Rei thought. Still, as much as the way Katsuragi was doing it rubbed him the wrong way, Rei ﬁgured he’d sound much the same if he were in the lieutenant’s place. Rei snorted out a laugh as he thought about it. The lieutenant’s questions weren’t about some duty to ﬁgure out what was going on. He really was a lot like Rei in that regard. Besides, Rei had a feeling that Katsuragi


was going to get nervous if he didn’t have something to talk about.
“What’s so funny?”
“You just remind me of when Colonel Rombert interrogated me. But yeah, you aren’t him. Just go on, Lieutenant.”
“If you people did receive overtures from the JAM before, then that’s a serious matter,” Lieutenant Katsuragi said. “The other units in the FAF don’t know that, do they? Is the SAF trying to set up some sort of private arrangement between itself and the JAM?”
“Overtures were made in advance,” Rei replied coolly. “But to Yukikaze, not us humans. If that weren’t the case, Yukikaze wouldn’t have told me not to attack and that she was going to try communicating with the JAM.”
“Oh… Is that what that was all about.”
“The SAF theorized that the JAM wanted to make contact with Yukikaze because she made that prediction herself shortly before we left on this sortie.”
Yukikaze performed unmanned sorties several times before now, and it’s possible the JAM had made their overtures to her each time, Rei thought. That was how she knew that the JAM desired to “receive” them. He could imagine that the JAM had made clear their conditions for contact with them—she had to be piloted, not unmanned.
“That’s why I was prepared for this,” Rei continued. “But I don’t know what the JAM are going to say to us. Is that good enough for you, Lieutenant?”
“What do you plan to say to the JAM?”
“I want to ask them what they think I am.” “And after that?” Katsuragi asked.
“Why, out of all the other planes in other units, they want to make contact with Yukikaze. I want to know what they think she is too.”


“Do you only care about you and Yukikaze, Captain Fukai? There have to be more important things to ask them.”
“Like what?”
“Like why the JAM invaded in the ﬁrst place. That’s what the SAF and the FAF both want to know. Are you serious? Do you really ﬂy Yukikaze for such personal reasons?”
“Yeah,” Rei said. “What about it? Is it wrong to?”
“Is it wrong? That answer is so disgusting, I don’t even know where to begin,” the lieutenant replied.
“That’s not how you really feel about it,” Rei said. “How do you mean?”
“It’s not that you aren’t answering me out of disgust. It’s because you don’t know how to judge my answer and you don’t understand how you feel about it. You don’t have a personal question to ask the JAM, and that disgust you claim to feel only comes from your being a soldier in the FAF. You’re acting the way you think a good soldier should, but you don’t really care. So do me a favor and stop trying to impress me.”
Lieutenant Katsuragi was silent.
“Think about it for yourself, Lieutenant. I’m pretty sure you know how you feel.”
Captain Foss and her therapy must have had an even stronger inﬂuence on me than I ever imagined, Rei thought. But nothing pissed him oﬀ more than hearing someone talking as pretentiously as Lieutenant Katsuragi was; the lieutenant wasn’t even using his own words. All it did was underline how mentally immature he really was. It was all Rei could do to keep from just telling the guy to fuck oﬀ. The foul language he wanted to hurl at him was the same abuse he wanted to hurl at himself.
“Does everyone in the SAF ﬂy for the same reasons you do?” the lieutenant ﬁnally asked.


“I couldn’t care less why they do it,” Rei replied. “So, the SAF is…yeah. That’s ﬁne, isn’t it?”
You draw the most strength when you ﬁght for yourself, Rei thought, as he silently nodded. He looked outside. The scenery hadn’t changed. Maybe the JAM were carrying out a cunning plan just to annoy him. Rei was concerned about their remaining fuel, but then noticed they hadn’t consumed nearly as much as he’d thought.
“It doesn’t matter what motivates your unit’s pilots to ﬂy, as long as they achieve their strategic goals,” Lieutenant Katsuragi said. “If you ﬁnd out what the JAM think of you and Yukikaze, we can ﬁgure out what their strategic objectives are and develop strategies to anticipate their behavior.” He paused a moment. “I was really shocked when you just coolly said ‘yeah’ like that, Captain. I just couldn’t come up with anything to answer that.”
“You would have said the same thing if you’d been in my position. There was nothing shocking about it. You and I are a lot alike.”
“I was shocked because saying something like that in any other unit would have earned you a trip to the ﬁring squad. If the SAF permits conversations like this to happen every day, it’s in real trouble. Well, I suppose I don’t have anything to worry about.”
“Do you have a meeting arranged with Colonel Rombert?” Rei asked.
“No, but I ﬁgure the colonel will approach me somehow. Still, even if he does, I don’t plan to tell him about this. Besides, considering the situation, I doubt he’d believe me even if I did.”
“That colonel wouldn’t ignore intelligence like this just because he didn’t believe it himself. He’d probably anticipate how well you can utilize your intelligence network and demand objective data.”
“Hm…”


Right now, Katsuragi is probably doubting what his ﬁve senses are telling him about this whole experience, Rei thought. If they made it back in one piece, he was deﬁnitely going to need the data Yukikaze had collected in order to process it.
“Don’t keep monitoring the instruments,” Rei ordered. “Keep a visual watch on our surroundings. No matter what happens, don’t look at the instruments. I’ll tell you again if I need you to run the EW systems. Trust your own eyes. Now, repeat what I just told you back to me.”
“Maintain a visual watch on our surroundings, don’t look at the instruments until the pilot tells me otherwise. That is all.”
“You left out the part about trusting your own eyes.” “That was part of your orders?”
“Yeah.”
“Trust my own eyes. That is all,” Lieutenant Katsuragi said.
“And can you do that?” “I follow my orders.”
“It’d be hard for me to do,” Rei said. “Flying without looking at my instruments would make me as nervous as hitting full throttle with my eyes shut.”
“You’re a pilot. That’s not surprising.” “It’s not that sort of anxiety.”
“Are you saying you can’t completely trust Yukikaze—” As he spoke, an object moving at high speed was
detected on the enemy search radar, triggering an air-raid alarm. Lieutenant Katsuragi’s eyes instinctively fell back to his display panel.
“Bogey, single, bearing low to port. Rising fast on a general intercept course. From its size, I’m guessing it’s a ﬁghter plane, not a missile.”


“Lieutenant, carry out your orders!” Rei snapped. “Maintain a visual watch and give me running reports on the actual conditions you see. Do it in a way that anyone would be able to ﬁgure out what happened here if we replay it back at base.”
“Roger. By visual observation…I can’t conﬁrm an enemy silhouette in the cloud bank below us, but it’s probably close.”
“Target is crossing to starboard, right next to us, Lieutenant. I’m matching speeds. No IFF response. I can’t conﬁrm if it’s a JAM. Type: unknown.”
“A section of the bogey has appeared through the cloud bank… Looks like the pointed tip of a vertical stabilizer.”
Like a shark ﬁn breaking the surface of the water, thought Lieutenant Katsuragi. It was very close to them now, barely one hundred meters away. It broke through the clouds as it rose toward them. The surroundings were dim, and in the weak light, its wings looked gray instead of the usual black of a JAM plane.
“I can see some sort of darkish marking on the gray wings of the plane. It looks like…like…”
It was a Boomerang mark. With barely a ripple on the surface of the clouds, the unknown plane revealed itself completely.
“The plane is a Sylphid, a high-speed Super Sylph. I can conﬁrm the markings of the Special Air Force 5th Squadron on it.”
Even Rei could now see with his naked eyes the plane emerging on the starboard side.
“It’s Yukikaze,” he said coolly. “A duplicate of Yukikaze’s old airframe, and this isn’t the ﬁrst time I’ve run into it.”
Setting the ﬁre control radar to pursuit mode, he locked on to the target plane. It was emitting an IFF signal


designating it as friendly, but Rei disregarded that and marked it as hostile.
“I see crewmen in the cockpit,” Lieutenant Katsuragi reported. “Their faces are covered with visors and masks… The one in the rear seat is moving his hand… He’s pointing to his mask. It looks like he wants to talk to us.”
This was the ﬁrst time he’d seen humanoids riding in the gray mystery plane. Wondering if they were duplicates of himself and Lieutenant Burgadish, Rei began manually searching the comm band, but the auto-scanner locked on before he could. A voice came through into his helmet.
“Lieutenant Fukai, you are ﬁghting a useless battle. Do you hear me? I demand that you abandon your ﬁghting spirit and live as I tell you to. Answer me, Lieutenant Fukai. I repeat…”
That wasn’t Lieutenant Burgadish’s voice. Its tone was neutral, as though mechanically synthesized. While the subject of its speech was easy to understand, it used words clumsily. Besides that, Rei was a captain now, but it was referring to him by his former rank. That might have been deliberate though, and Rei decided against correcting its mistake. No point in giving the JAM any more information than he had to.
“Lieutenant Fukai, you are ﬁghting a useless battle. Do you hear me?”
“This is B-1, I read you loud and clear. Please state your name, rank, and unit attachment.”
“Response conﬁrmed. I lack the type of classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation codes you inquire about. Lieutenant Fukai, please respond if you accept or deny my request.”
“If you’re going to make a request of someone, it’s only common courtesy to make your social position clear to them,” Rei replied, knowing that wasn’t true at all. “Who are you?”
After a short, almost embarrassed silence, it responded.


“By your conceptualization, I am the whole of what you refer to as the JAM.”
“The whole… You mean you’re the JAM themselves? Should I think of you as a voice representing the JAM?”
“I would not object to that judgment. Please issue your response.”
Rei switched oﬀ the comm circuit for a moment and called out to Lieutenant Katsuragi.
“Lieutenant, what do you think of what it said? Do you think I can believe this to be a representative of the JAM?”
“Hell if I know. I will say that it sounds unnatural, though. Like somebody is ordering it to say that stuﬀ to you.”
“I agree. Maintain observation of our surroundings.” “Roger.”
He reopened the comm link.
“I can’t understand the meaning of your request,” Rei replied. “When you say my battle is useless, I don’t know to whose advantage you’re referring, so I can’t answer you.”
“I somehow doubt that.”
The suddenly ﬂuent and lively voice he now heard leaping into his ears made Rei shiver. He knew one very similar to it. The man at that mysterious base where Lieutenant Burgadish had met his end. Yazawa. Major Yazawa. The name of the man he’d told Colonel Rombert about over and over again. The JAM human. It had to be him.
“Lieutenant Fukai, I very much doubt that you don’t understand its meaning,” the new voice said. “We’re saying that the FAF has no chance of winning, so we’re oﬀering you a way to save yourself. Come with us. We’ll lead you to a place where you can live in safety. If you don’t comply, you’ll only end up dying a meaningless death.”


“I can’t trust your words,” Rei said. “I reject your demand. I won’t negotiate with you.”
“Ignorant man. We’ve come here to make you understand.”
“I say again, I will not negotiate with you.” He called back to the rear seat. “Lieutenant Katsuragi, I’m engaging them. We’re attacking the target plane to starboard. Get ready for their counterattack and stand by on EW.”
“Roger!”
The stores control panel automatically displayed, letting him see at a glance all of the weaponry loaded on board. Yukikaze was agreeing with his decision to attack. She selected the high-velocity short range missiles, telling him to lead oﬀ with those. Rei snapped Yukikaze into a sharp turn. The target plane reacted immediately. In a close-range dogﬁght between the Maeve and a Super Sylph, the Maeve had an absolute advantage.
He launched the missiles, their range to the target extremely short. Rei counted to himself: three…two…one! and then the target plane vanished. It happened suddenly, without any warning. Having lost their target, the missiles ﬂew straight through where the plane had vanished and then self-destructed.
“It’s useless, Lieutenant Fukai.”
The target plane suddenly reappeared on the starboard side.
“Shit,” spat Lieutenant Katsuragi. “The thing may not even really be there.”
As if chiding the lieutenant’s impatience, Yukikaze scrolled a message onto the display.
This was just a test/next ﬁring will not be warning shots…JAM.
“Such foolishness, even after we oﬀered to save you. Very well. If you insist, I will accept your challenge. Now see


who truly rules the skies. This place shall become your grave—” the owner of the voice was saying. Suddenly, with no explanation, the words stopped. There came a shout like “No, don’t!”
Disaster struck the target plane. Its canopy blew oﬀ. “The crew have ejected,” Lieutenant Katsuragi reported.
“Conﬁrm ejection of both front and rear seats. Are they running away? But why? What happened?”
The lieutenant followed the two ejected seats with his gaze. They fell behind and to the side of their ﬂight path, tracing a double-helix path through the air as they spiraled away around one another. He saw no sign of the crew’s bodies separating from the seats or of parachutes opening, even as he twisted his neck as far around as he could to keep them in sight. They were enveloped in a reddish phosphorescence, sprouting glowing red tails as they grew smaller and smaller until they ﬁnally vanished from sight. It was as if they’d been incinerated in freefall. He instinctively checked the radar display, but saw nothing there. They’d been annihilated.
“Answer me, JAM,” Rei said. “I want to talk to you, not your human duplicates. Respond! This is Rei Fukai in B-1.”
The response came.
“I cannot understand you. Why do you ﬁght?” Lieutenant Katsuragi shivered. The owner of this voice,
he realized, was the JAM themselves, who wished to make contact with Captain Fukai and Yukikaze. The ejected JAM humans had been nothing more than intermediaries whose role had been to act as translators. The owner of the voice had probably discarded them when it judged that they were hindering negotiations. Like they’d been some sort of disposable weapon.
The target plane continued to ﬂy alongside Yukikaze, as though nothing had happened. The JAM voice might have been coming from the plane, but most likely it was acting as


a relay transmitter to convey the JAM’s will. No doubt it wasn’t the actual voice of a JAM, but the results of their eﬀorts to convey their thoughts in human speech through the manipulation of radio waves.
What we know as JAM do exist, but they’re some sort of invisible beings, and what we ﬁght are their shadows. What Rei had thought, Lieutenant Katsuragi could now understand as a palpable sensation. A sensation of fear. It hadn’t just been a theory.
“I cannot understand the intelligence known as Yukikaze. I cannot understand the intelligences which comprise what is known as the Special Air Force. Why, Lieutenant Fukai? Why do you ﬁght?”
“So that I can live and not die at your hands. Why can’t you understand that? Are you saying other humans, the groups aside from Yukikaze and the SAF, aren’t like that?”
“I believe that the machine intelligences of the SAF, including Yukikaze and you contained within her, are like me: intelligences that do not possess personlike consciousness. What I cannot understand is why you do not separate from the group known as the FAF and continue to ﬁght to thwart my plans. Yukikaze refuses to ratify my nonaggression pact. You are the only one who can convince her to withdraw her rejection. Lieutenant Fukai, I desire to awaken you. Come back to me.”
“Wait, what… What do you mean, I don’t possess personlike consciousness? Ratify a nonaggression pact? Come back to you?”
“The current people as well as the artiﬁcial intelligences that manipulate them are beings that can be made to deviate from their essential natures by our plans. You people, however, are not like that. You are essential beings, and your enemy is not me. It is not my intention to let you be consumed. It is my desire that you choose to come over to me.”


“In short…” said Lieutenant Katsuragi, cutting in. Rei didn’t stop him. He was going to need time if he was going to ﬁgure out what the JAM were saying. “You’re saying that since we’re like the JAM, you want us to join you, switch sides, and help you to ﬁght the FAF?”
“Who are you?”
“My name is Akira Katsuragi, Yukikaze’s ﬂight oﬃcer and electronic warfare operator. I serve at FAF Faery base in the Tactical Combat Air Corps, Special Air Force 5th Squadron. My rank is second lieutenant and I am a human. If you want to know why I ﬁght you, it’s pretty much because it’s my job to. My job, do you understand? My duty. I do this because there’s no other suitable path I can take through life.”
“You can live without ﬁghting me.”
“I can interpret your thoughts to mean that you want the SAF to be your allies, can’t I? Does that mean you’re oﬀering me a job?”
In this situation, what he’d just asked was so base it was almost funny. But they waited for the JAM’s answer, even as Rei wondered what the lieutenant’s real motives were.
“You people and I are similar, but we are not comrades. But I wish to explain that I see the possibility of forming a common front against the FAF. I judge that will provide a path through life for you, Lieutenant Katsuragi. I seek your answer. If you have any intention of withdrawing from the FAF and joining me, then declare it to me, Lieutenant Fukai.”
Its strained, unnatural circumlocutions made it diﬃcult to follow, but what Rei could basically make out was that the JAM were demanding to know, if he intended to continue ﬁghting, would he join the JAM’s side. His destiny was riding on how he answered this question.
What would the JAM do if he told them no? Would it eliminate him to rid itself of an opponent beyond comprehension? No, it would likely keep working to understand him till the bitter end. The JAM probably


wouldn’t let him escape from this space. Maybe lead him, and Yukikaze, to be conﬁned in a safe place, like Major Yazawa had said. Somewhere unimaginable that was neither Earth nor Faery, where the JAM could take its time in ﬁguring them out, with special attention paid to Yukikaze. What if the JAM brainwashed him to get him on their side? If they succeeded at that, he imagined they could bring the entire SAF there to brainwash as well and then use them against the FAF. In other words, turn them all into JAM…
Well then, what if he said yes? What if he joined the JAM? Yukikaze wouldn’t accept that quietly, surely. He had no doubt in his mind that she’d pitch both himself and Lieutenant Katsuragi out of the plane, to end up the same as Major Yazawa and whoever else had been with him.
“Your answer, Lieutenant Fukai.”
Rei sensed that the JAM was in no hurry.
It had plenty of time. It had been observing the FAF for thirty years, so why would it rush? Rei was still under observation in this space, as well. The JAM didn’t seem intent on killing him, but as long as he didn’t answer it, he’d have no way to take any proactive steps toward saving himself. Unless he did something, he would end up starving to death, and Yukikaze would exhaust her fuel and fall silent.
What do I want to do, Rei asked himself. Not what should I do, but do I want to do? Is that the answer?
“I wish to know more details about what sort of beings you are,” Rei said. “I don’t understand anything about you, but you seem to grasp at least a bit about me. I can’t ratify a nonaggression pact with you as long as this unequal state of aﬀairs persists. First of all, I don’t think you completely understand or know how to use human speech. Just what are you people? Living things? Beings that consist only of intelligence, will, and data? Do you have physical forms? If so, then where are they?”


“I cannot explain in a way that would be comprehensible in your terms. I am that I am.”
Lieutenant Katsuragi felt a smile spasm across his face.
The tension was so unbearable now that he could feel his train of thought starting to derail. “I am that I am.” Well, fantastic. They are just like Captain Fukai and Yukikaze, then. As he was thinking how the resemblance was astonishing, the feeling of tension returned. He concentrated every nerve on Rei’s answer.
“If you don’t have words that can explain more than that, then any further communication via words is meaningless,” Rei declared. Taking a deep breath and preparing himself for the worst, he gave his answer.
“I refuse your request.”
“Understood,” the JAM replied, without any emotion. “Strategic reconnaissance, complete,” Rei declared.
“Returning to base.”


OceanofPDF.com


















VII


RETHINKING FIGHTING SPIRIT


OceanofPDF.com