1


MAJOR JAMES BOOKER, the man responsible for sortie management and mission control for the Special Air Force 5th Squadron (FAF, Faery base, Tactical Combat Air Corps),


had a lot of problems on his mind, all of which were giving him a splitting headache.
First of all, his neck still gave him a twinge from time to time. Then there was the fact that he still didn’t have a complete understanding of the incident that had hurt his neck in the ﬁrst place. Finally, there was the matter of Lieutenant Rei Fukai, pilot of Yukikaze (SAF Unit 3) and how he remained unconscious in a vegetative state. Ever since the incident, the major had a vague sense that the JAM had subtly altered their strategy in a way that he couldn’t quite put his ﬁnger on. Sylphids, the same model of plane that had been enhanced to create Yukikaze, deployed at front-line bases, had suddenly been taking much higher rates of damage than previously.
The major recalled that Dr. Balume, the SAF ﬂight surgeon, had suggested a nerve block if the pain persisted. When he’d refused, telling the doctor that a nerve block performed by a drunk like Balume would likely kill him, the doctor then suggested that he might try some counseling, saying that ridding himself of his anxiety might also relieve the pain.
“And what do you have to be anxious about, anyway?” the doctor had said. “You made it back still breathing, didn’t you? Okay, the FRX00 nearly killed you, but you don’t have to ﬂy in it again.” It was about at that point the major decided that he would have to take care of his anxiety himself, because this doctor certainly wasn’t going to be of any help in that department.
Major Booker knew that the reason he was feeling so anxious had to do with question number two on his list. In other words, the fact that he still didn’t have a complete grasp of exactly what had happened to the FRX00. Yukikaze lay burning, shot down by the JAM, never to ﬂy again. Somehow, she’d abandoned her old body and transferred herself into the approaching FRX00. Having obtained a new


body for herself, Yukikaze had recognized the approaching JAM ﬁghters and initiated combat maneuvers against them. That was when the pilot and he, the acting ﬂight oﬃcer in the rear, had blacked out. The man at the controls was Captain George Samia, pilot of SAF Unit 13. Yukikaze’s maneuvers in the FRX00 snapped his neck, killing him instantly.
And those must have been some outrageous maneuvers, the major thought, rubbing the nape of his own neck. The FRX00 had exceeded its predicted air combat maneuverability. He could practically hear the computers of the Systems Corps snickering at him.
“The FRX00 is a modiﬁed FRX99,” they’d say. “The FRX99 was never designed to be piloted by humans. Did you seriously think you could do it?”
Major Booker had been riding in the rear seat to observe the real-world performance of the plane that had been manufactured at his insistence, but there was no way he could have predicted that something like this would happen. In truth, the real reason he’d been there was because he’d been worried when Yukikaze hadn’t returned to base from her sortie. He used the FRX00’s combat ﬂight test as an excuse to go out and run a personal search for her. It was clear that they’d provided support for Yukikaze, but being aboard the plane had prevented him from seeing exactly what had happened. Even now, he wasn’t sure.
Captain Samia had probably leaned closer to the display to conﬁrm that an external data stream was transferring into his plane from somewhere. However, that had been a fatal mistake on his part. The major regretted not warning him, but comforted himself by realizing that there had been no time for it. There was no way he could have known that the data stream was actually Yukikaze’s mind itself being transferred from her crippled body as she lay burning. Aside from that, as a former pilot, Booker had braced himself to


prepare for combat maneuvers the moment he realized something was wrong. That was what had saved his neck. All he’d suﬀered were a few dislocated vertebrae.
Maybe his ability to sense danger and intuit that he was about to pull some unimaginable Gs was due to a sort of sixth sense he’d cultivated as a pilot. He thought about this for a moment, then decided against it. It had been a long, long time since he’d ﬂown as a combat pilot. Was what he felt at that moment, more than the fear of combat itself, a sense of how dangerous the FRX00 really was? Had he sensed that it was a mistake for humans to ﬂy in such a plane and felt fear at being in one?
The FRX00 had been modiﬁed for manned ﬂight from the FRX99, which had been designed to be unmanned. The addition of ﬂight crew safeguards in manufacturing the manned version had drastically increased the weight of the plane, but even so it was still far more maneuverable than any other manned ﬁghter. It still possessed the same potential as the FRX99, after all.
In designing manned planes, engineers had to take into account the human body’s frailty in the face of G forces. For that reason, they couldn’t avoid decreasing its air combat capabilities. Human beings are land animals, after all, and their ability to grasp three-dimensional space is limited. They can ﬂy inverted through a cloudbank and never even realize it. However, when designing an unmanned aircraft, all of these weak points can be eliminated. When you don’t have to worry about a human occupant, you can create a plane that can carry out maneuvers to its full technical potential. Sending the plane into a controlled ﬂat spin would be child’s play. When you had such perfect control, what would once have been a useless maneuver in actual combat could prove advantageous, giving your assault forces a high degree of ﬂexibility in battle.


The FRX99 had been created to be such a plane, with vertical canard wings and two-dimensional vectored thrust engine nozzles. With direct side force control, it had the ability to rotate like a boomerang. The airframe even had direct lift force control as well, and could nimbly move up or down while maintaining level ﬂight. To maintain the eﬃciency of the air intake system during such violent maneuvers, the intake ports extended above and below the main wing. At ﬁrst glance, this made the twin-engine plane appear to have four.
Major Booker would never forget Lieutenant Rei Fukai’s impression of the prototype when it was delivered to the SAF.
“It looks powerful, but clumsy,” Rei had said.
As his neck ached, the major recalled Rei’s words over and over. The FRX99 had been designed with the idea that humans weren’t necessary and that they should stay the hell away from it. Perhaps Rei had sensed that. It was a combat machine built without any regard for human beings. Its very design showed that it wasn’t meant for humans to ﬂy. Rei had probably sensed that with a single glance.
Even so, the manned FRX00 version could be said to be the most powerful plane in the FAF’s current arsenal. Rather than saying it possessed a lethal level of maneuverability, you could just as easily say that it demonstrated just how powerful the plane really was. After all, no ﬁghter plane could honestly be considered safe. The important point was whether or not a human pilot could control it.
Yukikaze had been the one controlling the plane. There was no doubt about that. The problem was that she’d completely disregarded the FRX00’s human crew and had not hesitated to maneuver in a way that injured, or even killed, them.
Checking the data ﬁle of the FRX00’s central computer after they’d returned to base and realizing that it showed no


concern for the humans aboard, the major had become afraid.
What the hell was going on? There was no way the plane’s central systems didn’t know that there were people aboard. If that were true, then the central computer itself had ignored the crew and simply deleted any data it received about the occupants of its cockpit.
Why?
In that moment, the FRX00 wasn’t just a prototype anymore. It had literally become Yukikaze. She’d already ejected Rei from the burning remains of her old body. So perhaps, as far as Yukikaze was concerned, there weren’t any humans aboard her. Or rather, she assumed there weren’t any. That probably would have led her to treat any data about the crew aboard the FRX00 as an error. It was a plausible explanation, but they couldn’t determine that for certain from Yukikaze’s memory data. And since she couldn’t understand ambiguous human language, it wasn’t as though they could just ask her, “What the hell was going through your mind before?” The data hinted at the answer, but if it didn’t contain what the humans wanted to know, the best they could do was to guess at what Yukikaze’s intentions had been.
Once she’d transferred herself to the FRX00, Yukikaze had wanted to eliminate the surrounding enemy JAM as quickly as possible. That much was certain. In the investigation conducted after they’d returned to base, it was learned that the FRX00 had cut out all of its maneuvering limiters. Or to be more accurate, it had never engaged them in the ﬁrst place. He could imagine that the crew safeguards had been working just ﬁne, but that from Yukikaze’s point of view, they were just malfunctions. In order for Yukikaze to release all of the limiters, she would have had to send false data to all the sensor systems that there were no crewmen aboard and then deactivate the safeguards. As far as she


was concerned, it wasn’t false data. Since Rei had been ejected, the data from the safeguards telling her that there were humans aboard must have been in error, and Yukikaze had simply corrected it. The problem with this explanation was that, normally, it should have been impossible. So the only explanation possible was that Yukikaze had made a mistake. And that was what Major Booker just couldn’t understand.
Considering that Yukikaze had never experienced transfer of herself into a new airframe, it wouldn’t be too much of a stretch to suppose that the transfer could cause her to make some sort of mistake. If it wasn’t a mistake, there were much simpler ways she could have cut out the limiters, assuming that cutting them had been her true intention. Yukikaze could have just activated the FRX00’s ejection seats. In both the old Yukikaze and the FRX00, the central computer was capable of activating the seat escape system if it determined that the crew were unconscious and unable to activate it themselves. The crew safeguards that controlled all of the maneuver limiters, G-suit controller, and the active headrests that protected the crews’ necks were designed to deactivate if the plane were unmanned. If she’d simply ejected their seats, she could have performed the most lethal air combat maneuvers possible without any problem.
But Yukikaze hadn’t done that. So, had it been a mistake caused by her transferring herself, or was it that Yukikaze had decided she didn’t have to waste time ejecting any human other than Rei? There was no way to tell what her true feelings were. Hell, it was even possible that Yukikaze’s actions had nothing to do with what had happened, and that there was a fault in the FRX00’s safeguard system.
The true reason remained a mystery.
Because these questions remained unanswered, they’d been forced to suspend their plan to mass produce the


FRX00 and establish a new SAF. When Dr. Balume suggested that the pain in his neck wasn’t fading because of that, Major Booker grew depressed. Did that mean he’d be stuck with it unless he found an answer? Shit, he thought, if Rei’d just wake up, that’d take care of my anxiety. If Lieutenant Rei Fukai, Yukikaze’s partner, told him, “Yukikaze just decided she should kill any crew on board that wasn’t me,” he might not like to hear it, but he had a feeling he could probably understand it. Even so, it didn’t look like Rei would be regaining full consciousness any time soon.
The Systems Corps had said that if the SAF couldn’t explain the cause of the FRX00’s (Yukikaze’s) dangerous maneuvers, then they would investigate it themselves. When Major Booker objected, they’d demanded that he hand it over to them.
Major Booker had fought back against the demand, saying that he wouldn’t give the data to the Systems Corps under any circumstances. The reason being that the FRX00 was now Yukikaze herself, a battle-tested SAF ﬁghter plane. No other corps would be permitted to read the contents of her central data ﬁle. Besides that, if anyone apart from the SAF attempted to check out Yukikaze’s central computer, she would self-destruct. The Systems Corps had dropped the tough-guy routine when he’d pointed this out to them. They knew very well how dangerous an SAF ﬁghter’s central computer could be, mainly because they were the ones who’d designed it.
He’d had to point out the FRX00’s telecommunication log from when she’d returned to base in order to prove that it was now Yukikaze.
At the time, she’d called herself that, identifying herself as Yukikaze.
DE YUKIKAZE ETA2146.AR
“This is Yukikaze. Estimated time of arrival at base 21:46 hours. That is all.”


She hadn’t transmitted Unit B-3, her mission sortie code number, but had identiﬁed herself as “Yukikaze.” For the ﬁrst and only time.
Perhaps Yukikaze was cognizant of the fact that she was no longer in the same body and therefore technically no
longer Unit B-3. In that case, the only way she could identify herself was as Yukikaze. That was probably it, Major Booker thought. Or, he had gone on, she might have identiﬁed herself solely as Yukikaze as a way to try and ﬁnd Rei, the one who had given her that name. He’d told Systems Corps that she might have been pretty shaken by the whole experience as well.
Systems Corps pointed out that, if this were true, it would be dangerous to have a combat machine acting in such a human way. Fighter planes didn’t need individual personalities, they’d said. Major Booker decided that Systems Corps was using the situation to claim that the SAF (and by extension, Booker himself) agreed with their theory that the FAF no longer needed manned ﬁghters so that they could steal Yukikaze away from him. That was when he lost his temper, shouting that he’d let an active-duty ﬁghter get taken apart by friendly hands over his dead body. The argument got pretty heated, but in the end, Systems Corps gave up. They got in a parting shot though, pointing out that if Yukikaze had actually transferred herself into the FRX00, she’d used a wireless transmission that could have been intercepted by the JAM, which might have been the cause for the rising damage rates seen in the Sylphids nearly identical to the old Yukikaze. So long as they would not hand her over to them, it would be up to the SAF to investigate this, not to shirk their responsibilities, and so on and so forth.
They can go on saying it as much as they like, but if Systems Corps truly believe that manned ﬁghters are no longer needed, they’re just wrong, thought Major Booker. As


far as the SAF’s mission was concerned, you couldn’t separate the men from the machines.
Major Booker reiterated his thought that, no matter how much more reliable the unmanned planes became, the SAF would still have a need for manned planes. Even using their current Super Sylphs as unmanned planes was no good. He was sure that a human pilot could catch data during combat that a machine would simply ignore. Yukikaze’s behavior in real combat during that incident had proved that to him.
It was mentioned in her combat record that, during her mission, Yukikaze’s crew had ejected twice. The ﬁrst time when they made contact with the JAM, and then later during that mysterious time gap when the JAM shot her down.
If the ejection seat had been ﬁred twice, it meant that Rei, her pilot, had used it once to bail out, and then he’d been ﬂying Yukikaze again, after it had happened. That would have been impossible unless a new ejection seat unit had been mounted into the plane. That meant that somebody had installed a second ejection seat. There was no record that TAB-15, the closest front-line base, had received a request for a spare seat from Yukikaze, so that left only one conclusion: the JAM had installed it. Yukikaze had taken actions during that time gap that they still couldn’t explain. The major was sure that Lieutenant Rei Fukai knew the data that wasn’t in Yukikaze’s data ﬁle. It was the sort of data you could only get from a manned sortie. He could imagine that the JAM had engaged in their ﬁrst direct interaction with a human.
All the answers were probably inside of Rei’s head. “Please wake up,” Major Booker urgently prayed. If Rei
would just wake up, all the stress that was making his neck hurt would fade away. He could have the conﬁdence to introduce the mass-produced FRX00s into service. They might have been dangerous planes for humans to ﬂy, but that threat paled next to that of the JAM.


As for the FRX00, it was in the SAF’s hangar, in its place, lined up next to the Super Sylphs ﬂown by the other squadron members. The only manned version of the FRX99 in the entire Faery Air Force. FRX00. Personal name: Yukikaze. Yukikaze’s new body.
Yukikaze had transferred to the FRX00 and returned to base, but her pilot Lieutenant Rei Fukai had yet to return. Major Booker had eventually been freed of his neck brace, but Rei hadn’t regained consciousness. His physical body might be there, but Rei just wasn’t home.
Major Booker had a pile of problems to deal with. Rei. Yukikaze. The strategy and tactics to use against the JAM. As it turned out, he was about to have even more troubles dumped onto his plate.