3


REI LOOKED OUT across Faery base’s vast runway but could make out nothing but ﬁghter planes. If this lunch meeting were going to take place in the air, he’d expected there to be a large transport plane, but it looked like he’d been wrong.
So then where was it going to be?
Before he could ask, Captain Edith Foss told him to follow her and began walking in the direction of the control tower.
“The food’s probably going to be very good,” Rei said as he walked along beside her. “I’ll bet Major Booker got his hands on some food that you normally can’t get here and didn’t want the computers to know about the delicacies we’re going to have. Are you invited too?”
“Yes,” she replied. “Who else is coming?’
“I don’t know. And as appealing as a delicacy-tasting party sounds, somehow I don’t think this is going to be such a pleasant lunch. In your manner of speaking, my guess would be that Major Booker has called me in to act as a poison taster for his food. I doubt my role as the attending physician in your psychological care is unrelated to this.”
“Hm.”
“I noticed you arrived in Yukikaze. Quite a display you put on there. Did you mean that as a threat to the other participants in this meeting? Major Booker certainly knows how to liven up a show, doesn’t he?”
Captain Foss didn’t know that Yukikaze’s appearance had been wholly unexpected, and he ﬁgured she probably didn’t know that Llanfabon had been assigned to observe and protect the meeting either.


Rei said nothing. Captain Foss gave him a sidelong glance and then asked, “Or did you and not Major Booker plan that little production?”
“You don’t have to examine me anymore, Captain.”
“I’m asking this out of personal interest. I know you aren’t the sort who’d take oﬀense at the question. You didn’t show up here in Yukikaze for some other duty, right? I don’t know why you’d go out of your way to do something like this, though. There’s a lot of things about you SAF people that are a mystery to me.”
“Having Yukikaze show up here wasn’t my idea or Major Booker’s. It wasn’t a show. It didn’t happen by chance, and it wasn’t for any other duty.”
“Could you just talk straight with me? The inability to get to the point is sometimes evidence of mental illness—”
“Okay, I don’t like you. Is that straight enough?” “Perfectly. Now why did you show up here in Yukikaze?” “No comment. Major Booker didn’t tell me it was okay to
tell anyone else about it.”
“But you just said it wasn’t a show and it wasn’t by chance. Was it okay to say that?”
“He didn’t say to keep completely quiet about it either.” “So then why do you say ‘no comment’ about anything
more than that?”
“Because I’ve always wanted to say ‘no comment’ to somebody.”
“Are you mocking me?” Foss asked.
“Boy, there’s no hiding anything from you, is there? Yeah, I am.”
“You have some serious character issues.”
“You and me both. You’re the one who said I rode up in Yukikaze to liven up the show here. I ﬁgured, ﬁne, have some fun and mock her right back.”
“You thought I was making fun of you?”


“I don’t get what you mean,” Rei said.
“I’m still interested in your relationship with Yukikaze. Did you really think I was mocking you when I asked if she was your lover?”
“No, you were being serious, so I answered you seriously. Why are you asking me this?”
“Why? Because this isn’t fun for me. There’s nothing fun about being mocked. You aren’t the only one who engages in this roundabout game of tit for tat. Everyone in the SAF is like that,” Foss said. “Talking to any of you pisses me oﬀ, and it’s all I’ve been able to do to maintain my personal feelings in the face of it. That goes for me both as a doctor and as an individual. But everyone has their limits, and I’ve reached mine. I hate you. I don’t want to talk to you anymore. Do you understand?” A long time ago, a woman whose face he could no longer remember had said the same thing to him. Rei stopped walking and looked Captain Foss in the eye.
I hate you. I don’t want to talk to you anymore. Do you understand?
What was it about him that prompted such words? What thing, what deﬁciency inside of him inspired such black rage?
Captain Foss also stopped walking and met Rei’s gaze. Her mouth was open, but she noticed the hard expression on his face and slowly pressed her lips back together. Rei didn’t overlook how the pupils in her eyes contracted.
This doctor had been personally angry with him before, but now something had changed. His reaction was unexpected, and so either out of curiosity or her sense of duty as a doctor, she had raised her head to study him. What was it about this patient that made him constantly contradict what she said and react so excessively?
Rei himself was bewildered by his reactions.


He thought he’d forgotten everything about his past, so why was he dredging it back up now? He’d heard similar words from other people ever since he’d joined the FAF. He’d never once been bothered by anyone saying that they hated him. All he’d said to Captain Foss before was “I don’t like you,” to which she’d responded, “I hate you. I don’t want to talk to you anymore. Do you understand?” That was all it was. So what of it? He shouldn’t have any problem with that.
So why did he feel the way he did?
Was Rei’s distress over this woman declaring her hatred of him due to some unconscious desire to court the favor of the opposite sex? Would he feel the same way if this doctor had been a man? But he couldn’t count the number of times other women had said that they hated him.
Captain Foss held her breath for a few moments, waiting for Rei to say something. When it looked like he wasn’t going to, she spoke instead.
“What happened between you and Yukikaze?”
Rei sighed and asked which way to go, ignoring her question.
“We’ve got a meeting to get to. Show me the way.”
“I can’t take much more of this, Captain Fukai. Even you must have emotions. There isn’t a human alive who can be told that they’re hated and not feel something about it. I know there’s some sort of wound in your heart.”
“I’m not here to ﬁght with you, and I don’t know you well enough to have some sort of lovers’ quarrel either.”
“The meeting’s over there. You can’t miss seeing Major Booker, can you? Rei, don’t try to avoid talking about things. This is a serious problem for you.”
“What problem?”
“You want to have a ﬁght. You want your ‘lovers’ quarrel’ to turn into an actual loving relationship.”


“That’s ridiculous. Why would I want that sort of relationship with you—”
“Not with me. With Yukikaze. Captain Fukai, I’ll ask you again: what happened between you and Yukikaze?”
“No comment.”
“Then I’ll do the talking. Think of this as a monologue. You’ve been told by Yukikaze that she hates you. Not a while ago, but very recently. And so what I said reminded you of that—”
“Yukikaze has no emotions.”
“But you do. Even you don’t know what will happen if, for example, somebody says that they hate you, and now Yukikaze is ignoring you. When I asked you before if Yukikaze was your lover, you knew already that she wasn’t. That wasn’t the relationship you shared before. You want to go back to that relationship, but you also know now that you can’t. So you attempted to erase your irritation, your feelings of being jilted, by mocking me. But when I refused to play along, you felt how empty you really were inside.”
Foss continued. “The problem is that Yukikaze is changing, whether you like it or not. When I said I hate you and don’t want to talk to you anymore, it felt like it was coming from Yukikaze. The reason for this must be that something similar happened between you and she. That’s why I asked you what it was. You don’t have to tell me, but then I want you to please stop using me as your emotional outlet. I’m an individual human being too, Captain Fukai. I’m not your lover, your best friend, your caregiver, your mommy, or your babysitter, and I’d like you to please stop mocking me. If I wasn’t a doctor, I’d tell you that you’re not the only human being and that you should try to be aware of how self-centered you are.”
“You have been telling me that,” Rei said. “I said this was a monologue.”


“Well, since you are a doctor, I’ll tell you this: You see me as a patient with psychological problems. You wouldn’t say what you did to most people, because there’s no need to. If you hate somebody, you can just stay away. So was everything you did planned from the start? Did you intentionally try to piss me oﬀ just to see what my reaction would be?”
“You’re letting your imagination run away with you,” Foss said. “You really don’t understand how to interact with people at all, do you?”
“Because your attitude is constantly changing on me.” “I haven’t changed one bit. Or maybe you’re asking me
to wear a little meter on my chest that’ll tell you when I’m angry or sad, in a good mood or a bad one.”
“That’d actually be a big help to me,” Rei said.
“Even if I did wear one, you wouldn’t look at it. Or maybe you would, but you wouldn’t understand it. That’s the sort of person you are. You should restrict your lovers’ quarrels to Yukikaze. She’s got plenty of meters for you to read.” And with that Captain Foss stalked oﬀ.
I think I’m the one being used as an emotional outlet here, Rei thought. More taken aback than shocked, he followed after her.
Still, he thought, I have to take my hat oﬀ to her powers of insight. Captain Foss had transferred into the SAF only a short time ago, but she already understood very well what Yukikaze meant to him. While Rei had been busy lately seeing what changes were going on in Yukikaze, this doctor had observed changes in him instead.
Feelings of being jilted was what Captain Foss had called it. In response to Yukikaze’s peculiar actions lately, he found himself feeling as though he’d been betrayed by his lover. Having the fact pointed out to him, he had no choice but to agree.


But Yukikaze wasn’t that sort of companion. Their relationship wasn’t the sweet one of lovers, and he could see that now. It was much harsher than that. Yukikaze would cast him away if he wasn’t able to provide what she asked of him. That wouldn’t lead to an emotion as sentimental as being jilted. Being cast aside by Yukikaze was a matter of whether or not his life had meaning.
Much as he didn’t want to talk about his feelings of abandonment, there was no denying that he did feel fear in his heart. Captain Foss had pointed out something like that to him.
Not understanding and then being abandoned. He hated that. No, there was a perfectly straightforward way he could express it.
“I…” Rei had stopped again. He turned his head to look back and murmured, “I’m afraid of Yukikaze.”
That was how he really felt, the true feelings he felt toward her that he hadn’t wanted to admit. Actually saying the words made him shiver.
He was being warned of a coming separation from the companion with whom he thought he’d shared a deep relationship. And Rei knew that the cause of his estrangement from Yukikaze was from some internal trait or deﬁciency of his.
Just as Captain Foss had pointed out, he didn’t know how to get along with other people. Even though it was so simple. Strangers are other people, and he and other people were all beings who lived in diﬀerent worlds, internal worlds. Rei would have been better oﬀ if he’d just acknowledged the truth. Real relationships started from there. Whether between enemies or lovers, it didn’t matter. In short, up till then, he’d never actually had a relationship with anybody. Not even with Yukikaze.
Major Booker had told him the same thing, but he hadn’t been able to acknowledge his true feelings before. He


hadn’t been able to admit that he was afraid of Yukikaze now. I’ve never really feared others, and so no one has ever feared me. That’s why others tell me, “I don’t want to talk to you anymore.”
The thing he needed to fear now was Yukikaze. After that, the JAM. Rei realized that he’d never really feared the enemy before. Talking with Captain Foss had allowed him to see that.
“It’s okay, Captain Fukai,” Captain Foss said, turning to face him. “You’ll be able to get control of Yukikaze. And even if you don’t, no one will blame you for it. You know Yukikaze better than anyone else.”
“I can’t even have an argument with her.”
“So keep close watch on those meters. Use her gauges to have your arguments. That’d suit you better, anyway.”
Rei considered her words.
“You’re right,” he said at last. “You’re absolutely right. You’re a hell of a doctor, Captain Foss.”
There was no need to do away with his fear. The eﬀort to eliminate his fear would be immense, because the problem here wasn’t that he shouldn’t ﬂy Yukikaze if he was afraid.
What he wanted to do was convey the truth of his fear of her to Yukikaze, and the only way to do that would be to read her gauges—and also read the data they didn’t reveal —and then act in accordance. If it worked, then Yukikaze might fear him the way he feared her. Or Yukikaze might possibly take action to indicate that she didn’t want him to fear her. At any rate, he could guess that she was going to ﬁght him. If he could prevent her from resisting his attempts to communicate, she would refuse to accept his control. They would, in eﬀect, be arguing. And any opponent you could argue with, you can negotiate with as well. He’d never taken his relationship with Yukikaze this far before. He didn’t


know if it would work. He didn’t even know if any of this was a good idea, but that was how these things went.
“Thank you, Captain Fukai,” said Captain Foss in response to Rei’s compliment about her skill as a doctor. The words were cold, and her expression didn’t look very thankful.
Well, what else could he expect? He’d said he didn’t like her without really understanding what it was he was saying. He doubted she’d be genuinely happy for his breakthrough. Still, to him, this doctor was like bitter medicine. Even if he didn’t like her, she was still necessary.
Thinking that, Rei said nothing else and headed oﬀ for the meeting. Major Booker, looking royally pissed, waved for them to hurry up.