2


SOMETHING WAS HAPPENING in the Systems Corps. What had Yukikaze found?
Aboard Yukikaze, Rei checked the main display and saw that she had activated the T-FACPro II software. Before he could ask his question, Captain Foss, in the rear seat, spoke.
“This is Captain Foss. Yukikaze, what do you mean the JAM are in the Systems Corps? On what basis are you making that claim? Answer me. What have you found there?”
Yukikaze’s response scrolled onto the display.
I cannot answer Captain Foss’s question without clearance from Captain Fukai.
“Yukikaze, I’m granting you clearance,” Rei said. “This is a vital ongoing mission to predict the JAM’s future behavior. Captain Foss is participating in it as well. Yukikaze, answer Captain Foss’s question.”
Roger.
The response came up on the display in natural human language.
The names of people conﬁrmed dead have shown up on the roster of the retraining unit that has been organized within the Systems Corps. Second Lieutenants Burgadish and Lancome.


“W-w-what?” Rei spit. “Lieutenant Burgadish? As in our Lieutenant Burgadish?”
Lieutenant Burgadish, former ﬂight oﬃcer of SAF Unit 3. I identiﬁed Lieutenant Lancome as an enemy and destroyed him. Persons with corresponding names are currently extant within the Systems Corps. I predict other persons who would not be expected to be alive are also within this unit. These people are not human. I have therefore judged them to be JAM. I also predict that they will be taking destructive action against the FAF in the near future.
“The people in the retraining unit must be JAM duplicates,” said Captain Foss. But Rei, still unable to believe it, sat staring at the display.
“Captain Fukai, what’s wrong? Captain. Rei! You shouldn’t be surprised by this. We anticipated it.”
“Even if we did…” Rei muttered. “I ate Lieutenant Burgadish’s ﬂesh. And this guy, Lieutenant Lancome… Yukikaze killed him. I ordered her to do it.”
Foss sees this all as a game, Rei thought. Like it was nothing but a big chessboard. This doctor had no real feelings for the two dead men. But to him, they were a reality that held a palpable sense of dread. Lieutenant Burgadish and Lieutenant Lancome…?
Rei unconsciously shivered. If those two were there, then they were duplicates. They had to be. They couldn’t be ghosts. So why am I so terriﬁed? he wondered. What do I have to be scared of?
“The JAM have the ability to bring back the dead,” Rei muttered, then nodded at his own words. “That’s right. That’s what being able to duplicate people is. You could also call these duplicates the living dead.” That was even more frightening than a ghost, and if there was anything that had power over every human being, it was fear.
Yukikaze’s reply continued.


The names of Lieutenant Burgadish and Lieutenant Lancome and their personal histories have been entered into the Systems Corps personnel management computer as members of the new unit. I can verify that there are human bodies that correspond to those names. I can’t conﬁrm if these bodies have the same identities as the men who once shared their names, but that conﬁrmation will not be necessary when an attack is made on this unit.
“Why, Yukikaze? Why do you say that conﬁrmation is unnecessary?”
It is enough to verify the existence of the men with these names. I have made the veriﬁcation. This is a declaration of war against the FAF by the JAM.
“What…?”
“Yukikaze, you received a message to that eﬀect from the JAM while you were inside of the mysterious battle zone, didn’t you?” Captain Foss asked. “The JAM told you of their strategy against the FAF on your last mission, didn’t they? Answer.”
I recall receiving a message from the JAM that they were preparing a declaration of war. We are preparing a declaration of war in a way which only the SAF will understand. Pay attention to the humans within the FAF, it said. I judge that this situation denotes that declaration. Attack the new unit, Captain Fukai. Not one of them can be allowed to escape. Destroy them all. That is all.
“Let’s tell General Cooley,” said Captain Foss. “Yukikaze’s right. We have to hit this new unit before they can hit us.”
Rei didn’t answer.
“Captain Fukai, what’s wrong? There’s nothing to consider here. This unit is just a collection of duplicates.”


“Assuming it is…then that means there’s somebody in Systems Corps who did this intentionally to tip us oﬀ.”
“It was Colonel Rombert. He was in charge of personnel selection, so—”
“But we can’t conclude for certain that Lieutenants Burgadish and Lancome are JAM duplicates.”
“Why not?”
“Because Colonel Rombert may have assigned new names to the people who came to be in the new unit. In other words, he may be using the names of other people as code names, and the real names of the people in the unit may be entirely diﬀerent. We need veriﬁcation. Besides, I don’t buy this attitude from Yukikaze that we have to attack without veriﬁcation. She’s basically telling me to kill indiscriminately, without determining who’s a friend and who’s an enemy. I think…I think she may have been brainwashed by the JAM.”
“What are you saying?”
“Yukikaze has never been concerned about humans. I know that for a fact, Edith. This sort of behavior is abnormal for her. She’s scared of the names of these dead men, and I think the JAM may have psychologically conditioned her to be that way.”
“You’re being ridiculous.”
Rei accessed Yukikaze’s central data storage bank, searching for the original data to which Yukikaze had referred as the JAM’s declaration of war. But there was nothing speciﬁc to indicate the content of the message. Captain Foss also veriﬁed this fact.
“The JAM must have made Yukikaze hallucinate as well,” Captain Foss surmised. “I can hardly believe it, even if I did anticipate it.”
“It wasn’t a hallucination. It probably happened,” Rei replied. “The data may not still be there, but when she


considers her experiences in the mysterious battle zone, Yukikaze knows that the JAM would issue their declaration of war in this manner. She understands the JAM threat but has no concrete data to back it up. That’s what’s got her so scared.”
“I’ll have to take your word for it that she’s exhibiting fear. But if you say that she’s acting abnormally, then I trust you on that. So what do we do?”
“Something exists which shouldn’t. That’s scary, and there’s only one way to deal with it.”
“How?”
“We acknowledge their declaration of war and attack. That’ll be the only way to stabilize Yukikaze’s psyche. If they’re not supposed to exist, we’ll make them no longer exist…by erasing all data relating to these ghosts.”
“What?”
“Yukikaze, our mission action will be to erase all data in the Systems Corps’ personnel management computer relating to the members of the retraining unit,” Rei said, now talking to the plane. “This emergency mission action will be an electronic warfare attack against the JAM. Prepare to engage. Captain Foss, monitor the electronic attack. Yukikaze, initiate electronic warfare.”
“Wait, stop! Yukikaze, wait!” Foss said. “You can’t just delete data at random.”
“Don’t try to stop this, Captain Foss.”
“You’re the one who’s scared here. Calm down, Captain Fukai,” Captain Foss said. “I understand that you want Yukikaze back to normal, but you can’t rush into this. You’ll be deleting data that could be extremely valuable to the SAF. Even Yukikaze wouldn’t consent to that. There’s a procedure for this. You and Yukikaze are both upset. Surely you see that. Let me handle this.”
“Is that an order?”


“Yes. Yes, it is.”
Rei paused a moment before answering.
“All right, Doctor. Yukikaze, follow Captain Foss’s instructions.”
Roger, Captain Fukai.
“Yukikaze, this is Captain Foss. Tell me about the nature of the data you’ve targeted for attack. There’s no need for you to access it again at this time. What I’m asking is, in your reading of that data, on what basis have you judged that the people in that unit are JAM rather than human and that they should be wiped out? Answer me.”
The data targeted for attack relate to the members of the retraining unit. Full names, ranks, original unit assignments, and sortie records have been recorded, but the details have been changed after certain missions. In the case of Lieutenants Lancome and Burgadish, the fact of their disappearances and deaths in combat are no longer in the record. Instead, past those points, it has been recorded that they have been performing normal duties. This clearly contradicts reality. Therefore, they are not human. If they are not human, I predict that they are JAM. That is all.
“But that’s strange, wouldn’t you say?” Foss said. “Think about it, Yukikaze. The two men you believe are JAM may simply be other FAF personnel who have just assumed their names. Why didn’t you consider that? What’s the reason? Do you understand the meaning of my question, Yukikaze? What is your basis for your absolute belief that those two men are not human?”
The number of all humans currently extant in the FAF compared to computer records of the number of survivors is over by two. In other words, these two people are not FAF humans. On the other hand, it is impossible that the persons now claiming to be


Lieutenants Burgadish and Lancome have survived their deaths and continued to perform their duties. From this fact, I have concluded that these two men represent the numeric discrepancy previously mentioned.
“Yukikaze, are you saying that you have counted the tens of thousands of human beings on the planet Faery? Every person living, breathing, sleeping, and ﬁghting?”
I have.
“Might not the data be in error? I’m asking you that, Yukikaze. Respond.”
The data related to management of all humans extant in the FAF is not only stored in the personnel management computers of the units each person is attached to. It is also stored in the memories of several other devices, including FAF facility access control computers and the FAF soldier registration bank. I cross-checked them to verify any errors in their records, but could not ﬁnd any. There are no errors in the original data. That is all.
“This deﬁnitely isn’t the work of a human,” Rei said. “It shows all the hallmarks of a computer’s doing.”
“Amazing… For Yukikaze, so long as that target data about the Systems Corps exists, her only explanation for those two extra men is that they’re JAM. Even if the count is wrong.”
“Making the number of humans match up really isn’t what Yukikaze’s concerned about here.”
“I agree. I’m deﬁnitely getting the feeling that she’s been manipulated into acting this way by the JAM. It isn’t so much a question of logic, but rather of her intuition. I think she’s trying as hard as possible to logically rectify the existence of something that shouldn’t exist.”
“Which is what I believe I said at the start, Edith.”


“Yeah…if the original data were consistent with the target data, then Yukikaze wouldn’t have tried to match the numbers up,” Foss said. “This is all caused by the names of the dead men also being registered in Systems Corps’ computers as deceased. The Systems Corps probably hasn’t even considered that two of its people have the same names as two dead men. Still, the discrepancy would be revealed as soon as they conﬁrmed that Lieutenant Burgadish and Lieutenant Lancome are dead.”
“There probably isn’t anyone in Systems Corps who would know either of them. Well, that’s to be expected. Those guys are the elite. I doubt they’d know anyone who served on the front lines.”
“In other words, the only people who’d realize what was going on just by looking at the names would be us—you and Yukikaze and the SAF.”
“Here at Faery base, at any rate. The JAM acknowledged that by sending those two in to be the surplus,” Rei said.
“Only one man could have arranged this. The only one who could modify data without alerting the computers there or arousing the suspicions of the humans in Systems Corps would be the retraining unit’s true supervisor, Colonel Rombert. He has to be a JAM.”
“Not necessarily.” “Even after all this?”
“You heard Major Booker before, didn’t you? There are those who may not be JAM but who would still use them to destroy the FAF. He might even be acting as an agent for some government agency aiming for total global supremacy,” Rei said.
“That’s impossible. The JAM are the enemies of all humanity.”
“I don’t think the JAM would agree with you. They know by now that human beings are life-forms that would do exactly that sort of thing. They intend to use that aspect of


human nature to make the FAF destroy itself from within. Right now, the JAM have positioned the retraining unit as their vanguard, and they’ve used Yukikaze as their messenger to deliver their proclamation as they launch their ﬁnal attack on the FAF. It really is a declaration of war. If we keep quiet, the FAF authorities won’t know about it for a while.”
“So the JAM tell us and then sit back to see what moves we make?”
“The battle’s beginning. Or, actually, it’s been going on for a while now. The JAM don’t rest,” Rei said. “By neutralizing Yukikaze, they’ve robbed the SAF of a part of its military might. Putting her into this state is a tactical attack by the JAM. It’s like they’ve hypnotized her and gotten her so paranoid and worried about ghosts that she can’t think of anything else. I doubt she could even ﬂy a combat mission now. Unless we snap her out of this, we’re going to lose.”
Captain Foss considered who Rei meant would lose in this. Yukikaze would lose, and that would also be a loss for Captain Fukai, she thought. They really were one and the same now. This new species of composite life-form was also a part of the combat machine that made up the SAF. And as far as the SAF was concerned, the FAF’s fate wasn’t their problem. Their primary concern remained their own personal survival.
This unit I joined really is nothing but trouble, Captain Foss thought. If they took the action Captain Fukai had suggested to return Yukikaze to normal and launched an electronic attack to delete the target data from the Systems Corps’ computer without authorization, it would be a clear violation of FAF military regulations. That kind of arbitrary action wouldn’t be tolerated. She had to stop this; that was all there was to it.
But what then, Edith Foss asked herself, as Captain Fukai might have. Was she so convinced that she was willing


to die in battle for it? That’s right, she thought. Right now, this is about my own life or death. Which was more likely to guarantee her survival, either taking the side of the FAF as a soldier or believing in the SAF’s might and supporting Yukikaze and Captain Fukai as his physician? Which position would let her accept the consequences if the choice proved to be wrong?
Captain Fukai and the others in the SAF don’t trouble themselves over these matters because they just aren’t normal. But I am, thought Captain Foss. And that was when it hit her.
She’d never win against the JAM by thinking of herself as a normal human. Hadn’t she been the one who’d said that the way for them to win was to become that new species of composite life-form? She didn’t want to have to die to conﬁrm her prediction, which was another way of saying that she’d be satisﬁed if she could accomplish that feat of evolution herself. There was nothing for her to agonize over here. If she wanted to live, then she should become one with the SAF. That way she would ﬁnally know if she were right.
“We can’t lose,” Captain Foss said. “I don’t want to lose either.”
“Then I’m issuing the order to attack,” said Rei. “I’ll have Yukikaze engage them.”
“No, you mustn’t,” said Captain Foss. “Why not?”
“We need time. Yukikaze isn’t at full strength now. She still needs to have her engine replaced and repairs and maintenance done.”
“I suppose, but—”
“Captain Fukai, if you attack the retraining unit now, I predict that they will immediately initiate destructive action. If we don’t have some sort of plan to counter them, then Yukikaze could end up being destroyed.”


“Then what are you saying we should do?”
“I think the saying that a sound mind requires a sound body applies to Yukikaze now. Part of Yukikaze’s unease may be due to her physical damage. Captain Fukai, you should give top priority to Yukikaze’s repairs, then attack only once you have permission from General Cooley. We have to come up with a plan that will allow the entire SAF to survive.”
“Edith, to Yukikaze, inconsistencies in data are a real threat. We humans may think of it as some sort of illusory code, but she sees leaving it unrectiﬁed as the literal potential for her own destruction. If we don’t deal with it soon—”
“I understand that. I understand it better than you do, even without your telling me.”
“Oh, like you understand anything about Yukikaze,” Rei said.
“You’re the only one who can calm her down. If you’re too hasty and make a mistake in dealing with her, there’s a risk that she’ll go wild. No human would be able to control her then. You have to look ahead. Attacking now would be reckless. The JAM want you to be preoccupied with Yukikaze’s condition. If we go rushing into this, it’ll be game over very quickly. The end, full stop. We can’t let that happen.”
“Stopping the game on doctor’s orders, huh?” Rei said. “But will Yukikaze go along with it?”
“As a human, all I want is to avoid losing. You and Yukikaze both need some time to cool oﬀ and collect your thoughts. Make it an order, Captain Fukai. You’re the only one who can persuade her.”
Rei hadn’t realized how rashly he’d been acting. But, he thought, maybe what Edith is saying is correct, and the JAM are trying to keep me too wrapped up with Yukikaze to see that.


And it was true that they’d be at a disadvantage if they launched an attack now. The only way they’d be able to go up against the JAM would be to utilize the full military might of the SAF. The SAF tactical computers could handle the deletion of the target data. They should use the SAF. They could just have Yukikaze conﬁrm that the ghosts were gone without putting any undue stress on her.
“Yukikaze, maintain combat readiness,” Rei ordered. He knew that she probably wouldn’t accept an outright cancellation of the attack. She’d never understand him if he told her, “You’re acting weird and need some rest.”
“Then contact the maintenance team and have them eﬀect repairs on your airframe,” he continued. “I’m going to deplane in the meantime and try to use the tactical computer in SAF headquarters to attack the target data. Respond when I call you. If you require me, contact me via the tactical computer. That is all.”
Roger, Captain Fukai.
After ﬂashing the message onto the main display, Yukikaze shut down the T-FACPro II software herself. The program apparently placed too much of an additional burden on her resources and interfered with combat. That was probably it. And, thinking about how Yukikaze still trusted him, Rei climbed down from the cockpit.