II


A SOLDIER’S LEAVE


OceanofPDF.com
















REI FUKAI WANTED a trip back to Earth, and he was going to do something about it.
From the time he was rescued in his immobile vegetative state till the moment he was awakened aboard Yukikaze, he had been trapped in a nightmare space, consumed at the thought of meeting those human copies created by the JAM. What he obsessed over in particular was the taste of the chicken broth he’d been forced to eat. It held the taste of Yukikaze’s ﬂight oﬃcer, Lieutenant Burgadish.
Waiting for Rei upon awakening was a detailed debrieﬁng to collect all of the information he’d gathered on his mission. This wasn’t just conducted by the SAF. Rei had to tell the same story over and over and over to the other air corps and even the FAF Intelligence Forces.
Of most vital concern to the FAF was Rei’s claim that the JAM were able to produce copies of human beings. SAF analysis had concluded that there was at least a possibility that the JAM had perfected the creation of human duplicates with which they had successfully inﬁltrated the FAF.
The top levels of the FAF had to investigate the possibility that Rei and the SAF itself were now contaminated by the JAM. They also had to consider the possibility that the JAM were manipulating Rei and the SAF in order to lead the Faery Air Force down the wrong strategic path.
Rei didn’t particularly care if the others accepted his personal experiences. Even though he knew well the threat posed by the mysterious alien JAM, he couldn’t recall feeling fear during his encounter with them. In that way, he was similar to the combat intelligences which existed within the


FAF’s countless computers, but it was only after the experience that Rei’s true feelings began to make themselves known. What he was feeling and the changes he was seeing in himself became a matter of serious concern.
He was faced with questions: What he was doing on Faery in the ﬁrst place? Did Yukikaze’s abandonment of him mean that he had no value or worth? Rei wondered if maybe he’d lingered in his coma for so long in order to avoid returning to reality and facing the questions his experiences had raised. He’d dealt with one of them while confronting the threat to Yukikaze in her new body, the power of that moment stimulating him back to consciousness. In that instant, he knew for certain that Yukikaze needed him.
Awakened by his experiences, he didn’t want to go back to the way he’d been. Rei had begun to feel closer to the JAM.
What were the JAM? How did the JAM view him? He used to be able to forget those questions when he ﬂew with Yukikaze, but after encountering JAM weapons that looked human, and having a taste of Lieutenant Burgadish, he couldn’t just ignore his questions anymore.
The JAM’s human duplicates are not a new strategy they adopted suddenly or recently, Rei thought. They’ve been preparing this for a long, long time, perhaps starting work on it immediately after their initial attack on Earth.
Human existence must have seemed a strange thing to them. Doubtless, the JAM perceived it as something they couldn’t understand, wondering why these things called “humans” were always riding around in the Faery Air Force’s planes. As far as the JAM were concerned, their enemy was the planes of the FAF, not the humans. They recognized the combat machines of Earth as their opponents, not the blobs of organic matter inside them. If the combat machines and computers of Earth were the main adversaries, then the


humans were weapons they were equipped with, like computers or missiles.
He could see them now, the JAM desperately analyzing their data, searching for the reason for why the enemy planes were always equipped with organic human matter. It had taken them some time, but it was possible that they now saw the humans as some sort of organic computer that supported the actions of the combat intelligence. At any rate, having realized they could no longer ignore these things, the JAM had likely been devising a countermeasure for them since early in the war. They’d undoubtedly concluded that, since these weapons called humans could move around autonomously, they would create a weapon just like it. Perhaps they’d been deployed for some unimaginable purpose or strategy, but the simple fact was that the JAM were making human copies.
They might have been indistinguishable from humans, possessing will and even emotions, but in the end they were weapons. There could be no other purpose for the JAM to make them, that much was certain. They were organic weapons created by an inorganic alien intelligence that might not even be properly termed a life-form. It was exactly the same idea as when humans created their combat machines.
He wondered how these human copies felt, these men and, possibly, women. An SAF investigation had concluded that there was an extremely high probability that the man called Lieutenant Yagashira, who had taken up a post in the SAF, had been a weapon created by the JAM. The original Lieutenant Yagashira had been killed in action during a mission with his previous squadron, and the JAM had created a weapon based on his body and then deployed it to inﬁltrate SAF forces. The same went for Lieutenant Lancome, who had been killed at TAB-15 by Yukikaze’s gun. However, the SAF couldn’t prove this conclusively, and so


the FAF couldn’t accept their conclusion oﬃcially. It was being handled as a top secret matter for their squadron alone.
Despite his vegetative state, Rei had a hazy memory of Major Booker bringing Lieutenant Yagashira to visit him in the hospital. He’d said that he wanted to be a top-class Sylphid pilot, just like Rei. He’d said that he wanted to be his friend. He was a JAM weapon, and yet he’d said that.
Rei had never thought of himself as a consumable weapon in this war. He’d never been particularly concerned with whom or for what he was ﬁghting either. But now, when he thought about the weapons the JAM were making, he couldn’t help but think that he was just like them. A weapon was only concerned with its own eﬀectiveness. If it started to wonder for whom it was being eﬀective, its eﬀectiveness would decrease. Since Rei never thought about things like that as he grew to become the best soldier there was, it meant that when a JAM weapon said, “I want to be like you,” it was telling him that he was more like a weapon than a JAM weapon.
No wonder the JAM perceived him as a threat.
He didn’t know if Lieutenant Yagashira was conscious of having been made by the JAM. It was possible that, even if he did, his sense of identity as a human grew stronger than his identity as a weapon, preventing him from exhibiting his true eﬀectiveness as such. Perhaps Yagashira had said he wanted to be like him because, despite his being human, he recognized Rei as being a far superior weapon. If that were true, it also meant that Yagashira had been a far better
human being than Rei was. Far better than a man who didn’t care if he was a human or a weapon. And if he was a perfect human, Rei thought, then I must be a perfect combat machine. That was totally the opposite of the way it should have been.


When Rei had targeted Yagashira’s plane and ﬁred his missiles from the cockpit of the new Yukikaze, he had hesitated for a moment, even though there was no doubt at all that he was shooting at a JAM. Why was that? Was it because he had sensed in Yagashira someone who could have understood him?
The thing he didn’t understand, the thing he now feared, wasn’t the JAM. It was himself. He wanted to take a hard look at the changes he was seeing in his heart. He would return to Earth, the planet that had borne him.
Rei told his only friend and commanding oﬃcer Major James Booker exactly how he felt, and the major simply replied that it was a good idea. They were in the SAF hangar bay.
The thirteen ﬁghters were lined up, with Yukikaze in the space for Unit 1. The old Yukikaze had been Unit 3.
“It’ll make you more human,” Major Booker said. “You’ve awakened. Yukikaze has been reborn also, into an even more powerful body. She’s Unit 1 in name and reality. The same should go for you as well.”
Her ﬁghter number had been overwritten with 05031. Yukikaze was now the fourth plane to hold the position of Unit 1.
“I don’t think I want to be reborn,” Rei answered. “You’ve taken a shock to your mind and body,” the
major said. “A change of environment will do wonders for you. The SAF’s also replacing its planes. We’re working over the plan we’d suspended before. The plan is to gradually introduce the FRX00, although the Systems Corps is still convinced the FRX99 is better.”
“Why aren’t you accepting the unmanned planes?” “Because humans are necessary in this war,” the major
answered. “The pilots of the SAF are eﬀective counters to the JAM’s strategies.”


“Humans acting as combat machines, you mean.”
“Not quite. Humans are diﬀerent from machines. The JAM see that as a threat.”
“Jack, what I’m trying to say is—”
“I know, Rei. I know what sort of damage you’ve taken in all this. The way you are now, you can’t ﬂy. You need leave. God knows, you deserve some, even if the authorities won’t authorize a return to Earth for you.”
“You’re saying I won’t get to go back?”
“The Faery Air Force doesn’t want you wandering free. You’re a great pilot and they need you, but they’re also terriﬁed that you might be a JAM.”
“That’s ridiculous,” Rei said.
“The nature of the SAF’s mission means that you constantly see those sorts of contradictory sentiments. That’s always been the case.”
“If I were a JAM, I wouldn’t tell you that the JAM were making human duplicates, would I?”
“That’s a good question,” Booker said. “Maybe the JAM’s objective is to drive a wedge between the humans and the machines of the FAF. Maybe they revealed this to you on purpose.”
“Well, JAM or not, I’ve already done the damage, then.”
“True, but nonetheless, there’s no evidence that you aren’t a JAM agent. That’s why the authorities want to keep you under close observation. Come on, you know how hard it is to get authorization to return to Earth. Besides that, there’s never been any instance in the SAF’s history of somebody asking for leave. This unit is full of people who have no interest in visiting Earth or their hometowns. The only people who go back are ones who retire or get drummed out of the service.”
“So if I want to go back to Earth, I have to retire?”


“Well, good news for you, then,” Booker replied. “Your term of service in the Faery Air Force is almost up. In four days. You can renew your contract instead of retiring, of course. According to the terms of renewal, you can request a promotion to the rank of captain. If you say you’re going to retire, the authorities may try to keep you here by oﬀering you a special two-rank advancement. That’s a typical bargaining tactic they use.”
“I don’t care about rank. It doesn’t mean anything here, anyway,” Rei said.
“I don’t know about that,” Booker said. “If you get to be a ﬁeld oﬃcer, you can start meddling with personnel aﬀairs and make yourself a big man in some other squadron.”
“Yeah, and get buried in a ton of miscellaneous crap.” “Being a captain might be the best position for you, but
someone with higher rank can still get in your way. The smart move would be to leave when you get the chance.”
“I have Yukikaze here. I’m not going to retire.”
“Figured you’d say that,” the major said with a nod. “I’ll talk to the higher-ups and try to negotiate a temporary leave for you. You’re going to come back here, no matter what, because Yukikaze’s here.”
Rei looked up at Yukikaze, his face expressionless.
Her airframe carried an air of menace. She was a modiﬁed FRX99, a plane developed as an unmanned ﬁghter.
Compared to the Super Sylphs on either side of her, there was no softness to the design at all. They at least show some touches that reﬂect human aesthetics, but Yukikaze’s new airframe engenders a sense of complete strangeness, Rei thought. She had that beauty born of the total eﬃciency an advanced weapon needs, but the airframe looked threatening, and one could sense a sort of spooky atmosphere around her. In the gloomy light of the hangar, Rei suddenly realized why. Yukikaze was black, just like a


JAM ﬁghter. It wasn’t just his imagination. She was shaped like one too.
“She…she looks like a JAM ﬁghter.”
“Because they borrowed the good points of their planes in the design,” Booker explained. “I realized that too. When you just come out and say it, it sounds awful, huh? The JAM planes don’t have cockpits, but we added that onto this design. It’s built to be piloted by humans, but it was designed to be unmanned. She can pull maneuvers that can kill her crew.”
Yukikaze was no longer the FRX00 prototype. As their new tactical combat electronic surveillance plane, she’d been given an oﬃcial name: the FFR41, nicknamed “Maeve” after the goddess who ruled the wind fairies.
“A pretty wild goddess, this one. It’d be dangerous to piss her oﬀ. Even on a Super Sylph, it’s the human pilot who chooses to ﬂy it. This one leaves that all behind. Not just any person can ﬂy her. You’re necessary, Rei. Make sure you come back here, because I don’t want to lose you either.”
Rei silently stroked Yukikaze’s fuselage. Her body felt warm.
While Rei had been making the rounds to his various debrieﬁngs, Yukikaze had ﬂown a mission unmanned, one determined to be simple as far as SAF operations went and not a problem for a pilotless plane. Major Booker had thought it was dangerous to have Yukikaze fully exhibit her new abilities without Rei in the cockpit. The likelihood was steadily increasing that she could behave in wholly unexpected ways while in ﬂight, and they’d need a crewman aboard to ﬁnd out why. Moreover, Rei would probably be the only one who could completely understand her, and Rei knew that perfectly well. Even so, he wanted to leave the battleﬁeld, to leave Yukikaze, and try to ﬁnd himself.
“Make the arrangements for me to go back to Earth,” Rei said. “I’m counting on you, Jack.”


“Gotcha,” the major answered, and said nothing more.






AS MAJOR BOOKER had expected, the Faery Air Force authorities didn’t okay Rei’s leaving. The FAF didn’t want him to retire, the major told Rei, who’d been waiting for Booker’s return in the major’s oﬃce. And even if he reenlisted, he went on, they’d probably delay his request for temporary leave with the review process. It’d be a minimum of a month’s wait.
“And if we spent a month arguing it, they probably still wouldn’t grant my request, would they?” Rei answered.
“That’s correct, Lieutenant Fukai,” said the man Rei had never seen before.
“Rei, let me introduce you. This is Mr. Chang Pollack, international attorney. He’s here to help us.”
“A lawyer,” Rei replied. “So essentially I’m still a criminal. I’d actually forgotten that I agreed to come here instead of serving time in a Japanese prison.”
“That’s only until you retire from the Faery Air Force,” Pollack said. “You already agreed once before to extend your service here and became a second lieutenant as a result. The moment you did that, you gave up your right to be discharged. That’s why you’re not just being automatically discharged this time around. In order to retire from service, you’ll need to make a formal request. If you choose to extend your contract, your situation won’t change. You were handed down an indeﬁnite sentence, after all.”
Since Rei had never thought of returning to Earth until now, he’d never considered the diﬀerence between discharge and retirement.
“In this case,” the lawyer continued, “I’d recommend applying for retirement. You haven’t given up that right. Even though the FAF can try and pressure you to abandon the case, they have no right to just quash a request for it. If


you do that, you’ll be free of them. As far as the nation of Japan is concerned, you’ll have fulﬁlled your debt to society. You’ll be a free citizen once again, with all of your rights restored, including the right to receive help from your government.”
“I think that’s a good deal,” Major Booker said. “When you get back, you can do whatever you want. People who choose to enlist here are automatically given the rank of second lieutenant. In your case, you’d probably make captain.”
“I don’t like it,” Rei said. “What?” Pollack asked.
“Any of it,” Rei said. “I’m a human being, and I want to return to Earth as a regular human. I couldn’t care less about organizations or some country called Japan.”
“Even so—”
“I understand how you feel,” the major said, cutting in. “But the reality of the situation is that you aren’t just a single, independent human being. You have to make a choice. If you get leave as an FAF soldier, you’ll be bound by military regulations. They’ll control where you can go and who you can see.”
“They’ll be spying on me?”
“On the other hand, you’ll have the FAF as a powerful ally, backing you up. It’s not all bad. Nobody would be able to lay a ﬁnger on you, even if you had an entire nation as your enemy. Although the same could be said if you became a civilian. If you retired and the FAF still tried to control you, you could request that the Japanese government assist you.”
“I can’t depend on anyone there,” Rei protested.
“You’ve got me,” Pollack said. “I work to protect the rights of people like you.”


“Would the JAM say something like that?” Rei asked. “Only humans talk about things like ‘rights.’ The JAM don’t play that game. They’re my enemy, and the only person I can depend on in ﬁghting them is myself, except now, I… Dammit, I don’t want to die at their hands the way I am now!”
“Lieutenant Rei Fukai, apply for retirement,” Major Booker said ﬁrmly. “Then go and get your head together. This isn’t a problem you can solve by yourself. Having you dicking around here being unsure of everything is just going to make my life diﬃcult. I don’t care how you settle it, just settle it.”
“Just sign these papers,” said Pollack, holding out a pen. Rei took it and signed several pages.
“Good,” said Major Booker with a nod. “This is the only way you can go back. Once you sign these, no matter what the FAF brass says, in three days, you’ll be free. Assuming you live that long.”
“You’re saying they’ll try and kill me?”
“It’s possible,” Booker said. “There’ve already been moves to get you away from the SAF. Our organization is big enough that I think we can protect you for three days. General Cooley doesn’t want to lose you either, and she’s been ﬁghting it too.”
“If you should be killed, your signature is still valid,” Pollack said. “Your honor will be protected. I’ll take care of those for you.”
“I’m not giving these papers to you,” Rei said.
“Major Booker is still a member of the SAF, Lieutenant. You can’t be certain that he won’t rewrite them or try something else. I don’t trust him. You’ll have to trust me.”
“I said I’m not giving these papers to anyone else. I’m going to walk them over to the administration oﬃce and hand them in myself.”


“Have it your way,” Pollack said with a shrug. He left the oﬃce, not looking particularly disappointed.
“Is he trustworthy, Jack?”
“For what he’s charging, he’d better be. I took it out of your future pay, so you’ll need to work oﬀ that debt. Just leave the legal wrangling to him.”
“I don’t trust him.”
“You just have to trust him for now,” Booker said.
“No, it’s not that. It was the way he walked around unarmed, like he thinks he has some right not to get killed here. That’s just a delusion.”
“A shared delusion. Pollack operates within the delusion of what Earth society calls common sense. That doesn’t apply here. Not in the FAF or on Faery. Especially to us in the SAF, with the JAM constantly at our throats, the kind of conﬁdence that man has would naturally seem bizarre. Talking to him makes me feel like we live in entirely diﬀerent dimensions. He walks in the world of Earthly common sense.”
“Earthly common sense,” Rei pondered. “I never was very familiar with that.”
“I know what you mean. It’s the same for me. If you go back to Earth, it’ll probably be even stranger to you. There were always people who said that the JAM invasion was some giant hoax, but now there are apparently a lot of people who don’t even believe they exist. The number of people who aren’t conscious of the fact that the JAM threat is real is growing, and to them the war on Faery is just ﬁction. Everything that happens on this planet is becoming ﬁctional.”
“Fiction. Like a fairy tale.”
“Exactly. We and the JAM are just characters in a story. If this collective delusion continues to hold sway, it’s possible that humanity wouldn’t understand what was happening if


the JAM broke through the Faery defense line and invaded Earth. If it gets to where we can’t recognize the JAM anymore, will ﬁghters and combat intelligences like Yukikaze who are ﬁghting against the JAM even recognize them as the enemies of humanity? Maybe we wouldn’t be able to tell what the real threat was without Yukikaze ﬂying overhead to keep an eye out for it.”
“The ones suﬀering from that delusion are happy to get killed oﬀ without ever sensing a threat or feeling fear,” Rei said, carefully folding the documents he held. “It makes things easier for the JAM, doesn’t it? If the JAM are making those human duplicates with the thought of using them as anti-personnel weapons, their strategy is wrong.”
“I doubt that’s what the JAM have in mind. For now, they’ve only made a small number of duplicates exclusively for gathering intelligence. I think they’re using them in the same way that we use Yukikaze. They’d need to mass-produce them if they were to be used as anti-personnel weapons, and it would require a lot of resources to maintain a squad. Just producing food for them would be a huge problem. I doubt they’d adopt such an ineﬃcient strategy. If the JAM are creating human copies, it means they’ve studied the human body thoroughly. If they know enough to make a human body, it stands to reason that they could easily engineer a virus to wipe us out. It’d be child’s play to spread—an autonomous, infectious, self-propagating micro-weapon. That would be the most eﬃcient way to kill us.
“Maybe they haven’t perfected it,” Booker continued, “or they don’t want to for some reason, but the fact remains that we don’t know what the JAM are after. We may never be able to communicate with them. We operate under the assumption that, given enough eﬀort, a means to understanding an opponent with a rational mind can be found, but that may simply be a human delusion. I think it’s


a conceited notion. We humans don’t really know what Yukikaze and the FAF computers think, and we made them.”
“The same goes for strangers. We make enemies of other people.”
“True understanding may be impossible,” the major said, “but we can believe. Humans have that capacity.”
“I believe in you,” Rei said, slipping the folded papers into his pocket. “And in Yukikaze. And in the JAM as well.”
“Then why are you so eager to return to Earth? Do you even know, Rei?” The question was so unexpected that Rei was ﬂummoxed. He just looked at his old friend for a long moment, wondering if his silence was proof that he really didn’t know.
“I think I know why,” the major said at last. “I understand, because I get the same feeling a lot.”
“What do you mean?”
“You want to see for yourself that Earth still exists, don’t you?”
“What?”
“You should go. You’re free now. Nobody can tell you what to do. I’ll wait for a week after your retirement is ﬁnalized. If I don’t hear from you in ten days, I’ll reorganize the SAF without you.”
“I understand.”
“That is all, Lieutenant Fukai.” “Roger, Major.”
Rei straightened up and saluted. Major Booker sat up in his seat and returned the salute with a casual wave, like he always did. It was an attitude that said that, true to their nickname, a Boomerang soldier would return without fail. If
the boomerang hit its target, he would go out to recover it. That was Major Booker’s role to play. It’s thanks to him that I was rescued, Rei thought. From one viewpoint, Booker was just doing his duty, but from another, it was conﬁrmation


that the major didn’t simply see Rei as a weapon. Had it not been for his faith in his friend, Rei wouldn’t have wanted to return from the void in which he’d been trapped.
“I appreciate everything you’ve done for me,” Rei said as he lowered his hand. “I’d better get to the administration oﬃce.”
“I’d hate to see you not come back to the SAF, but you do what you have to do,” the major replied. “This is a gamble I’m taking, Rei. Drastic action. It’s the only thing I can oﬀer you so that you’ll be a soldier again. There’s a chance I’m going to lose this bet.”
“I don’t want to think about what’s going to happen,” Rei said.
“Since you’re going back to an Earth you don’t really know anymore, anything could happen. I’d feel better if you had a navigator to help you out. I contacted Lynn Jackson and made a private request. That was me acting as an individual, not as a major asking a favor.”
“Lynn Jackson, huh?”
“The FAF Intelligence Forces are probably already moving and may refuse, but that has nothing to do with me. Lynn Jackson is a ﬁrst-rate journalist. She’ll keep you out of trouble.”
“It sounds like Earth is more dangerous than the JAM.” “In your naively fragile state, it deﬁnitely is. I’m praying
you don’t have a total nervous breakdown there.”
As Rei turned to leave, Major Booker wished him luck. Rei left his friend’s oﬃce without another word.






THREE DAYS LATER, Rei was safely retired from service. The process had been complicated and mysterious, but apparently Chang Pollack had earned his hefty fee, sparing Rei from having to deal with any annoying contingencies. Once his conﬁscated Japanese passport was returned to


him, it was all over. Rei Fukai was no longer a soldier in the Faery Air Force. He was a civilian, with all debts to society paid.
Just as he had when he’d ﬁrst arrived at base, Rei walked through the tunnel which connected the surface to the underground, though this time he was going up instead of down. Carrying only his jacket and a Boston bag he owned, Rei headed for the exit. As he neared it, the outside light growing brighter, Rei felt as if he were awakening from a dream.
No one was there to see him oﬀ. There were about twenty other people who, like him, were making the trip back to Earth, along with four others still in uniform, going back on temporary leave. The guys in uniform were mainly jovial, but the expressions of ex-servicemen varied, sullen frowns outnumbering smiles considerably.
Emerging from the tunnel, Rei looked up into the light of Faery’s twin suns.
A huge eddy of gas jetted out from one side of the binary stars, forming a reddish belt that resembled the Milky Way. The Bloody Road, as it was called, was more diﬀuse
than when seen from a plane at high altitude. Normally, it wasn’t visible from the ground at noontime. Perhaps, Rei thought, ﬁnding yourself forced to see something that you normally wouldn’t is the essential nature of homesickness. A formation of FAF tactical ﬁghters crossed the sky overhead. Opposite them stood a huge, white pillar of clouds—the Passageway that connected Earth and Faery. Rei thought the scene looked like some sort of painting.
A United Nations transport plane bound for Earth sat at the end of the runway. This was the shuttle that made the trip through the hyperspace Passageway from Faery to Earth. Generally, FAF planes never went there.
IDs were checked prior to boarding. The note on Rei’s passport that he was retired from service and was no longer


a Faery soldier was checked and veriﬁed by a crewman, who then demanded that everyone except those in uniform present their boarding passes. You paid your own way home, although there were no ﬁrst class seats on this plane.
The shuttle plane’s pilot seemed like a veteran. Without any hesitation, he entered the hyperspace Passageway in the cloud pillar from the proper course and altitude. The plane emerged on the Earth side with barely any turbulence. When the clouds cleared, they were greeted by the sight of the Antarctic skies spreading out around them. One of the
seating rows broke out in cheers. The blood red river of the Bloody Road was nowhere to be seen in Earth’s skies. I’m home, thought Rei.






REI WAS RELEASED in Sydney, Australia.
Lynn Jackson was waiting for him. The author of The Invader, which dealt with the JAM threat, she had never lost interest in the JAM or the Faery Air Force. She greeted the man returning from Faery—who knew the JAM so well—the way she might an acquaintance she hadn’t seen in a decade. Rei had met her once before, though they hadn’t spoken. She seemed a little older, but her eyes still held their intelligent sparkle.
“Welcome home, Lieutenant Fukai. Congratulations on making it out alive,” she said as she fell into step with Rei at the airport exit.
“What’s the deal?” Rei said. “You gonna follow me everywhere I go?”
“Major Booker asked me to help you out. Do you remember me?”
“Yeah.”
“So, what are your plans? What do you want to do?” “Travel around the world.”


“You mean until you feel like going back to your homeland?” she asked.
“None of your business.”
“Isn’t it? Lieutenant Fukai, don’t you think you have an obligation to tell all of humanity about the JAM?”
“I’m back here because I’ve fulﬁlled all my obligations. If you want to know about the JAM, enlist and go to the front yourself.”
“Participating in a war means losing your objectivity.”
“If being human means believing there’s a fair, balanced, and objective position to take on the JAM, then I guess I’m not human. I couldn’t live as a human.”
“In a way, you may be right, Lieutenant, but as for me
—”
“I’m not a lieutenant anymore.”
“Does that mean you have no intention of returning to Faery?”
“No comment.”
Amidst the whirlpool of noise and color in the bustling airport, Rei was starting to feel a little seasick.
“Even though we’re alike?” “Alike how?”
Lynn dropped the professional tone from her voice. “It’s true that there are all sorts of things I want to ask about. You and I both appreciate the threat the JAM pose. We don’t know what they’re after, but if we try to perceive them objectively, human sense and common sense become unreliable. I agree with what you said about not being able to live as a human. That’s you now, isn’t it? That’s how it is for you.”
“Well, if I’m not human, then what am I?” Rei asked as he stopped midstride.
Lynn Jackson looked Rei straight in the eye and answered without any hesitation. “A Faerian.”


“An alien, you mean?”
“Yes, exactly. So, as an alien who’s come to Earth to sightsee, you’ll need to hire a guide. You’re ignorant of human customs, I’m sure.”
“And in return, you want exclusive access to my story, right?”
“This may wound your heroic pride, but I can’t market you as a hero. The war with the JAM isn’t the sensation it used to be,” Jackson said. “Only a very small specialty market exists with any interest in the exploits of returning soldiers. Very few in the media would have any interest in interviewing you.”
“What happened on Faery seems like a dream already,” Rei said. “It feels like I was hooked up to some machine designed to induce nightmares as part of some psychological punishment. Actually, I kinda suspect that the machine they used to force-inject basic ﬁghter piloting skills into my brain was exactly like that.” Rei sighed. “If here on Earth the JAM are now treated like characters from a fairy tale, then you may as well say that it all really was the sort of punishment I just described. There wouldn’t be much diﬀerence between trying to convince people they’re real and me just saying it’s not my problem now.”
“As much as I think public consideration needs to be paid to the psychological wounds our returning soldiers have to deal with, you’re still wrong. I just can’t believe that.”
“I’ve had enough of public consideration and the rest of that crap,” Rei said.
“I’m here as an individual.”
“So you have a personal interest in me?”
“I do. I don’t think you can handle human society as it is now. You can’t live here on your own.”
Rei considered what she said and ﬁnally gave in.


“I’ll hire you as a guide.”
“I warn you, my fee’s pretty high.”
“I’ve got money,” he replied. “There isn’t a lot to spend it on back at Faery base.”
“If you tell me about that too, I’ll let you pay me in installments.”
“If the balance gets too depressing to look at, I’ll consider that,” Rei said.
“Don’t lose count of what you owe.”
“I’ll expect you to charge me an honest price.” “Trust me,” she said.
Lynn Jackson started walking toward the airport lobby exit.
“Where are we going?” Rei asked.
“You need a place to relax, right? I’ve booked you into the Meridian Hotel.”
“You’re prepared, aren’t you?”
“I’m living there right now. It’s convenient, being as close to Faery as it is.”
“Nice status you enjoy, huh?”
“I can live comfortably if I economize.”
“You published a best seller, after all. When you write the sequel to The Invader you’ll sell that too, right?”
“I’m just starting to write it now,” Lynn said. “The thing is, my agent’s having to wrack his brains before he can sell it to someone.”
“Why’s that?”
“If we sell it as a work of fantasy ﬁction, we may be able to ﬁnd a publisher who’ll buy it. That’s what the times are like nowadays. See, anything having to do with the JAM is fantasy. If the JAM are mentioned anywhere, nobody takes the contents of the book seriously. I wasn’t intending to become a novelist, but my agent’s been telling me he has a feeling that the publisher is going to make me do it that


way. If it looks like I’m writing some kind of quickie cash-in job, it’ll damage the trust people have in me as a journalist. So, I’m writing some other ‘hard’-subject books to keep from seeming too far out of my usual line.”
“So how is The Invader viewed now?”
“Probably as nothing but fantasy, like the vast number of books, good and bad, that came out about the JAM for a while. They’re not popular anymore. I’m basically seen as a has-been popular writer. I always saw myself as a journalist and not a pop writer, and that hasn’t changed, but the world doesn’t see me that way. With my insistence on still writing about the JAM, I’m seen as a bit of an anachronism.”
“That’s nuts.”
“It’s the result of the FAF’s success at containing the JAM threat,” Lynn said.
“And there’s a whole bunch of other problems that reality has for people to worry about, right?”
“Right. Humanity’s perennial crises are a much more familiar problem to deal with. Economics, politics, religion, cultures, race, gender issues, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.”
Rei remembered what Lynn Jackson had written in The Invader.
Back when the JAM ﬁrst drove through the hyperspace Passageway linking Earth and Faery and invaded Antarctica, humanity hadn’t united to ﬁght them. In the end, humanity saw the JAM as just another race among many to be confronted. On Earth you could ﬁnd a race called “humans,” but that group couldn’t be properly considered “Earthers.” Humans are basically animals who ﬁght each other for dominance within and between groups, so if a controlling member of one collective loses even a little power, the group fractures. Joining and splitting, over and over. The relationship of the ruler and the ruled. Struggles for supremacy. Even the presence of the JAM did not change


this. This desire for confrontation would persevere in humanity until the species ﬁnally fell to ruin.
“Just humans with a diﬀerent skin color, eh?” Rei said to Lynn Jackson as they climbed into a taxi.
“Hm?”
“That was something you wrote in your book. You basically said that humans wouldn’t face reality until the very end.”
“And what do you think?” she asked.
“I think we eat, we sleep, we grow old, and then one day we vanish from this world. Anything aside from that is an illusion.”
“Spoken like an enlightened old Buddhist.”
“The JAM made me that way,” Rei said. He shut the taxi door.
As the taxi drove along, Rei spotted a newsstand out the window and asked the driver to pull over. He bought four diﬀerent papers. When he returned, Lynn Jackson laughed and told him he could ask the hotel to buy as many as he wished, or else print out all the news stories he could carry from the MT in his room. Rei, however, had no intention of doing as she said.
“It’s easy to forge newspapers or computer data,” he explained.
“Ah, but a paper bought out in the city from a random location would be a little more reliable, is that it?”
“I guess.”
“Who do you think would be trying to forge them?” “Someone trying to make me laugh,” Rei said.
Lynn Jackson shrugged her shoulders and kept her mouth shut.
After arriving at the hotel and checking in, Rei went his own way after promising to meet Lynn for dinner later.


Lynn oﬀered to take him out to a nice restaurant where he could have a meal ﬁt for a human and plan what he was going to do, but Rei wasn’t used to just relaxing. Major Booker had given him a one-week grace period. For seven days, his posting in the SAF was still guaranteed. The meaning was clear—if he let it pass he’d never ﬂy Yukikaze again, even if he returned to Faery.
Rei doubted he’d ﬁnd something new to live for in the next week, but he didn’t want to waste his time. He wanted to perceive the JAM with the senses of an Earther, to ﬁnd out just what it was that he’d been ﬁghting.
The room Lynn had booked for him was a sumptuous suite. On top of the enormous bed, Rei read the newspapers he’d purchased. There wasn’t a single mention of the JAM. Rei couldn’t believe it, but he read them through completely and couldn’t ﬁnd one anywhere.
Throwing the papers down, he went over to the multimedia terminal on the writing desk. They hadn’t had these before he’d left for Faery, so he experimentally switched it on.
He ﬁrst searched the major news sites for any information about the JAM, but there were very few recent hits. Particularly shocking was that a keyword search for “the JAM” yielded hardly any information at all. While the word was there, it was treated merely as a special-purpose
term or colloquialism used by some. According to the deﬁnition that came up for JAM, “It is not known who ﬁrst referred to them as the JAM, and the mysterious group that invaded Earth still has no oﬃcial name.”
Thinking this was ridiculous, Rei next ran a keyword search for Faery Air Force. There was information on it, but again, nothing substantial, not even any oﬃcial reports on the latest war progress. The reports should have been available, but they hadn’t been uploaded for display on the MT.


It was as though an information blackout was in eﬀect. Perhaps there is, Rei thought. In short, somebody was making it diﬃcult to learn about the JAM. It seemed to be taking him forever to ﬁnd any information about them. There might have been tons of data about the JAM and the FAF, but if it took you a lifetime to search for and ﬁnd it, the practical reality was that it might as well not exist.
Lynn would say that there were no articles about the JAM in the papers because writers couldn’t sell them. That was probably why she hadn’t yet found a publisher for the sequel to The Invader she was writing. But Rei sensed that the fundamental reason for the paucity of information was due to social manipulation with the goal of changing the minds of the general public. It would have to be a worldwide eﬀort. Assuming there was some group that wanted to propagandize on the JAM’s behalf, Rei suspected that their agents might delete the word JAM as soon as it was entered anywhere, or possibly change the expression to something else in order to make it diﬃcult to search for.
So who was doing it, then?
The ones who would proﬁt from it. The JAM. The JAM were already in control of the network all MTs were connected to.
It was possible that the JAM had quietly slipped undetected past the FAF and invaded Earth, then carefully bided their time in order to realize their plan. Since the
change was so gradual, it wasn’t surprising that only someone like Lynn Jackson would notice it. The other possibility, Rei thought as he stepped back from the terminal and sat down on the bed, is that this is all the fantasy of a returning vet from Faery, one of those psychological scars people talk about.
He’d risked his life ﬁghting the JAM, and yet he’d come home to ﬁnd that they weren’t considered worth discussing. So then, what was the point of the war? Why had he risked


his life? Come on, the JAM are right there! It was natural for him to come to that conclusion.
Suppose the JAM were just a virtual threat created by humans? That would certainly make sense in some ways. If you explained Faery as being some international criminal incarceration system, it’d make a lot of sense.
Still, it was unrealistic to claim that the JAM and planet Faery were artiﬁcial virtual creations. If you considered the cost of maintaining such a system, you’d eventually have groups who’d refuse to pay for it and the whole thing would collapse. Rei also doubted that you could keep a system like that running for thirty years.
But even if that were all true, and the JAM were originally virtual creations, they weren’t anymore. The JAM were real. Even if the parties responsible for starting the whole charade declared “game over,” the FAF as it was now wouldn’t obey them.
The JAM weren’t virtual to the FAF. Real or fake, it was still kill or be killed out there. There was no way that the JAM were phantasms, because the FAF itself had made them real. The JAM would eventually invade Earth. Whether they were real JAM or something created by the humans and combat machines of the FAF didn’t matter, they were still JAM.
Wow, Rei thought, these are some pretty powerful post-combat psych aftereﬀects. He was basically desperate to make the JAM real by any means. Maybe it was due to the notion that they’d already invaded Earth. Well, if that was true, maybe this wasn’t the real Earth. Maybe the JAM weren’t real, and his sensing them here came from his inability to slip free of the illusion. Maybe some psychiatric treatment could cure him. No, there was no way he’d ever be able to forget the JAM threat. Better to live thinking they were real than to try and force himself to believe they weren’t. He didn’t give a damn what other people thought.


The JAM were a threat to him. That made them real enough, no matter what their true nature might be. These Earth people who made the JAM into fairy tales would probably be destroyed without ever knowing what really killed them. They wouldn’t even think it was the JAM who were doing it.
That’s not for me, Rei thought.
As far as the JAM were concerned, media inﬁltration was a good strategy. There’d be no need to produce human duplicates to use as anti-personnel weapons. They could instead use the complex and advanced information management system humans themselves had created in order to control human thoughts. All the JAM had to do was turn their attention away from the true enemy, themselves, and then give a little push to encourage humans to turn back to their ordinary squabbles. Humans are just the sort of life-form to do that anyway, so there was no need for any out-and-out brainwashing. Their own systems and biological nature would lead to their self-destruction.
To people who were satisﬁed just to eat and sleep, it wasn’t the JAM they were worried about being trampled by. It was other people or groups who had weapons. Actually, Rei had spotted a few articles in the papers about just that sort of thing. This was stuﬀ humans themselves were doing, not the JAM. All the JAM had to do was wait. A hundred years, a thousand, ten thousand, it didn’t matter to them. The JAM might have been trapped into ﬁghting the FAF because their invasion was premature. The only things that might be able to resist the JAM weren’t human at all. The only         defense         was         autonomous         combat         machine intelligences like Yukikaze.
Rei lay back on the bed, his arms cushioning his head, and wondered if it not might be for the best if humanity destroyed itself. Even if the JAM’s control over Earth’s computer network was just his own fantasy, he hadn’t changed what he was. Human society would never accept


him, so it was all basically the same. Nothing had changed. Coming back to Earth had made him see that clearly, and he hadn’t even been here for half a day.
Rei wasn’t really concerned with being a perfect combat machine anymore, and he was now pretty sure he had acknowledged he wasn’t human. Rei was neither human nor weapon. He’d not known what he was until Lynn Jackson had told him with her all too brief answer:
He was a Faerian.
He fought because the JAM were there, not as a weapon, but as a man trying to survive as a resident of the planet Faery.
Even so, how had he come to be what he was? A person whose personality estranged him from normal human society. A person who couldn’t stand to live his life as just another face in the crowd.
Rei wondered if he was some sort of mutant. Nothing more than something inserted by the program of evolution to ensure the survival of the seed of humanity. They existed in every age. He’d just been born by chance into the age when the JAM were here. He had a feeling that the JAM, despite their desire to eliminate humanity, couldn’t simply wait for it to self-destruct because of people like him.
People like him were more a threat to the JAM than the vast majority of humans on Earth. For their part, the people of Earth saw the JAM as being not too diﬀerent from themselves. They were certainly living that way now. At any rate, if you left humans alone, they’d probably end up destroying themselves.
But he couldn’t stay here on Earth and hope to ﬁght for his life, especially if the JAM were already here. He had no weapons. He had only just arrived, but Rei made up his mind to call Major Booker tomorrow morning.
He’d have to thank Lynn. Since he’d have to wait for Major Booker to tell him which shuttle ﬂight to take back, he


could hang around with her. If time permitted, he might do a little sightseeing. Rei would go wherever he wanted. It was so obvious—the only weird thing being human common sense, which was an obstacle. Humans were the only animals that required passports for moving around.
It was a little early, but Rei decided he’d call Lynn anyway and got up from the bed.
There was a knock at the door. Wondering if she’d been thinking along similar lines, Rei looked out the peephole and saw men in the corridor. Three of them, and from their faces he could tell they were Japanese.
“Who are you?” he asked from behind the door. It had been ages since he’d spoken Japanese.
“Fukai Rei-san, we’re here to greet you,” came the answer through the door. “We’re the welcome party for returning soldiers.”
“Don’t need it,” Rei replied.
“If that’s true, I’m afraid we’ll need you to sign a document saying so. If we don’t follow procedure, we could all be accused of neglecting our duties.”
These guys weren’t going to go away. Rei opened the door.
“Nice room,” one of them said. “Get to the point,” Rei said.
“Allow me to introduce myself,” said the man acting as their representative as he took out a business card. Rei read it.
“Japanese naval development division?”
“We need excellent pilots like you for our naval air forces,” the man explained.
Rei suddenly realized it was all a setup. Pack people oﬀ to Faery for minor crimes, then exploit the best of the survivors. It was payback for the enormous national expenditures made to keep the Faery Air Force running.


Which meant this was an oﬀer he couldn’t refuse. He was obligated.
“I didn’t ﬁght the JAM for the sake of you people,” Rei said.
“Oh?” answered the man. “Then what were you ﬁghting for?”
“So that I could survive.”
“Then please, keep that talent alive. It’d be a shame to let it go to waste.”
“Which is to say,” said another, “that a man with your personal history won’t be able to get a civilian job.”
“Mind your own damned business,” Rei answered, even as he was thinking that resistance was useless. “I’ll live my life gazing at my own navel. Tell your superiors I refuse. I have that right.”
“Then we’ll take you back to Japan at once—”
“No way,” Rei replied. “I promised a pretty lady that I’d meet her.”
“I don’t believe you’ve had contact with anyone aside from Ms. Jackson, which means we can make things very diﬃcult if you don’t accept our oﬀer. We don’t want another country to make use of your talents. If you’re Japanese, you should use them in the service of your country. Aren’t you a patriot?”
“So, I come home and that’s the only value I have now?” Rei said. “Fly a ﬁghter plane as a Japanese so I can kill people from another country? Humans, like me?”
“To protect our national interests. It’s all grounded in international law.”
“Maybe, but what does any of it matter? Winning or losing against fellow humans…Why would I want to do that? What nations need are public service organizations, not political and military power. But you people still haven’t created them. I don’t feel like risking my life for something


so primitive. When I fought the JAM, I did it for my own sake, not so that I could be used by you people when I got home.”
“You’re saying you didn’t do it for your country?” “Of course not!”
“Then you’re under arrest.”
Rei knew it’d do no good to shout about what right they had to do this. Even if he went to trial, no court would ever rule to allow him to go back to Faery. They’d brainwash him to make him ﬁght for his country. He’d be made to walk down the path of self-destruction as a human. That was the only path for humans to take, after all. Humans enjoyed ﬁghting other humans. Manipulating others, even occasionally sacriﬁcing themselves. Even when they didn’t enjoy it, they couldn’t help but do it. It was all part of being human.
Rei stepped back.
“Resistance would not be to your advantage,” said the man.
“Damaging my abilities isn’t in your national interest,” Rei replied.
“If you don’t come along quietly, then we’ll have no choice. Still, I think you’re being a fool. We can guarantee you a position in society, honor, a good living. I guess you were born a traitor.”
The two men behind him drew out weapons that looked like stun guns. Rei could tell they were designed to paralyze. He’d never be able to win in a hand-to-hand ﬁght, but ﬁghting was the only option he had left, he thought as he backed into the room.
“Fukai, get down! Look away!”
The warning had been delivered in English with a Faery accent. Rei reﬂexively dropped to the ﬂoor, sensing dazzling light even through his sealed-shut eyelids. He thought at


ﬁrst someone had thrown a grenade, then realized it was a ﬂashbang.
“Fukai! Out! Hurry!”
In a second, Rei was on his feet and heading in the direction of the voice. His vision was a little dim, but he could see the three Japanese soldiers rubbing their eyes.
He ran down the corridor, ﬁnding Lynn Jackson at the elevator bank, holding the door open on one. He threw himself into the car. Inside was a man he’d never seen before. Lynn quickly pushed a button.
“FAF intel, right?” Rei said to the man. “You got into that room somehow. How’d you do it?”
“Right,” the man replied. “FAF Intelligence Forces, combat division.”
“He got in through my room,” Lynn said. “From next door.”
“Oh, living the high life, huh?” Rei said. “You were keeping an eye on me from Lynn’s room?”
“Right,” replied the FAF intelligence agent. He was fairly young.
“Why? I’m retired…or were those documents I signed fakes?”
“They were real, hence the welcome wagon from your home country. I was also kind of surprised by how quickly they moved.”
“What you’re doing is illegal. You’re kidnapping me.” “No, they were the ones acting illegally. They were
attempting to kidnap someone who’d just reenlisted in the FAF.”
“Oh. Now I get it,” said Rei with a sigh. “Well, your timing’s perfect. Reenlistment would be very convenient for me at the moment.”
“That looks like the truth, Rei,” said Lynn.


“It is,” replied the agent. “Your reenlistment request was actually accepted by the FAF authorities the moment you left the airport and bought those newspapers.”
Rei thought about this for a moment.
“Major Booker,” he decided. “He had this all arranged from the start.”
“You mean this isn’t what you want?”
Those men claiming to be from the Japanese navy might have been actors, and the whole thing might have been a
hoax set up by the FAF authorities to get him back to Faery. Still, it doesn’t matter, Rei thought. He’d made up his mind to go back well before any of this happened.
“It doesn’t matter,” he said. “You saved me.”
The elevator car stopped at the entrance level, and the agent hustled them out.
“It’s dangerous to stay here, Lieutenant,” he said. “The guys chasing you haven’t received any oﬃcial documents from us yet that prove you’re back in the FAF. We’ve got to get you on that shuttle. I’ve ordered my subordinate to take care of that. Just sign this and you’ll be good to go.”
If this was real, and not just a show for his beneﬁt, he doubted having that paper was going to stop a nation from ﬂexing its might against him.
“Ironic, eh? It’s safer for me to be on Faery with the JAM,” Rei said.
“Sorry you couldn’t take some time and let me show you the sights, Lieutenant Fukai. But then, I suppose you’re used to being in a hurry,” Lynn said as they left the hotel. Rei wondered what would have happened to him had this woman not been there. Then he suddenly realized that she was probably in as much danger here as he was.
“It’d probably be safer for you to come to Faery,” Rei told her. “You’re not a human, and it’d be dangerous for you to get mixed up in their stupid wars. With your career,


you’ve got the civilian qualiﬁcations to come to Faery. You can do your work there,” Rei said, just before he got into a waiting car on the street. But Lynn shook her head.
“I also think the wars humans ﬁght amongst themselves are foolish,” she said. “But I’m not going.”
“Why not?”
“Because I still have hope. I believe humanity won’t always be this mad. It may be true that, like you, I’m not just a regular human. But in other ways I’m not like you at all.”
“I see,” Rei said. “Damn, this leave ended way too soon, but I’m glad I could meet you.”
“Next time you come, I’d like to play guide for you as much as you’d like.”
“As long as the price is fair.”
“Of course. Trust me,” Lynn Jackson said with a smile. It’s a nice smile, Rei thought. He’d been lucky to see
such a smile on his all too brief sojourn.
Later on, he could look back over all of this at his leisure and wonder what the hell had happened, but he knew some things for certain. First, his misgivings that Earth no longer
existed were laid to rest. Second, he’d met a human who recognized the threat posed by the JAM. But if she’s not a regular human, then what is she? he wondered.
An Earther. That was it. He’d seen the smile of an actual Earther.
“May we meet again, Earther. Good luck.” “And you, Lieutenant Fukai, man from Faery.”
Rei nodded, then climbed into the car and ordered the driver to go as he shut the door. His leave was over. Yukikaze was waiting.


OceanofPDF.com


















III RETURN TO BATTLE
OceanofPDF.com
















ALTHOUGH REI HAD been in a vegetative state for three months, the SAF medical staﬀ guaranteed that they could have him back to his former strength in half that time. That was dependent, however, on his precisely following the rehabilitation program. The program had been devised when he awakened, but then had to be modiﬁed due to his debrieﬁng and trip back home to Earth, so it didn’t kick into full swing until after Rei had reenlisted and returned to Faery. It had been ten days since Rei had rejoined the SAF, and he was following the program diligently. Major Booker called him into his oﬃce to see what eﬀect it was having.
Rei appeared to be in good shape. Better shape than Booker was, actually. “It’s nice to be young,” he told Rei. “At my age, you can take twice as much time to recover and never get back to full strength. I still get a twinge in my neck every now and then.”
“It’s your body saying you shouldn’t be riding around in a ﬁghter plane at your age, Jack,” Rei replied.
“That was my call to make, and I don’t think it was wrong. I dragged you back to consciousness, didn’t I?”
“You didn’t need to ﬂy out in the FRX or in Yukikaze.” “No, I did. In the case of Lieutenant Yagashira, there was
nobody else I could trust. This is war. Real combat, not desk jockeying. Going out in a ﬁghter once in a while lets you understand the war situation in your guts, not just your head. The brass should go out on sorties once in a while.”
“So they can feel the JAM threat in their bodies, you mean?”
“Not just for that,” Major Booker said. “What else would there be?”


“The JAM aren’t the only threat. If they rode in that plane, they’d understand.”
“You’re talking about how wild the Maeve’s combat maneuvering can be, aren’t you?”
They were referring, of course, to the newest model tactical combat reconnaissance ﬁghter: the FFR41. It was named Maeve, after the mythical queen of the wind, and at the moment, Yukikaze was the only one in existence.
“It’s not just about the Maeve,” the major replied. “There’s also the fact that we don’t really know what the FAF’s combat intelligences are thinking. How can the brass not understand that’s a threat to us humans?”
“You mean how this war is between the JAM and the FAF’s combat machines, not between the JAM and humanity, right?”
“Exactly,” Major Booker replied, nodding. “From the very start, when the JAM appeared thirty years ago, they haven’t been at war with humans. You and I understand that, but the higher-ups who control our forces don’t. They probably can’t, and they won’t unless they go to the front and experience the danger of combat themselves. That goes for me too. God only knows what the people living safe and sound on Earth think about all this.”
“The JAM have already invaded Earth.” “I beg your pardon?”
“I can’t really put it clearly. It was just a feeling I got when I went back there. I don’t think humans are capable of really sensing the true, actual JAM themselves.” Rei told the major about what he’d seen on his brief leave back to Earth, about his suspicion that the JAM had already invaded Earth’s electronic networks.
“Rei, why didn’t you say anything about that?” the major asked.


“Because I didn’t have any obligation to report it. I went back to Earth as a civilian, and I can’t substantiate what I felt. And even if it’s true, the people on Earth will deal with those JAM. It’s not our problem.”
“Just saying it’s not our problem won’t make the problem go away.”
“Why not?”
“Why not?!” Major Booker shook his head, looking utterly shocked by what Rei had just said. “Rei, why did you come back here?”
“I came here because you wanted a report on how well my rehabilitation program was going. I’m here because of you, Major Booker.”
“I’m asking if you’re telling me that you believe you’re a completely isolated being in this room here, unconnected to the SAF, the FAF, or the entire Earth. You really think that you can just live here as you please, unconcerned with what happens back there?”
“Yeah, I do,” Rei replied. “The FAF may not believe that, but I think they’re wrong.”
“You went to Earth. You saw that it still exists, right?”
“It doesn’t matter if Earth is real or just a dream. That’s no problem as far as my living here on Faery.”
“You’re saying you came back because you think this is the only place where you can live now?”
“Yeah, I guess I am,” Rei said.
“So, Earth’s already been contaminated by the JAM, and you won’t ﬁght on Earth, so that’s why you came back here?”
“Yeah. On Earth, I’d have to ﬁght humans as well as the JAM. I may as well cut down the number of enemies I have to deal with.”
“Fight humans on Earth?”


“Yeah, Jack,” Rei said with a nod. “Life is battle, and there’s nobody there I can depend on. I’m not an Earth human anymore, and neither are you.”
“What do you mean, you’re not an Earth human?” “We’re Faerians now. We have to ﬁght an enemy that
threatens that existence. This battle we’re in isn’t a war. It’s a struggle for existence. It’s not about beating the enemy; it’s about living. Victory for us is not losing. The JAM aren’t the only ones competing against us. Going to Earth showed me that clearly.”
“Rei, I really don’t have time to listen to your great philosophy of life. No matter what you may think, the FAF exists to represent Earth’s interests. That’s reality,” Booker said. “You think we just have to not lose here? If we lose our backup from Earth, you’ll see us lose here pretty damned quickly. You don’t seem to get that. And this stuﬀ about us being ‘Faerians’…Where’d you get an idea like that? Somebody had to have fed you that line, because it doesn’t sound like the sort of thing you’d…” The major paused. “It was Lynn Jackson, wasn’t it?”
“Yeah.”
“What, does she expect the FAF to launch a war of independence from Earth? Is that what she’s got you all worked up to do?”
“No. Ms. Jackson just said that I wasn’t a human anymore,” Rei said. “When I asked her what I am, she said I was a Faerian, like that. I thought it was a clear and simple answer, that’s all.”
“That woman is a dyed-in-the-wool journalist. She’s got a toughness to her that keeps her from taking sides with anyone. But you’re not like that. You’re naive, especially now, with your mind and body as unstable as they are. It’s easy to brainwash somebody who’s convalescing, like you are.”
“So you do it, Jack.”


“Me?” the major asked.
“Yeah. It should be simple for you to make me believe that I can have a happy life sacriﬁcing myself for the people of Earth.”
Major Booker took a long, hard look at Captain Rei Fukai. He’s changed, the major thought. There was a subtle change to the style of conversation he was practicing now. But where exactly was the change? He’d been promoted from ﬁrst lieutenant to captain. Appearance-wise, he was thinner, having lost some muscle mass. But those were just minor changes. The big ones had happened inside. You could tell just by looking at him.
The look in his eyes conveyed a sharper vitality, or from another viewpoint, they were the eyes of a man who now knew fear. They exuded an air of wariness. The old Rei hadn’t been like that. He’d been a man who did nothing but passively glare at the world, with an attitude that said he didn’t like anything and would never like anything. He engaged the JAM as though swatting away ﬂies buzzing in front of him. Anything aside from that, he’d always simply say, “Not my problem.” He was the very image of an advanced weapon who could only see his JAM targets.
But Rei was diﬀerent now. Now Rei seemed to be observing himself from a higher vantage point. He’d begun to think about the relationship between himself and the world in which he lived. He’d probably realized that there was value to being aware of and thinking about the questions of existence.
In short, Major Booker thought, for the ﬁrst time in his life, Rei acknowledges that people other than himself exist in the world with him. Even so, the change hadn’t made him more emotional. He was still behaving in an inorganic, mechanical, almost emotionless manner. Rei’s original personality hadn’t changed at all. This man didn’t care what happened to the people of Earth. He’d just come out and


said as much only moments ago. But he’d said, “It’s not our problem,” rather than “It’s not my problem.” On the surface, it was just a minor diﬀerence, but that diﬀerence was conclusive. To put it in terms of weaponry, he was like a missile that had just been switched from passive to active seeking.
But I don’t know for certain that the change is for the better, Major Booker thought coldly. Psychologically, Rei was still very deﬁnitely naive. His betrayal by Yukikaze, the one thing he’d trusted, had left a deep wound. That would need rehabilitation along with the wounds to his body. The major had just told Rei that he was in a state that left him open to brainwashing. Rei had just challenged the major to change his mind. Perhaps, somewhere inside, part of Rei doubted whether the changes he’d made had put him on the right course.
Even so, it was clear that this man wanted to put himself on a more precise heading. The major wondered where exactly Rei was ﬂying to.
“This battle we’re in isn’t a war. It’s a struggle for existence,” Major Booker said, trying out Rei’s words for himself. “That’s true for the rank and ﬁle of every war. No soldier wants to die in vain. You have to kill the enemy in front of you or be killed yourself. Same goes for the enemy. The struggle for existence. All it means is that you just don’t want to be an enlisted man who gets used up as cannon fodder.”
“I’m not an enlisted man,” Rei replied. “The FAF has never had enlisted men, and I’m a captain now, Major Booker.”
“A ﬁgure of speech,” the major said. “You’ve always said that rank didn’t matter to you. Or perhaps you now see the meaning of it and want to rise even higher.”
“I thought you said you didn’t have time to listen to my philosophy of life.”


“Well, it’s already eaten up enough time. So how about it, Rei?”
“Why are you asking?” Rei said.
“I want to make sure the SAF can still use you as a top-class Maeve driver. That’s my job. Now answer me, Captain Fukai.”
“If getting a higher rank badge meant I could guarantee how I die, it might not be a bad thing to aim for. But you can’t say that even a general won’t die stupidly by slipping in the bathroom. The opposite is just as true. If you’re a general, the odds are much higher that you’ll die a ridiculous death like that rather than dying in battle.”
“Die a ridiculous death, huh? It reminds me of the story of Aeschylus.”
“Who’s that?” Rei asked. “Someone famous for dying stupidly?”
“Whether it’s stupid or not depends on your point of view. He was one of the three great tragedians of ancient Greece. He was killed by a tortoise that fell out of the sky onto his head.”
“What?”
“The tortoise had been caught by a crow or an eagle that was ﬂying overhead, and the bird was looking for a good rock to drop it on to break its shell open. Aeschylus was completely bald, and there’s a famous story that the bird mistook the tragedian’s bald head for a rock to split the tortoise open with,” the major said. “Tragedy is the ﬂipside of comedy. Take it as you will. It was a death even he might have written. But the point is that the way he lived his life isn’t as known to posterity as this little anecdote about his death. He was a man of great rank and social status, so don’t you think he would be remembered more for that?”
“All that was just someone else’s way of valuing him. That had nothing to do with how satisﬁed he was with his own life,” Rei said.


“But why do we concentrate on the way he died rather than on how he lived? The way you die never goes the way you expect it to. There’s an element to it that’s beyond human knowledge. Besides, it’s not like dying is something you consent to.”
“Everyone dies, regardless of rank or class. Living life without realizing that is meaningless, and I don’t want to live a meaningless life.”
“Memento mori,” the major said. “Remember your mortality. Rei, you really have changed, haven’t you?”
“I don’t think it’s easy to live a life that you can agree to, but I’m trying my best to.”
“Even while you keep saying ‘Not my problem.’ ”
“I’ve never had any regrets before and I don’t have any now.”
“And yet you seem unable to face the thought of death. Isn’t that another way of saying that you regret the way you’ve lived your life?” Major Booker asked. Rei answered him coldly. “You’re right. I may have been wrong. Living a life without regret doesn’t mean you’ll be ready for death when it comes for you. I understand that. I just never thought about it before.”
“I see,” said Major Booker, nodding. “That’s how it is. No matter how often you claim something isn’t your problem, there are always some problems you have to accept. That’s reality. It’s common sense. The same goes for death. No matter how often you say ‘I’m not going to die, and I don’t care about death,’ death is still coming for you. People normally live with that as a fact of life, but your way of life wasn’t normal. You lived as if saying ‘I’m not going to die’ meant you really weren’t going to die. Of course, one day reality is going to kick that worldview in the ass. It wasn’t the JAM who taught you that. It was your trusted Yukikaze, wasn’t it? You were ready to be killed by the JAM, but Yukikaze wasn’t—”


“And now I don’t want to sit back quietly and get killed by the JAM. Or by anyone else, for that matter.”
“Of course you don’t. I know exactly what it is that you’re worried about,” the major said.
“And what’s that?”
“Rei, you sense that you might end up being killed by Yukikaze. That’s something you haven’t faced until now.”
“I don’t think that Yukikaze betrayed me, and I don’t expect her to. Yukikaze still needs me, even now.”
“That’s ﬁne if you’re immortal. There’s no problem at all, then. The thing is, you’re human. If you die, you can’t come back to life and there won’t be a spare body ready for you to use. You don’t have an equal relationship with Yukikaze,” the major said. “That’s the thing you just can’t accept. This isn’t a question that lies on the emotional plane —of whether she betrayed you or whether you think she did, Rei. That’s common sense. Yukikaze is a machine, so she has no emotions. There’s no room for it in your relationship with her. If Yukikaze killed you out of hatred, you could accept that. But if she’s going to kill you, she’s just going to kill you. It won’t be like a gun accidentally going oﬀ and killing its owner, because Yukikaze isn’t a simple device like that. She possesses the barest seed of self-awareness now, and you don’t know how to handle the idea of being killed by something like that. You came back here to seek out Yukikaze because you’re looking for an answer.”
“You’re saying that I came back here to be killed by Yukikaze? That’s ridiculous. You’re wrong—”
“No, I’m saying you came back so that you wouldn’t lose to her. You want to understand Yukikaze as an adversary in the struggle for existence. You don’t have to win, just not lose. When you do lose, you want to accept your death as an honest loss. If you can accept it, it won’t seem like a loss to you. Rei, up until now, you’ve lived your


life in a completely selﬁsh manner, never thinking of other people. In that respect, you haven’t changed a bit.”
Rei had decided that none of it mattered—seeing his fellow planes getting shot down, the Earth captured by the JAM, or even the extinction of the human race. That was a question he had to settle within himself. This man thought that, as long as he himself didn’t lose, it was okay. That was true then and that was still true now.
“So what?” Rei replied.
“Figured you’d say that. Now I’m relieved. I wouldn’t want to talk to you anymore if you’d changed that much, because I’m a bit like you. I have my own thoughts about Yukikaze now—she’s a threat, an enemy on the same level as the JAM. She’s a competitor in the struggle for existence.”
“I’m not afraid of Yukikaze.”
“No, you’ve embraced the seed of fear within you. You’re now beginning to realize that Yukikaze is an independent being separate from you. The meaning of that is, for the ﬁrst time, your relationship with her has been equalized.”
The old Yukikaze had been like a part of Rei, not a separate entity. He never thought she’d betray him, any more than you’d expect your right hand to betray you. But, of course, that wasn’t reality. The incident when she’d been shot down had taught Rei as much.
“Psychotherapy isn’t going to settle the question of what the optimal relationship between you and Yukikaze would be, or what its meaning is,” Major Booker said. “That’s a matter for philosophy because, in the end, you’re asking about the meaning of life. You’ve always had questions about that. Is there any meaning to human existence or not? If there is, then what is it? If there isn’t, then why do we go on living lives without meaning? I have some sympathy for your naive feelings. That’s why I like to


be around you, as a friend. Your problem with Yukikaze is my problem too.
“The thing is, ﬁghting the JAM is taking everything I’ve got, so I don’t have time to answer that question with you. For now, if I can’t conceive of Yukikaze as being on our side, then I can’t work out a strategy to use against the JAM. You’re going to have to deal with that one on your own, Rei. Right now, you’re being proactive in thinking about how to answer it, and in that way, you have changed.”
“So what are you saying?”
“Speaking as both your commander and your friend, I want you back in Yukikaze’s cockpit as soon as possible. You don’t need the psychological counseling aspect of your rehab program anymore. It’s a waste of time. The SAF can’t spare you time to fool around on the ground. Train hard and get your body back up to full strength. That’s an order. You’re dismissed, Captain Fukai.”
Rei saluted and left the oﬃce. Major Booker watched him leave, then ﬂipped through the documents relating to Rei’s rehabilitation spread out over his desk, searching for the section indicating which doctor was in charge of it. Rei didn’t need any more psychological care. He had to speak to the attending physician about that. He understood Rei better than any doctor could. Booker wouldn’t just dismiss the opinion of a specialist out of hand, but he was the one with ultimate responsibility. The doctor’s opinion was merely there for reference. The full responsibility was his to bear.
He was shorthanded. The SAF needed expert pilots. It didn’t matter how Rei felt about the war. What they needed was combat intel, and no matter what sort of wounds Rei’s heart might now carry, they could aﬀord to be ignored when they didn’t directly relate to combat. This was a battleﬁeld, not a hospital. While the major dearly hoped that the anxiety Rei felt in his heart would heal, he just didn’t have the time to coddle the pilot. However this turned out, Rei


wouldn’t rely on anyone else for help. That guy will handle this on his own, the major thought. That was why he’d come back here—because on Faery, there was the FAF, and in the FAF was Yukikaze. He understood that.
But, Major Booker wondered, will Rei’s attending physician understand that as well?