3


THE JAM BASE code-named Cookie by the FAF had been nearly destroyed by the time Yukikaze arrived for her reconnaissance duty. The fact that they couldn’t detect any JAM radar waves emanating from either the base itself or its surroundings made that clear enough. Radar sites are vital to an air base’s defense, and the FAF had initiated this operation by targeting several of them, and after successfully destroying them after four Faery days of intense resistance, the operation appeared to be 80 percent successful.
The FAF, however, wasn’t letting up the attack and was now engaged in an operation to destroy any JAM that took oﬀ to intercept them. In short, their forces were to shoot down any and all enemy planes, leaving none alive.
From aboard Yukikaze, Rei could conﬁrm the destruction of several ground installations with just his naked eye. Black smoke was still rising from the largest one. They could also see the three runways which surrounded the central installation like a triangle—two of them had been torn apart with ballistic missile strikes. The third seemed miraculously untouched, but only because the operation had included orders to keep one intact until the very end.
This operation was going to be the ﬁrst chance the FAF had ever had to directly explore a JAM base. Major Booker had told Rei that this was being done on the strong recommendation of the Strategic Reconnaissance Corps. The SRC had, naturally, pushed to handle the exploration themselves, but FAF high command had decided that the investigation couldn’t be left to them alone. It would be
investigated, of course, but the FAF had plans beyond that: they wanted to seize the base for themselves. They must be worried that the base might recover suddenly if we just hit it without capturing it, Rei thought. The top brass must want


the base because its sudden recovery would make this attack meaningless, and they must now see how futile the last thirty years of the war have been in that respect. The SRC’s “discovery” of the JAM’s paired-base operations must have had a great inﬂuence on them.
Their assumption was that Cookie was paired with Richwar base, and now that Richwar had been destroyed, Cookie would receive no support from it, creating a perfect opportunity for its capture. And, in fact, no large-scale retaliatory response from the other JAM bases had been seen against Faery base. The FAF high command had judged the SRC’s discovery to be correct.
However, the SAF held a contrary viewpoint. First of all, they didn’t believe that their battles until now had been as futile as some believed. Rather, they felt that the enemy had been engaging to gather information on humanity’s true nature, which the JAM didn’t understand. If the JAM hadn’t been ﬁghting the humans till now, then it meant the JAM hadn’t known or understood that the FAF’s ﬁghter planes were being operated by humans. Had the FAF sent ground forces to occupy a JAM base early on in the war, things might have developed in an entirely diﬀerent way. The JAM would have realized early on that the humans were their real targets, and mankind might have been exterminated. The idea that the defensive stance they took in prosecuting the war might have actually saved mankind meant that the ﬁghting hadn’t been meaningless. Despite that, as successive generations of FAF commanders came and went without seeing real progress made in their one-sided defensive strategy, the idea that they had to take the ﬁght to the enemy began to take hold. However, with the enemy’s true nature and objectives still a mystery, it was reckless to act on this idea. And, in fact, what attempts they had made in the past never netted them much in the end. But this time it would work, the FAF thought.


Even so, the SAF felt this was premature. The SRC’s conclusion hadn’t been proven at all. It was true that no enemy support was coming from Richwar and they hadn’t seen any JAM retaliation thus far, but it wasn’t known if that had anything to do with the SRC’s discovery. Major Booker had felt that the JAM might be keeping quiet for an entirely diﬀerent reason. In fact, he was sure that this was a sign of the JAM changing their strategy for ﬁghting the FAF. They mustn’t fall for it, he’d warned, and this plan to try and capture Cookie base was too risky. The JAM might be waiting for them with a large force. He could even imagine that they might be able to replace the FAF occupation force with Jammies, the human duplicates they were now creating. Since there was no way to tell duplicates from the real humans, the FAF could be torn apart from within.
They shouldn’t think about trying to capture the enemy base, Major Booker had continued. They should instead go on as they had, just destroying them. Even if the bases were repaired, it wouldn’t be a waste of time. It would still temporarily reduce the JAM’s ﬁghting strength, and there was always the possibility that the FAF or SAF would ﬁnd some clue as to how the enemy eﬀected their repairs as well. And if they were intent on capturing the bases, then the FAF should send in tanks equipped with machine intelligences like Yukikaze instead of humans. Unfortunately, Major Booker’s words went unheeded by the FAF high command. Though Booker truly believed that humans needed to be the main actors in this war, he knew what would happen if the JAM began to target men rather than machines. It would become too dangerous for humans to show themselves at the battlefront, and the decision would eventually be made that advanced machine intelligences would be needed to replace them. The FAF authorities must realize that too, Booker had explained, but the SAF had never been told that the FAF’s real intention was to


reorganize their troops in order to initiate a full-scale land war. The top brass knew full well that the JAM had inﬁltrated their forces with human duplicates, so Major Booker couldn’t understand why they were still taking the actions they were. They had kept the details of this plan to capture the enemy base secret from the SAF. It was possible the high command had decided that the old Yukikaze’s contact with the JAM had compromised the SAF, and so they’d taken steps to avoid leaking any information pertaining to the base capture plan to them. If that were the case, then the SAF would eventually be smashed by the FAF itself. How loyal the SAF was or whether the SAF had committed any treasonous acts would be beside the point. Just the appearance of danger would be enough. There was the distinct possibility that the unit and its computers would be wiped out.
In any case, the situation had changed even more drastically than the SAF had originally expected. As far as
the SAF were concerned, they had to ﬁgure out what the JAM and their own forces were up to and then deal with both. If the SAF hoped to survive, they were going to have to ﬁnd the answer to all these mysteries on their own.
“Recon the hell out of that place.” Those had been Major Booker’s parting words to Rei and Yukikaze.
The SAF was sending out all of its ﬁghters on rotation to conduct combat intelligence gathering missions, so when Yukikaze arrived on the scene, she was met by the unmanned Rafe ﬁghter that had just ﬁnished its sortie. Once Yukikaze approached it and identiﬁed herself with her IFF code, the Rafe followed its programming and set out to return to base.
The Rafe didn’t exchange the data it had collected while in ﬂight, since its duty was to carry it back to base without allowing the JAM to intercept it. Rei wondered if it might have been attacked by the JAM, but he decided against that possibility after judging the situation and seeing no sign of


damage. It had been sent to scout a greater area than usual because it was able to avoid danger better than any of the SAF’s manned planes. While it wouldn’t approach hazardous airspace, it would still be able to shake oﬀ any attackers at high speed if it encountered any. If the enemy didn’t give up, it would avoid combat and retreat. Combat mode was only selected if escape wasn’t possible. Since the Rafe’s fuel had held out till Yukikaze appeared, it meant that there hadn’t been any unpleasant surprises out there.
Protect itself while avoiding direct combat. Even if it judged friendly planes to be in danger, it was to avoid any contact that might endanger itself. Collect combat data and bring it back to base, even if it meant watching your own forces get killed. The SAF’s actions at the scene of a battle made them unreliable allies of their own forces and a hated target that the JAM would go out of their way to intercept. This time, however, the situation was diﬀerent. Minx, which had been sent out when the operation had begun, had been seemingly ignored by the JAM, with no attempt made to intercept it. This had continued with each mission they ﬂew out there, the Rafe being no exception. It had carried out its duties without any problem, and it didn’t seem to matter that the battle wasn’t over yet. Rei had expected that the JAM would show a diﬀerent reaction to an unmanned plane like the Rafe, but it seemed that they hadn’t. The JAM weren’t behaving at all like they normally did.
Rei ﬂew closer to the enemy base, telling Lieutenant Katsuragi to begin intelligence gathering as he did so. The Rafe had just ﬂown a simple course around the center of the base. A manned ﬁghter, however, could take a more ﬂexible route based on the ﬂight crew’s judgment. Every sort of tactical recon ﬂight pattern was worked out in advance, and a combat-hardened ﬂight oﬃcer could judge a situation and call for, say, a bee dance ﬂight pattern, which the pilot would immediately execute. A predetermined ﬂight pattern


like that could also be ﬂown on automatic. However, Lieutenant Katsuragi wasn’t used to combat yet, and Rei thought that making and executing ﬂight pattern decisions should be his call alone. But Lieutenant Katsuragi proved to be even more skillful than expected, understanding what Rei wanted to do and answering him with a request for an Endless Eight pattern. They would ﬂy a continuous ﬁgure eight centered over the base below them. It would involve an intensive observation of the base itself, beginning at high altitude and gradually moving lower.
Rei complied with the request. It was a dangerous pattern, but there didn’t seem to be any action in the air at this point. It looked like there were hardly any JAM left to intercept them. There was no sign of any FAF ground attack ﬁghters around them, just a formation of small planes meant for dogﬁghting that were ﬂying on the perimeter.
There was an installation that may have been the entrance to an underground hangar bay next to the one remaining runway. It looked like a small white hill with a gaping entrance that rose to the runway’s side. If it hadn’t been destroyed, it most likely was the sole remaining escape route the JAM had left on the base. Occasionally, several black JAM planes would appear at it and begin to take oﬀ, only to be picked oﬀ by the FAF’s ﬁghters. Not on the runway, but immediately after they’d cleared it. It was as if they were swatting ﬂies.
Rei had a feeling that it was an ant queen, not a ﬂy, which lurked underground at the bottom of that hole. It really did feel like they were there to exterminate a nest of ants. He wondered what methods FAF authorities were going to use to capture the base. Maybe they’d try pouring insecticide down the hole. He wondered what the men on
the surface there would see when they went underground. Probably nothing, Rei thought. The odds were good that they wouldn’t have time to see anything. They’d be too


busy being wiped out in some completely unexpected way by the JAM. If the JAM had really abandoned the base, they wouldn’t leave any clues behind. And if they were intending to defend it to the bitter end, they’d probably use that hole as a trap to draw the enemy to them. The humans weren’t going to get to see the inside of a JAM base that easily. The proof of that lay in bitter experience. They’d had many opportunities to penetrate a base over the decades they’d been ﬁghting, but never once had they managed to do it. Did they really think this time would be any diﬀerent? Rei wondered.
Yukikaze ﬂew her ﬁgure-eight course, descending as she did.
Rei approached the runway, ﬂying at low altitude as though he intended to land. That was when it appeared. A JAM plane. Just one. A relatively large high-speed ﬁghter of the type used for hit-and-away combat. It was out on the runway now, accelerating. All the FAF planes in the air banked around, getting into formation to intercept it.
What happened next was about what Rei had expected, although not entirely as he had imagined. JAM defenses launched from the white sand. Two types. One type was anti-aircraft missiles. They popped up from the sand and ignited their rocket engines in midair, then seemed to self-destruct as they accelerated upwards, scattering smaller pieces in every direction. They hadn’t destroyed themselves, however. The missiles had split into countless micro-missiles, which now sped toward the FAF planes that were still getting ready for their attack. The other type were small ﬁghter planes. Short range interceptors. Too many to count, not that there was any time to count them.
In an instant, Yukikaze had passed over the JAM ﬁghter on the runway. There was no time to target it. Instantly, Rei began coming back around to engage. At roughly the same moment, he saw the JAM attack slam into the FAF formation,


wiping it out. The JAM planes already in the air took up a protective formation around the one taking oﬀ and ﬂew after Yukikaze. Rei snapped her into a turn and then saw the disaster that had struck the ground below. The planes, probably taking oﬀ from the center of the base at supersonic speeds, had produced a shock wave that had left a round hole in the desert sand, which began to cave in. The rumble and roar was loud enough to be heard aboard Yukikaze. Cookie base was turning into an enormous crater right before his eyes.
All to let that one plane escape, Rei thought. They must have been preserving the ﬁre power they needed to escape, waiting for the FAF attack to let up. And then they’d abandoned the base. It didn’t look as though they planned to repair it, as they had in the past. But why? Why now?
“Multiple bogeys. JAM, closing in!” Lieutenant Katsuragi called out, his voice tense. Setting his ﬁre control radar range to super search mode, Rei calmly conﬁrmed the countless JAM contacts ﬂying at them.
“Support ﬁghters won’t make it here in time,” Lieutenant Katsuragi said. “The nearest one’s—”
“Don’t expect any support.”
Rei knew that slipping away from the enemy on his own wasn’t going to be easy. The swarm of JAM planes began to surround Yukikaze.
“The one they’re trying to protect is the plane that took oﬀ from the runway.” The other, smaller planes couldn’t ﬂy for long. They were like disposable interceptors. “Lieutenant, ﬁnd that plane. We’re taking it down. Get me a heading. Engaging!” he demanded, declaring his intention to attack to Lieutenant Katsuragi.
“Roger!” He paused a moment. “Two bandits, on our six! Get ready to break to starboard…now!”
Rei changed direction as he’d been told.


“Target sighted, closing fast,” said Lieutenant Katsuragi. “Locked on.”
It had been picked up on Yukikaze’s antiaircraft ﬁre control radar, which was able to track multiple enemies simultaneously. The ant queen. No, not an ant. A wasp. And Rei could tell that Yukikaze had no intention of letting it get away alive.
She turned to evade the smaller JAM ﬂying up from low in front of her.
It was here that Rei realized that the enemy planes were behaving strangely. They weren’t attacking. And not a single missile that had launched from the desert sands below had ﬂown after Yukikaze.
“Any time you’re ready, Captain Fukai. All loaded missiles are reading green.”
“Understood.”
Leveling oﬀ—though by all rights he shouldn’t have had time to do this, he realized—Rei looked outside of the cockpit. He searched for the target with his naked eye. It was heading toward them from the skies to their upper right.
“It’s going to get us!” shouted Lieutenant Katsuragi. “What are you doing?”
“I’m not picking up a target lock beam,” Rei replied. “What is that thing? Look at it. It’s—”
“It’s a JAM! What else do you need to know! Hurry up and ﬁre—”
Just then, Lieutenant Katsuragi choked in shock. Yukikaze was displaying a message that he couldn’t believe.
Don’t touch me…FO/I will try to communicate with BOGEY/do NOT attack…Capt.
What Rei saw was that the enemy plane had lowered its landing gear, and unless it was experiencing some sort of mechanical breakdown, that was a signal that it didn’t


intend to attack. It had been waiting for them, Rei realized. It had waited, enduring the intense attack, for Yukikaze to appear in the skies over Cookie base. Hoping that she would arrive so that they could talk to each other.