2


MAJOR BOOKER SHUT the ﬁghter maintenance ﬁle with a sigh and poured himself a cup of cocoa. “I’m busy as hell, but you just won’t wake up, will you Rei,” he muttered. Sitting down on his desk rather than in the chair, he picked up his mug. “Want some?” he asked Lieutenant Rei Fukai.
Rei sat in a wheelchair next to the major’s desk. His eyes remained closed. He didn’t move a muscle.
Every day of late, the major would wheel Rei to his oﬃce for about an hour. In the hospital, Rei is just a patient, but here in the SAF’s area he is a soldier and he’s treated like one, thought the major. The chances were very good that even a slight stimulus might be enough to bring him out of his coma.


“Not thirsty, I guess.” The major let out a little sigh and then drank his cocoa. “Self-service. Clean your own cup. What I wouldn’t give for a sharp, hot secretary. Don’t you think I need one?” The major looked at Rei. “ ’Not my problem.’ That’d be your answer, right? Isn’t that what you’d say, Rei? If you could talk. I can guess what you’d say.
“A soldier who can’t ﬂy. Pretty pathetic. Well, you and me both. Here I am, doing a monologue. Although, technically it’s not a monologue when you’re here ’cause I speak for you too.”
No response from Rei. Still, there was that one time when he thought Rei had reacted to hearing Yukikaze’s name. The major took that to be a good sign. Rei’s eyes had stayed closed, but his cheek had twitched.
Twice, Rei had opened his eyes. What are you reacting to? the major wondered. Maybe you’re ﬁghting the JAM in your head, but maybe you’re reacting to something in the outside world. I’d like to know which.
Major Booker had no medical expertise, but he knew Rei better than any of the medical staﬀ. He genuinely believed that Rei wanted to have these conversations with him. He’d gone so far as to set it up so that the telemetry from the brain wave monitor attached to Rei’s head could be received from anywhere in the SAF’s area. The idea was to feed it all in real time into the tactical computer in the SAF’s headquarters as he interacted with Rei. If there’s a correlation between changes in my friend’s brain waves and whatever I’m talking about, the major thought, then I’m having a conversation, not a monologue.
“It’s a touching eﬀort, Rei. I’m sure even you must appreciate that. The SAF’s tactical computer is monitoring you. You really are a big shot around here, aren’t you?”
At this point, analysis didn’t indicate that Rei was reacting to the outside world. It would have been nice if they could ﬁgure out a way to translate his thoughts directly


into speech. That wasn’t possible now, the major told Rei, but it eventually would be.
“What, you think that’s bullshit? No, eventually we’ll be able to achieve direct human–machine communication by thought alone. You’ll be able to pilot a plane just by thinking about it. You still wouldn’t be able to take those high-speed maneuvers, though. But if you sensed you were in danger and wanted to eject from your plane, you’d be able to activate the ejection sequencer even if you couldn’t move your arms or legs. Rei, you aren’t dead. You just can’t access the outside world, right? Somewhere, there’s still a connection open to you. I’m not giving up on you, because there’s a lot of stuﬀ I want to ask you about.”
Rei didn’t answer. He merely sat, his head slumped against the wheelchair’s headrest. The brain wave monitor he had on his head made him appear to be wearing a hat, but he was dressed in a ﬂight suit. He looked almost bored with the major’s monologue. Booker then changed his mind, deciding instead that it looked like Rei wanted to continue the conversation, so he pressed on.
“So, I told you before, didn’t I? About the newbie we got? For Unit 13. We ﬁnally found a successor for Captain Samia. Name’s Second Lieutenant Yagashira. The characters for his name are the ones for ‘bow’ and ‘head,’ by the way. He was asking about you. Wanted to know just what kind of group member you were. You keep gooﬁng oﬀ around here and pretty soon everyone’s going to know about you. A pilot’s career is short, after all. Even if the JAM don’t get you, you’ll eventually lose the strength you need to ﬂy. I learned that in the FRX00. What do you think?”
I can still ﬂy, he imagined Rei would answer.
“Yeah, you can still ﬂy,” the major responded. “When you wake up, we’ll have you back in the air in no time.”
The major had seen that, if left alone, Rei’s body would have become as immobile as a plant, and Booker didn’t


want that to happen. First of all, it would have been awful to see that happen to a friend, but as the personnel supervisor of the SAF, he didn’t want to lose a good pilot either.
There weren’t many people who could handle SAF duties. It wasn’t just a matter of training or experience but also the need for pilots with the right personality, men who could carry out their missions with a callous intensity.
The new guy who’d been assigned to 5th Squadron,
Second Lieutenant Yagashira, seemed a little weak in that respect. That is to say, the major thought coldly, he’s a little too human. Lieutenant Yagashira had asked who Rei was and such, unlike the other pilots in the SAF, who were indiﬀerent toward him. Lieutenant Yagashira might have been a ﬁrst-rate pilot, but he might also have been unsuited for duty in the SAF. Rei wasn’t like that. He seemed to have been born to serve. If he awakened, he’d want to be sent back into combat as soon as possible.
To prevent Rei’s body from atrophying, it was forcibly manipulated for quite a long time every day. At the rehabilitation center, he’d be loaded into a machine similar to a powered suit to exercise while his muscles were given electrical stimulus. Seeing what looked like a corpse being made to dance made the major want to shut his eyes the one time he went to observe the procedure. However, he gritted his teeth and toughed it out, because he’d been the one who had asked that it be done in the ﬁrst place.
“You should be grateful for all the trouble we’re taking over you, Rei. Still, even if I wasn’t around, they’d probably be doing it for you anyway. You’re a very important man, after all. What really happened to you? Did you meet the JAM? The actual, physical JAM? What were they like? Please, answer me. You’re my best friend and I’m tired of talking to you like this. There’s nothing wrong with your head. Those quacks in medical told me so, and just this once, I’m willing to believe them. Rei, say something to me—”


A knock at the door interrupted him. “Come in,” answered Major Booker, who proceeded to gulp down the last of his cocoa. He never would have guessed who was about to step through the door.
“General Cooley…” It was Brigadier General Lydia Cooley, boss of the SAF. Major Booker stood up from his perch on the desk and saluted, then oﬀered her the chair behind his desk. His oﬃce lacked a decent sofa for visitors to use.
The general pushed her glasses up higher on her nose, then looked at Rei.
“Is Rei in the way, ma’am?” the major asked. “I was about to call the nurse for him, so…”
“No, it’s ﬁne,” the general answered. “Leave Fukai where he is.”
“Did you come to see him about something?”
“Yeah, you could say that. The Intelligence Forces were asking me how long you intend to keep Fukai like this.”
“Hm,” the major replied. “They’re at it again, are they?” This is one superior who always brings tough problems for us, huh, Rei, he thought. “I’m not handing Rei over to them, General. He’s a vital member of the SAF.”
“As a pilot.”
“A pilot who will ﬂy again.” “When?”
“We’re working on that.”
Her demeanor softened. “I know, Major,” she replied and then sat down in his chair. “You’ve been putting a great deal of work into this. I don’t want to lose a good pilot either.”
So why don’t you handle the FAF Intelligence Forces’ demands that we hand over Rei to them on your end, General? Major Booker wanted to say, but just barely managed to hold his tongue.


“So what’s the problem then?” he said instead. “If we hand Rei over to Intelligence, he’ll end up a human vegetable. They won’t exercise him, just concentrate on treatments to extract the knowledge in his brain, if you can call that sort of stuﬀ ‘treatment.’ ”
“I think your method is the correct one,” she replied. “However, Intelligence doesn’t agree. It’s very irritating. How long has the lieutenant been like this?”
The major paused. “About three months,” he answered. “Today is day ninety-two, General.”
“Fukai’s term is nearly up, then.”
“What do you mean? Oh, of course. You mean his term of service. But Rei was going to reenlist.”
“Unless he makes that intention known himself, he’ll be discharged and become a regular civilian again. If that happened, then there’d be nothing the SAF could do to stop Intelligence.”
“Can they do that?”
“There are big shots in the FAF who are on board with the idea. They’ll make it happen, Major. If there’s something those people want to do, they’ll do it. And we don’t have any big shots of our own among them who can stop it from happening. I certainly don’t have that power. I am essentially the commander of the SAF, but oﬃcially the SAF falls under the direct command of the commander of Faery base’s Tactical Combat Air Corps. At the moment, that’s Lieutenant General Laitume. I’m just the deputy commander.”
“Even though we have our own autonomous headquarters.”
“Despite my rank, I have the responsibilities of a lieutenant general, and the work you do certainly wouldn’t normally be a major’s responsibility. That’s not saying they look down on the SAF. As the war’s tactical situation has changed, our duties have grown in importance, but the


internal organization of the FAF just hasn’t kept pace. Still, there’s no use complaining about it. That fact is that, in one month, we’re going to have to give up Fukai.”
The general kept her eyes locked in a sidelong glance on Rei as she said this. “Therefore—” she continued.
“Therefore, you’re ordering me to get Rei to sign his reenlistment papers, is that it?” the major replied, cutting her oﬀ.
“Yes,” she answered. “Is that possible?”
“A month, huh… I can’t say for sure, but if Intelligence takes him as he is now, Rei’s probably going to end up an invalid.”
“So long as my SAF has the power of a corps-level organization, that won’t matter.”
As if we, with our thirteen tactical recon ﬁghters, were on the same level as a corps that controls hundreds of planes, the major thought. Still, that was what they said. The data that the SAF gathered aﬀected the entire Faery Air Force, and that was especially true of the data in Rei’s head —if he had seen the JAM’s true form. That could aﬀect the fate of the FAF, if not the whole of Earth. General Cooley was determined to hand over that information herself, to present it as having come from the SAF. In short, she wanted a feather in her professional cap. And it was with an irritated tone that he told her this.
“That may be,” the general answered, nodding coolly. “Still, Lieutenant Fukai is a member of the SAF, and if he wasn’t in our unit, there would have been a lot of valuable information we never would have gotten. By that argument, I already have a feather in my cap, Major. And he may have information that’s just as important. I don’t want all your hard work to be in vain. You’re using the tactical computer in SAF headquarters for Fukai’s treatment. I was the one who authorized that. If I let Intelligence take him at this point, I’ll have no authority left.”


“I understand perfectly, General.” “How is the lieutenant doing?”
“Physically, he’s ﬁne. That’s because TAB-15 was so close to where he ejected. Those front-line surgeons are rough, but their work is top notch. I swear, they could probably cure a dead man, which is pretty close to what Rei was when they got to him.”
“I understand that he didn’t sustain any severe brain damage.”
“Probably because those front-line docs gave him the right initial treatment. The surgeons we have here at Faery base are good with the theory, but they don’t have the real-world experience. Our chief ﬂight surgeon Dr. Balume is pretty good, as long as you get to him in the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes before the booze messes him up.”
“I expect you’ll do ﬁne with him,” the general said. “Fukai was shot with a pistol, wasn’t he? Was he shot by his ﬂight oﬃcer, Lieutenant Burgadish? And where did he disappear to? If Fukai doesn’t recover, we’ll never know that either. I want to know what happened out there. Within the month. Our SAF can do anything, can’t it? That is all. Any questions?”
“None, General.”
“Very well, then,” she replied, nodding. She didn’t seem to want to leave the oﬃce.
“How about some coﬀee?” the major oﬀered. “You look tired.”
“So do you, Major,” she replied. “I’ll pass on the coﬀee, thanks. How’s the battle analysis going? We’re deﬁnitely seeing the action intensify around TAB-15. Do you think all the Sylphid losses are due to the old Yukikaze being shot down?”
“We’re about to have a tactical mission brieﬁng. You can hear it then—”


“I want to hear your personal opinion, Major.” “Oﬀ the record?”
“Yes.”
Strategy sessions, tactical development sessions, mission planning sessions, mission conduct brieﬁngs, and on and on and on. There were lots of meetings to attend, the faces varying with each group. At the strategy sessions where the requirements of the next generation of planes were discussed, people from Systems Corps would be in attendance. The tactical development sessions featured lots of soldiers, as you’d expect. And aside from all of those, there were the preﬂight brieﬁngs held before each sortie, with General Cooley invariably in attendance. At those meetings and in her oﬃce, the major had asked her for her personal opinions before. However, this was the ﬁrst time she’d ever come into his own oﬃce to ask for his opinion on anything.
“This is just between you and me, Major.” “What are you after, General?”
“I just want to hear your opinion.” “Hm…”
The general was worried. The normally conﬁdant, unﬂappable head of the SAF who usually had the bearing of a queen was losing her nerve.
This is a crisis for the entire SAF, the major thought. The Yukikaze incident had set oﬀ a shock wave that shook the entire Faery Air Force, but the SAF had absorbed the brunt of the blow. Yukikaze had become the ﬁrst plane in the SAF to be destroyed by the JAM. She’d transferred herself from that plane to the FRX00, and among that data was information related to the Sylphid and the Super Sylph, not to mention data on their performance envelope. If the JAM had gotten ahold of that too, it deﬁnitely would have put the Sylph at a disadvantage against the JAM. Just as Systems


Corps had said. But it was impossible that Yukikaze would have let that information leak out to the JAM.
“It has nothing to do with the Yukikaze incident,” the major declared. “Yukikaze would never have allowed the JAM to get that data.”
“But there is a possibility.”
“There’s also the possibility that the JAM gained data on the Sylph’s weaknesses from a plane other than Yukikaze. I’d say the odds of that are much higher.”
“I’d like to think that, Major.”
“Believe it and it’ll be true. This isn’t like you. If you stay this indecisive, you’ll blow your chance for a promotion, General.”
She didn’t answer; instead she simply sighed faintly. “General, the method Yukikaze used to transfer her data
has never been seen before, even by us. It was just as novel a feat to the JAM. There’s no way the JAM could have known what it was. Yukikaze used the U/VHF communication system on the FRX00 to send out false data. The real, vital information was transferred into the FRX00 via the attack control radar.”
Yukikaze had switched her ﬁre control radar into single plane pursuit mode to boost its directionality, then targeted the FRX00. She’d then broken her data up like a jigsaw puzzle and transferred it to the FRX00 by modulating the radar wave. The FRX00, being an electronic reconnaissance plane designed for the SAF, simply hadn’t sensed it as an attack lock-on and began recording and analyzing the data in real time. Yukikaze had made use of this.
“The FRX00’s main functions include an emergency decryption system. Even if the JAM somehow got hold of the decryption hardware, they couldn’t analyze it with the hardware alone. Only when the decoder was activated by the central computer could the code be deciphered. To decrypt the data that Yukikaze was transmitting, you’d need


something that used the same function structure. In real time. That was the FRX00.”
“There were three JAM in the area, though.”
“It’s possible that they possessed the same function structure as Yukikaze. That’s why, as soon as she’d gotten her new body, Yukikaze had to destroy them immediately, even if it meant risking killing Captain Samia and me. She struck and destroyed them before they had a chance to report anything to their friends. The new Yukikaze conﬁrms that.”
“Indeed.”
“There’s another cause for all the Sylphs we’ve been losing on the front lines. The FAF has been mass-producing the Sylphid in conjunction with its next generation ﬁghter. As you must know, a number of reasonable design changes were introduced in order to make the Sylph easier to produce. You could call it a new design. Another word for a more reasonable design is ‘simpliﬁed.’ They cut corners compared to the original model Sylphids. It’s possible that doing so introduced a defect into the design.”
“The losses aren’t limited to the new model Sylphs that have been introduced into battle, as you well know.”
“Hm…Well, if the fault isn’t in the planes, then it’s probably in our using less and less experienced pilots. Besides that…” the major said casually, “even if they did get the data from Yukikaze, it’s old data now, like the Sylph itself is old. It wasn’t the FRX00. The SAF needs to introduce it into service. Let’s restart our plans for mass production.”
“Not the unmanned version?”
“Humans are necessary. It’s best to have a lot of means to gather information.”
Major Booker said this while looking at Rei, who still sat silently in his wheelchair. What was making him and the general so fainthearted was Rei’s being stuck in this state, he thought.


“Speaking of new pilots, what do you think of the new man I transferred into our unit?” the general asked.
“Lieutenant Yagashira? He’s only been out on one sortie so far, so I can’t say anything about him.”
“He has plenty of combat experience. His record is exemplary.”
“He was an ace pilot at TAB-15. But he got shot down and sent here.”
“He was excellent. That’s why I grabbed him.” “Oh? You fancy him that way?”
The general glanced up at the major where he stood. “Beg your pardon, ma’am. The thing is, the SAF needs pilots like Rei.”
“Ones who don’t care about anything but themselves? Who act like machines? Look at Fukai now. He’s a broken machine.”
“Yeah,” Major Booker replied. “I can’t argue with that. Human doctors can’t cure him. If we can’t get his own self-repair system activated, he’s doomed. Still, Rei made it back. So did Yukikaze. Whether you like it or not.”
“That’s beside the point. And perhaps Yagashira is a bit too human for this work. If you decide that he’s of no use to us, be sure to tell me, Major.”
“Yes, General.”
“It’s time for the meeting,” said General Cooley, looking at her wristwatch as she rose from the chair. “I’m glad I got this chance to talk with you.”
“So am I, General.”
As she was about to leave, the major said something that halted her.
“Let’s put Yukikaze back into active service. The FRX00.” “Who will be the pilot?”
“Unmanned, I mean.”


“Doesn’t that contradict everything you’ve been saying, Major?”
“Yukikaze isn’t like any other unmanned plane. Not like an FRX99 that’s been unmanned since it was born. That’s Yukikaze, General. There’s a part of Rei in that plane.”
At the moment, Yukikaze was being used by other members of the squadron on training ﬂights designed to familiarize them with the FRX00. She hadn’t been sent out into actual combat because there was no way to predict what she’d do out there. However, as they used her for training ﬂights and he grew more familiar with her behavior, Major Booker’s expectations had grown. No matter how distinguished a name she’d made for herself, if she didn’t ﬂy, she’d end up being taken away by Systems Corps.
“The truth is that she wants Rei to ﬂy her. I think Yukikaze is just itching to ﬁght the JAM. She probably can’t stand the thought that she’s responsible for Sylphs being shot down like she was.”
“You’re anthropomorphizing a plane, Major.”
“Oh, Yukikaze is deﬁnitely not human, and it’s dangerous to think of her as such. But the truth is that she was raised by Rei. I think…she cares about Rei. Let’s send out Yukikaze for combat recon around the TAB-15 front. I think she’ll be able to ﬁnd out something there. I have a plan ready to go.”
“Roger, Major,” said General Cooley. “We can’t lose to the JAM, so we have to try anything that we can. The SAF mustn’t lose this ﬁght. Well then, Major. I’ll see you at the meeting.”
The general exited the room without another word. Back to her old self, he thought. He then called for the nurse on his intercom.
“Time for gym class, Rei. You stay asleep like this and you can kiss Yukikaze goodbye.”


Rei had just one month. He’d have to do something in that time. He had to.
When the nurse arrived, the major reminded her to change Rei’s clothes for his exercise session and then to shower him oﬀ after it was done. He always did this. And after promising him that she’d take care of it, the nurse took the wheelchair and left the room.
Rei needed something to stimulate him back to life. I wish he had a girlfriend, the major thought as he gathered his papers for the meeting. The closest thing Rei had to a lover was Yukikaze, and the time had come for the major to seriously consider putting Rei aboard her as a sort of shock treatment. He’d told Rei that he could ﬂy anytime, but he probably wasn’t strong enough. The doctors had told the major that they couldn’t guarantee that Rei would survive. However, it might be worth the risk. It was a decision not to be made lightly.
But before that, Major Booker grabbed the plan for using Yukikaze unmanned in combat and exited the oﬃce.
Tomorrow. Tomorrow she would ﬂy. General Cooley’s approval was in the bag. Rei, he thought, Yukikaze’s going back into action, and I’m going to let you see it.