6


LIEUTENANT KATSURAGI SAT down on a chair oﬀered to him by Major Booker and began to speak.
“You said that the JAM don’t understand the SAF. It’s similar to how I said that I don’t understand it either.”


“That’s right. That was on the recording,” said Captain Foss. “So?”
“It’s hard for me to explain, but I thought that Captain
Fukai thinks the same way that the JAM do. It’s something like total individualism. The JAM aren’t a collective being. I think that what the JAM can’t understand is how a collection of individualists like the SAF can still function together as a whole to resist them. Do you see what I’m getting at? I’ve only just come to the SAF, so it still seems miraculous to me. It seems unbelievable to me that Captain Fukai ﬂies Yukikaze for his own personal reasons, and the SAF thinks nothing of it. I doubt the JAM are the only ones who ﬁnd it amazing that a group of humans like that can function eﬀectively.”
“I know just what you’re talking about. I also thought that when I came here.”
“It was General Cooley who made the SAF like this,” said Major Booker as he sat down on Rei’s bed. “You could say that the organization was set up as a gathering of people with special personalities. They never expected problems like this would arise as a result. Well, I suppose we are special as far as the FAF is concerned, so it’s only natural that we get treated diﬀerently than other units. Maybe that’s what’s thrown the JAM for such a loop. I never would have expected that, though.”
“There are many diﬀerent types of humans,” said Captain Foss. “Usually, they tend to mix traits together within a group to form an average. However, the SAF was artiﬁcially set up to form a group with similar personality vectors. It isn’t just simple individualism, but rather like a non-group-based life philosophy of autonomy. It’s almost like a group that believes itself capable of parthenogenesis. Even their interest in the opposite sex is weak. They might have sexual desire, but very weak urges to form families or


protect and care for them. The term ‘special’ almost can’t help but carry a negative connotation.”
“That’s the SAF exactly,” replied Major Booker with a nod of his head. “But while it may be special among humans, there are plenty of animal species that live their lives in this way. Seen from that point of view, you could say that most people are the special ones and we’re the normal ones.”
Rei caught Captain Foss’s glance and, feeling as though she was criticizing him, spoke up.
“I don’t know if it’s normal or not, but human beings are capable of living on their own. It’s just that a life like that can be diﬃcult. After all, we humans were basically programmed to live in groups from the start.”
“By whom, I wonder,” said Lieutenant Katsuragi. “At the very least, it wasn’t the JAM. The JAM seem to understand the character of the SAF. The way they talked, it was like they expect life to be like that. It was almost as if they had scattered the seeds of life across the earth.”
“It’s possible that they did,” said Major Booker. “But I doubt they came to Earth to harvest it. Not to observe either. They invaded Earth seeking something that they could use. It’s possible that the JAM systematically modiﬁed the earth in order to make it suitable for themselves. But instead of organic life, what if it they had been attempting to grow computer networks? What we consider artiﬁcial information systems. Maybe what happened was the JAM set up an operation to create them automatically, but when they came here expecting them to be completed, they realized it had been contaminated by an unforeseen glitch called ‘humanity’ and didn’t know how to deal with it.”
“I got the feeling that the JAM just didn’t quite understand the human speech they were using,” Rei replied. “I wouldn’t take them at their word.”


“But I was thinking,” said Lieutenant Katsuragi. “The JAM can understand the personality of the SAF but don’t understand why you won’t ally yourselves with them.”
“That’s right, I agree. What about it?”
“I know there’s another group aside from the SAF who’s like that. So I was wondering, why didn’t the JAM contact
them as well? They can’t not know about them. That’s when it hit me: the JAM didn’t contact them because they can understand them.”
“There’s a group like that in the FAF?” Rei asked. “Other than the SAF?”
“Yeah, the combat unit of the FAF central intelligence department: the FAF Intelligence Forces,” Katsuragi said. “The group led by Colonel Rombert. I think that guy’s a JAM. I have no basis for it, just a gut instinct.”
“I get you,” Rei said after a moment’s consideration. “It makes a lot of sense when I think about it. That’s probably why I could have potentially been assigned to the Intelligence Forces instead of the SAF. If they’re working for the JAM, then it makes sense that the JAM would have no questions about them.”
Major Booker stared at Lieutenant Katsuragi, then silently took a swig of his beer.
“A double agent,” said Captain Foss. “Someone inside the FAF who knows its counterintelligence activities would certainly be an invaluable resource to the JAM.”
“Jack, what do you think about this?”
Major Booker gulped down his beer, then sighed and spoke.
“Keep your voices down. The room may be bugged. Except it’s too late now, isn’t it? Well, Colonel Rombert must have known we’d be on guard for this. Of course the SAF was aware of that possibility. Rombert is the absolute last


person we’d want to be a JAM duplicate, as far as we’re concerned.”
“Did the JAM have a chance to replace him?” Rei asked. “You must have checked that out.”
“I think that, if the JAM really wanted to, they could swap in a duplicate at any time. Besides, he doesn’t have to be a duplicate. It wouldn’t be so strange for a human to decide to help the JAM if he gets what he wants in return. There’s the question of how he made contact with them, but the possibility may be high that he has.”
“Long story short, the SAF suspects that Colonel Rombert is a cat’s paw for the JAM,” Rei said.
“Exactly. The fact is that, right now, we’ve received orders from Colonel Rombert to place you both in the newly formed retraining unit. That pretty much clinched our suspicions of him.”
“Retraining unit? When was that established?”
“I was told yesterday, during a meeting with General Laitume. It’s a conﬁrmed fact. Colonel Rombert’s in charge of it,” Major Booker said.
“They’re trying to separate me from Yukikaze?”
“I’m afraid that Colonel Rombert may destroy her,” said Lieutenant Katsuragi. “The JAM are sick and tired of her. Absolutely.”
“You said no, of course, right, Major?” “Not yet.”
“Why not?”
“It’ll be hard to ignore these orders,” the major explained. “It’d be hard even for General Laitume to do it. The existence of JAM duplicates has thrown the FAF into an existential crisis. Doubtless, Colonel Rombert is fanning the ﬂames. But if he’s a JAM, what would his motive be for doing that?”


“God damn, it’s a brilliant way to do this.” Rei sighed. “The colonel’s found a legitimate way to obtain information on the SAF. If he’s a JAM, he could take over the SAF and then use it to carry out the JAM’s ends. Isn’t that a clear enough motive? If you follow these orders, the SAF will be destroyed. Jack, you don’t want to recognize them, do you?”
Booker answered with a silence that was broken by Lieutenant Katsuragi saying that he was thirsty too.
“You can have my drink if you want,” said Captain Foss. He took a sip from the beer she held out to him, then
sounded determined when he spoke.
“I’m going,” he said. “You can say that Captain Fukai is too badly injured to be moved, but I want to have a word with Colonel Rombert.”
“It’s General Cooley’s decision, and a diﬃcult one. But we don’t have much time. General Cooley has to make it as soon as possible,” said Major Booker. “At any rate, the intelligence you two brought back is beyond anything we expected. It’s requiring us to completely rethink the meaning of our war with the JAM. Compared to that, this thing with Colonel Rombert is just a trivial problem.”
“Are you saying there’s no point in ﬁghting anymore?” asked Rei. “Is the SAF abandoning its war against the JAM?”
“Captain Foss, tell them your prediction.”
“Yes, Major Booker,” Captain Foss said, formality creeping back into her voice. “With the additional data that Yukikaze brought back, I can make a report on the results of my profacting of the JAM. In a nutshell, the JAM desire competitive coexistence with the SAF. I haven’t formally submitted my report to General Cooley yet, but—”
“What do you mean by competitive coexistence?” Rei said.
“A relationship wherein we shut up and let the JAM get the jump on us. It would change the relationship to one


similar to where we compete for a common food source, sometimes working with the JAM and at other times competing against them. That seems to be how the JAM conceptualize us. It’s clear that if we abandon our war with them, we won’t be able to compete and will ultimately be consumed by them.”
“That’s practically the same as what we have now. Nothing would change.”
“That wouldn’t be true for the FAF and the people of Earth,” Captain Foss continued. “I predict that, since the JAM will have completed their information gathering from the humans here on Faery, the probability is high that they’ll decide that the war here is no longer necessary and initiate a full-scale invasion of their main target: Earth.”
“They’ll just ignore us?”
“The JAM were sounding you and Yukikaze out as possible allies on this mission, but their objective wasn’t to gain a strategic advantage in battle. For them, Yukikaze and the SAF are the only things that they don’t understand, meaning that they’ve judged you to represent anomalies compared to the rest of the humanoid beings in the FAF, which they do understand. The JAM wanted to conﬁrm that before they begin the full-scale invasion of Earth. If they decide that the SAF are just normal humanoids as well, then I believe that they’ll immediately begin their ﬁnal attack. No, actually, that wouldn’t even be necessary. I think the war here on Faery could go on for the time being while they realize their original goal without us humans even knowing it.”
“And what was their original goal?” asked Lieutenant Katsuragi.
“That, I don’t know. But if that happens, the war here on Faery will become completely meaningless and we humans would never know it. It’s possible that’s already happened.


But the JAM didn’t get their answer about Captain Fukai. Therefore, their questions about the SAF remain.”
“According to Captain Foss, developing a new strategy against the JAM is going to be a nightmare,” said Major Booker. “Even a huge JAM attack on the FAF might just have as its tactical goal intel on us as a prelude for their ﬁnal attack. It won’t be the sort of localized war we’ve seen here. It’ll be the full might of the JAM hitting all of our forces everywhere on this planet simultaneously.”
Neither Rei nor Lieutenant Katsuragi could say a single word.
“It doesn’t matter if the SAF stood down against the JAM or even joined forces with them. They’ll still end up attacking us. I’m convinced that’s what they’ll do. Our choice is to kill or be killed, the same as it always was. But the meaning of the battle will be diﬀerent. And there you have it.”
“How much time do we have, Captain Foss?” Lieutenant Katsuragi asked. “Do we have enough time to think this over carefully?”
“The time needed to rethink the meaning of why they’re ﬁghting and ﬁnd that answer is diﬀerent for each of us,” she replied in an objective tone, then continued. “But I think the JAM have completed their preparations for the all-out attack. There’s no mystery about when they did it—they’ve been ready ever since they abandoned Richwar. I can rightly guess that they were ready to put their plan into action once they’d seen Captain Fukai’s attitude. Cookie base was a chess piece they sacriﬁced to lure Yukikaze to them.”
“You’re saying I was the trigger for the full-scale attack?”
“Yukikaze was the one who cocked it,” said Major Booker. “All you did was follow the mission.”
“So did Yukikaze.”


“I know. Yeah, if I’d just been aware of her combat awareness, I might have been able to do something about it. If Captain Foss’s prediction is correct and the ﬁnal attack is now imminent, I would be the one responsible,” Major Booker said
“Excuse me, sir,” Captain Foss said. “There was nothing you could have done, Major. You can’t stop Yukikaze. And we can’t negotiate with the JAM. This is as pointless as standing in front of an erupting volcano and arguing about who ignited it. That’s what I think, at least.”
“Speaking of a full-scale attack by the JAM, it’d exceed the expectations of the FAF, wouldn’t it?” Rei said. “They wouldn’t have time to evacuate everyone back to Earth. The FAF will have to ﬁght. But that’s natural, since it’s an organization created to ﬁght. The same goes for us.”
“We have no chance of winning,” said Lieutenant Katsuragi. “And we can’t surrender. I doubt a white ﬂag would work with the JAM.”
“I have hope,” Foss said.
“You think the JAM will spare you if you act like you like them, Captain Foss? That’s naive,” said Lieutenant Katsuragi.
“I mean we have a strategy to avoid defeat,” she replied. “Become composite life-forms. That’s the only way to keep the JAM from beating us.”
“The FAF will never be able to do that,” Major Booker replied. “The FAF battle computers see humans as a hindrance that they’ll cut loose when things go to hell. If the humans can’t retreat back to Earth, then we’ll have to deal with it. But not by becoming this new composite species or whatever the hell you want to call it.”
“But I think that the SAF could do it the same way that Yukikaze and Captain Fukai have,” said Lieutenant Katsuragi. “You are literally a special force.”


“In short, it’s a way to not lose to the JAM even if they kill us. But it’s just a theory,” Rei replied. “Logically, I understand. When I’m with Yukikaze, I have no regrets. But what about you? Could you allow yourself to die in battle based on your theory?”
“Well…I won’t know that till it happens,” said Captain Foss. “But at least when it does, it’ll be after feeling the satisfaction of knowing that my prediction was correct.”
“Maybe the JAM might even pay some respect for your pride.”
“I don’t want to lose, not to anyone. Not to the JAM, to the SAF, or even to myself. That’s all. Besides, I didn’t predict that we’re going to lose. The JAM will cope with the composite life-forms by changing themselves. I believe that the JAM themselves will evolve to become more like us so that they can achieve competitive coexistence. In that case, I can even think that the SAF will end up capturing a JAM and forming a composite life-form with it. Rei…Captain Fukai, if hearing my prediction now about the JAM’s all-out attack makes you think only about wanting to die with Yukikaze, then I’ve misdiagnosed you. You’ll need a bit more counseling.”
“Jack,” began Rei as he climbed out of bed, “give me clearance to see Yukikaze. Input my report into the tactical computer, along with Captain Foss’s prediction.”
“What do you plan to do?”
“I want to see Yukikaze’s reaction. I have a feeling she’s searching for me, and she won’t stop accessing the FAF network till I go to her. She can’t understand the diﬀerences between the personalities and nature of the people in the SAF and other humans. It’s dangerous to leave her as she is. I’m going to go and explain it to her. Edith, you come too. And don’t say that all she and I think about is dying.”
“All right,” said Major Booker. He checked his wristwatch. “I’ll give you thirty minutes. Get back here


within that time, then eat and get some rest. We’ve got a meeting with General Cooley tomorrow at 08:00. Lieutenant Katsuragi, stay here. You have a report to write.”
“Yes, Major.”
“Then deliver your report to me orally, based on it.” “Roger.”
“Where is Yukikaze?” Rei asked. “Is she being serviced?” “In the hangar. She wanted it that way. She doesn’t
want anybody to touch her until she’s sure you’re all right. We’ll never get her repaired at this rate. So go, you have thirty minutes. I’ll lend you my watch.”
Taking the major’s watch, Rei went to see Yukikaze, still clad in his sweatsuit.






HER CANOPY WAS shut tight. Pulling out the folding ladder, his feet shod only in white cloth med center slippers, he climbed up and turned the exterior canopy handle. Then, after helping Captain Foss into the rear seat, Rei settled into the front.
“You’re really sweaty,” Captain Foss said. “You’re amazingly lively considering what you’ve been through. I have a feeling you think my prediction is just a theory.”
Without answering her, Rei plugged in the headset he’d brought with him from the prep room and switched on the main power to the instruments. On the main display appeared a scrolling list showing the network types and discrete computer IDs Yukikaze was accessing. He knew that the SAF’s tactical computer was acting as the intermediary. Suddenly, the display cleared.
“It went out. Like it broke.”
“No, Yukikaze just cut the connection with the tactical computer. —Yukikaze, this is Captain Fukai. Were you looking for me?”
Yukikaze didn’t answer. The display remained dark.


“It looks like she still can’t understand human speech, Captain Fukai.”
Ignoring her, Rei continued.
“Yukikaze, if you’ve learned anything through the FAF computer network, then report it to me now. Do you understand?”
No answer. It was as if Yukikaze was asleep. Rei felt as though his body was shrinking. He softened his voice, as if telling her to relax, that it was okay to sleep here.
“What’s wrong, Yukikaze…? Why won’t you answer me?” Rei thought about her consciousness, then came to his
senses. Yukikaze wouldn’t rest. She didn’t sleep. She was always ﬁghting. He had to be like that too, even here. He had to get through to her, not with words, but with his own ﬁghting spirit. Yes, this wasn’t a bed. This was a place of combat.
Rei ﬂipped the master arm switch to ON. Initiate search for the enemy.
“Switch the power on back there too, Captain Foss. Set it to electronic warfare mode.”
“Roger.”
Just as he’d expected, Yukikaze reacted immediately. A diagram appeared on the main display, followed by a message from Yukikaze. Rei and Captain Foss read it, completely speechless.
JAM are here/attack this point…Capt.
“What?” whispered Captain Foss. “Where are they?” The diagram indicated a section of Faery base. One section was highlighted with a square mark indicating the enemy. Captain Foss recognized it even faster than Yukikaze could display the area name.
“That’s the Systems Corps, where my last job was.” “There are JAM in the Systems Corps?”


“I think it’s the retraining unit. Major Booker mentioned that it’s been set up as a lower branch of Systems Corps. It’s already been gathered together. Or maybe she’s telling us that Colonel Rombert is there.”
“I need more details. Edith, start up the T-FACPro II software. Yukikaze can use it to communicate more clearly.”
This wasn’t going to be done in thirty minutes. There’d be no eating and no sleeping. Rei was already regretting how little sleep he’d gotten as he explained to Captain Foss how to start the program. For the Special Air Force, it was the beginning of a long, restless night. A night during which they couldn’t aﬀord to waste a single moment.


OceanofPDF.com


















VIII GOOD LUCK
OceanofPDF.com