2


THE PERSONNEL FILE he’d requested on Lieutenant Akira Katsuragi reached Major Booker’s desk that same day. He noticed that the characters spelling his name in Japanese were the ones for redbud, fortress, and clear. After skimming through it, he summoned Captain Fukai and Captain Foss to his oﬃce.
Rei, still on standby and eager for his next mission, came quickly.
The night of Chef Murullé’s death, after that ill-fated lunch meeting, the major had gone back to his quarters with Rei to share some whiskey. Booker took Murullé’s death harder than usual. As he got increasingly drunk, Major Booker started complaining about the SAF’s manpower shortage. Rei comforted him by saying that he would ﬂy Yukikaze even without a ﬂight oﬃcer. He had his reasons for not wanting one. Major Booker had broached the idea of Rei and Yukikaze ﬂying a mission to proactively make contact with the JAM. There was no way of knowing what might happen on a mission like that, and Rei didn’t want a repeat of his experience of having the JAM feed him the ﬂesh of his last ﬂight oﬃcer. When he told the major that, Booker replied that he understood how Rei felt, but that there was no way he could let him ﬂy out there on his own. Two would be better than one, and while he was sorry about what had happened to Lieutenant Burgadish, the major pointed out


that Rei might not have made it back alive had he ﬂown solo last time. The old scar on his face was ﬂushed as he talked. The major had gone on, saying that he didn’t want to lose any more of his people either, but that just wasn’t a realistic option, and so he had resigned himself to it. And he had to deal with that on his own. Rei had remained silent and simply reﬁlled his old friend’s empty glass.
It had been two days since that meeting, and Rei hadn’t been sent out with Yukikaze. Rei entered the oﬃce and immediately asked, “Have you worked out the details for my and Yukikaze’s new mission?” The major replied that no, he hadn’t yet. Still, the major’s attitude now made his drunken bellyaching from a couple of nights back seem like it never happened.
“You get some good news for a change, Jack? You look like you just inherited a fortune.”
“You can tell? Nothing to do with money, I’m afraid, but I’ve got you a new ﬂight oﬃcer. That’s enough to make me happy. His transfer isn’t oﬃcial yet, but as long as there’s no complaint from our end, it’s a done deal. Now we won’t be down a plane anymore. I’m still putting together your special strategic recon mission against the JAM, but I’d like you to ﬂy some regular tactical recon missions in the meantime. The new guy can get used to Yukikaze while you do.”
“Shouldn’t we leave him out of the special mission?” “That’s part of why I want to see how good he is,” the
major said. “Anyway, I want to see if he’ll be of any use to us under ﬁre. Check over his ﬁle to see what kind of person he is before he gets here.”
“What, are you telling me to play nice with the new kid? This isn’t kindergarten. What the hell’s the matter with you?”
“I’m not asking you to get along with him. Of course I wouldn’t expect you to do that. Actually, kindergarten is a


good way of putting it, since he is kind of like a transfer student. Think of him as a student from the Colonel Rombert School. He’s the kind of guy you’d throw into an intelligence war or something like that.”
Rei seemed a bit taken aback. “I didn’t realize we were that short of qualiﬁed people,” he said. “You’re really going to have me ﬂy with a spy in the back seat?”
“I know how you feel. That’s why I’m giving you the background info on him.”
“I suppose there’s no point in my saying no to this.” “Not before you ﬂy with him under ﬁre. If you judge
there to be a real problem after we get him up to speed, and not one just based on your emotions, then report that to me. If it means anything, I don’t like having to pair you up with a guy like this either.”
“Hmm…” Rei replied. As he skimmed the personnel ﬁle of his new ﬂight oﬃcer that he’d been handed, Captain Foss arrived.
“Sorry I’m late,” she said.
“You’re actually earlier than I expected. Looks like you’re getting into the ﬂow of things here.”
“Yes, thankfully.”
“Well,” said Rei. “If you don’t need me now, then—” “Hold it. I’m not done with you yet, Captain Fukai.”
Rei stopped at the door. Major Booker brought Captain Foss up to speed on the new ﬂight oﬃcer’s planned arrival, including the detail that he was one of Colonel Rombert’s men.
“Now, you see,” the major said to her, “I’d like you to analyze the personality of this new man. If the ﬁle they sent isn’t enough, ﬁgure something out. I especially want you to ﬁnd out if he’ll be able to work with the SAF in general and Rei in particular. Take Colonel Rombert’s expectations into


account as well. Since he’s about to take up his post here, I’d like you to give this matter your continuous attention.”
“Yes, Major. In other words, you want me to try profacting this man,” she replied.
“I’m not that familiar with your ﬁeld’s terminology, but I think so. I thought it was called proﬁling, though.”
“Proﬁling techniques were never widely accepted in the ﬁelds of psychology and psychiatry. Since the term was also broadly interpreted and used arbitrarily by the general public, it fell into disfavor in the scientiﬁc world. Profacting is a method used to analyze the load intensity of the mind and body in order to theoretically predict a subject’s behavior or psychology.”
“It’s your specialty. I want you to analyze him the same way you did Rei.”
“Understood, sir. I suppose we’ll need to analyze Colonel Rombert’s psychology as well.”
“Just be prudent and don’t be too obvious about it. I know you can do this.”
“I’ll try to live up to your expectations, Major.”
“Good to hear. Ask for Captain Fukai’s opinion in your analysis. He knows more about Colonel Rombert and the relationship between the SAF and the Intelligence Forces than you do.”
“You want me to help with this too?” Rei asked.
“Right,” the major said. “You’ll do this together. This is a question that concerns your continued existence, Rei. The results of his psych analysis will be helpful in that regard.”
“Roger,” Rei said, nodding. “It’ll be nice, but don’t you think you’re going a little overboard with all this? It doesn’t matter who they send to us. If he’s useless in combat, we throw him out, that’s all. You used to say that was all that matters.”


“But it’s better to know the trouble spots beforehand, right?” said Captain Foss. “You can’t be too careful.”
“That’s especially true for this new guy,” Major Booker added. “It may seem like I’m overdoing things here, but I don’t think it’s a waste of time, so it’s okay.”
Major Booker rubbed the back of his head with his palm, taking some time to let the mood change before he continued.
“I’ve been thinking about trying a direct exchange of information with the JAM. I want Yukikaze and Captain Fukai to carry it out.”
“Will the enemy go along with it?” asked Captain Foss. “Make contact? With the JAM? We don’t know anything about them. It’s too dangerous!”
“Which is why I’m working on the plan,” Major Booker said. “If we just do it all of a sudden, it won’t work. After thirty years of ﬁghting them, we still know nothing of the JAM. I’ve decided that it’s time for the SAF to initiate its own strategy regarding them. The tactical reconnaissance we’ve been conducting up till now hasn’t been getting us anywhere, and coming up with tactical plans to forestall losing will never let us win. What we want is a strategy that will lead to victory. General Cooley agrees with me, so beginning with all of the data we’ve collected on the JAM thus far, I want to begin reconstructing a portrait of them. In other words, Captain Foss, I want you to do that profacting thing you mentioned. On the JAM. I want a psychobehavioral analysis of them.”
“But the JAM aren’t human,” Rei protested.
“I know that. I also know that only humans can do this job. The question we’re trying to answer in this case is this: what is the true nature of the JAM? I want to know what they’re after. I also want to know what their goal, their ultimate goal, is in all of this. Besides that, why are they sending these human duplicates to inﬁltrate us? I think it’s


because they want to know more about us, but I want some theoretical backing to that supposition.”
“The JAM’s ultimate goal?” asked Captain Foss. “That’s pretty obvious, isn’t it? They want to invade Earth and conquer it. Are you saying that’s not what they’re after?”
“While it may be true that the JAM invaded Earth before and are still trying to gain a foothold, the idea that they’re
trying to conquer the planet is just our subjective impression as humans. Or rather than our impression, it’s your impression. The SAF doesn’t see it that way. At the very least, General Cooley and I don’t think so.”
“You’re right,” Rei added. “I don’t think the JAM’s objective is simply to conquer Earth. If they were just trying to invade, they could have pulled that oﬀ without us humans knowing it. They still could. They may already have.”
“I agree. It’s as though the JAM never expected humanity to try and stop their invasion, and their actions toward us since then seem to support that. That still holds true, but their behavior is changing. They’re changing their strategy because they now seem to have realized that achieving their objective is going to require dealing with us humans ﬁrst. If they’re adopting a new strategy, then we can’t aﬀord to ignore it. We’re about to see a major turn in the course of the war, which means we can’t keep ﬁghting it the way we’ve been. We’ve got to come up with a countermeasure, and fast! Is that clear, Foss?” Major Booker said, chiding the young doctor.
“You have to understand that conquering Earth and
conquering human society are two entirely diﬀerent things. Homo sapiens isn’t the only species on Earth. To an outsider observing us, humanity may not appear to be its rulers. I’ve said over and over, that’s just human prejudice talking. You might even call it human conceit. Someone could just as easily say that plants rule the earth, or the oceans, or


possibly that our computers do. The JAM certainly behave as though they see things that way. What I want from you in your role as a specialist is to analyze what the JAM have done so far and then ﬁgure out what they’re thinking and how they plan to seize Earth. Add Captain Fukai’s experience to the data and then go to it.”
“I’m not a specialist in analyzing JAM behavior and psychology!” Captain Foss insisted.
“Nobody’s a specialist in that,” Rei said. “No human at least. Yukikaze and the computers probably know more about that than we do.”
“We can’t go on saying that!” Major Booker shot back. “First of all, there’s a problem in our not being able to take pride in being the ones who know the most about the JAM. There are probably lots of civilians outside of the FAF who also have an interest in this. Some among them may be doing analysis that’s even more pertinent than what the SAF is doing.”
“Yeah,” said Rei. “Like Lynn Jackson.”
“People like her who think outside the box are a dying breed. Yeah, I was also thinking of her while I was talking just now.”
“Lynn Jackson? You mean the world-famous journalist?” asked Edith.
“Right,” replied Major Booker. “She’s been covering the JAM and the FAF for a long time now. It’s her life’s work. We owe her a lot, especially Rei here.”
“Really?” replied Captain Foss. “I read her book and found it fascinating. That’s what ﬁrst gave me the idea of joining the FAF.”
“I wonder what Lynn would say if she heard that,” Major Booker said. “Well, the younger generation is deﬁnitely growing up. You’ve put yourself a lot closer to living JAM than she has. It’s an undeveloped ﬁeld, and you’ve got a


chance to pioneer it. That’ll become a real feather in your cap, one that may even outdo what Lynn’s working on.”
“Are you being sarcastic, sir? Because that’s how I’m hearing it. I came here to be a doctor for the SAF ﬁrst and a researcher second, so—”
“I was hoping to get you ﬁred up for this, Captain Foss. If I rubbed you the wrong way, you’re just going to have to accept that your superior oﬃcer is that kind of guy and then move on. I may not mean to wound your pride, but I don’t have a lot of time to always be careful not to. In short, I really don’t give a damn. No matter what your motivations were in joining the SAF, right now, your talents are needed. Do your profacting thing on the JAM. That’s an order. You’re both to get to work on it at once and make it a top priority ongoing project. This is the ﬁrst stage of our strategic reconnaissance mission against the JAM. That is all. Dismissed.”
“Yes, Major.”
Captain Foss saluted. Rei followed suit. They left the oﬃce.