5


GENERAL LAITUME, HOLDING, holding his glass in one hand, his cheeks stuﬀed with meat, looked at Llanfabon and Yukikaze in the distance. “The SAF certainly has some nice ﬁghters. I’m jealous,” he said.
“The SAF only has thirteen ﬁghter planes at its disposal,” General Cooley replied. “I believe you have two hundred seventy-nine of them under your command.”
“They’re yours, don’t worry, General Cooley. Besides, I don’t have two hundred seventy-nine planes in my air wing anymore. It’s two hundred seventy-seven now. We lost two of them yesterday. I thought the SAF had conﬁrmed that.”
“I beg your pardon, General.”
Rei knew General Cooley wouldn’t make a mistake about the number of planes. She was testing General Laitume, and obviously he knew his job.
“We hit them and hit them, but the JAM keep coming. It’s like they spring out of nowhere. I’ve really come to hate it.”
“We can’t ignore the fact that war weariness is spreading, even through the FAF’s upper ranks,” added Colonel Rombert. “The brass have that luxury. The lower ranks are too busy ﬁghting to complain about how much


they hate doing this. They’re the ones who are keeping the FAF aﬂoat.”
“What do you mean by that, Colonel?”
“If you resign your commission, a man of your position is guaranteed a life back on Earth. It’s not like that for the soldiers at the front lines. Many are convicts. That’s why they can’t say how much they hate this.”
“And which are you?”
“I’m a man who’s enjoying his work here. I’ll have many happy memories of this place after I retire. Even more so if we win the war with the JAM.”
“Saying that war weariness is spreading through the upper ranks is inexcusable, Colonel,” General Cooley said. “If I were to say something like that, a commissioned oﬃcer in the Intelligence Forces like you would probably have me court-martialed.”
“Hardly. I don’t have that sort of authority. I might want to, but I doubt you’d ever willingly abandon your position and status. I expressed myself poorly. My point was that the high command doesn’t have a way to break this stalemate we’re in. That’s related to the feelings of helplessness we have toward the JAM, because we still don’t even know what we’re ﬁghting. The SAF exists because it possesses a system that can help us discover what the JAM are. Do you have any leads on that, Major Booker?”
“If I had good news, I’d have thrown a huge gala party instead of this lunch meeting. Unfortunately, I don’t,” Major Booker said. “There’s something the people in charge of the Intelligence Forces and the regular forces want to hear from the SAF.”
“And are you going to tell us?”
The general, who’d been happily grazing at the buﬀet, sat down for the ﬁrst time. The others followed suit, all save General Cooley, who began to speak.


“The information I’m about to tell you is secret. SAF Unit 7 over there has been assigned the task of disrupting any attempt at spying on this meeting. Our unit can’t interfere with how you use this information after I give the report, but I hope that you will be extremely careful with what you choose to do with it.”
“Hm. You’ll put this down in a memo, won’t you? I didn’t bring my private secretary because you told me not to, but —” General Laitume said.
“There will be no memos made. The details are simple. I’ll have Major Booker give the report. Major?”
Major Booker was about to stand up when General Laitume told him to stay seated and just get on with it.
“All right, regarding the ﬁrst point,” the major began. “I’d like to amend the oﬃcial record on the shooting down of the former SAF Unit 13, piloted by Second Lieutenant Yagashira. While it was reported that his plane was shot down by the JAM, in truth he was downed by Captain Fukai here, a ﬁrst lieutenant at the time, piloting Yukikaze. I was also aboard Yukikaze when it happened. It was not a mistake. The shooting was intentional.”
“Was Yagashira attempting to desert under ﬁre?” asked Colonel Rombert. “If he was, then shooting him down would have been the normal thing to do. There was no reason to cover it up.”
“We determined that Lieutenant Yagashira was a JAM,” Major Booker replied. “He was a human duplicate created by the JAM. Captain Fukai gave us a report of encountering these JAM duplicates. We suspected that these humanoid weapons had already inﬁltrated the FAF, and I’m here today to report that they have.”
“Hm…” said General Laitume. “That makes things even more complicated for us.”
“Can you give us some proof this isn’t some excuse from the SAF?” asked Colonel Rombert. “As in, some proof


that this isn’t your attempt to cover up a deadly friendly ﬁre incident against an SAF plane and place the blame on the JAM? Aren’t you just trying to protect Lieutenant—pardon me, Captain Fukai there? I don’t know how else to put this, but his mental state at the time probably wasn’t that stable.”
“I was the one who ordered Yagashira’s plane to be shot down,” Major Booker said. “I’ve had Captain Foss here prepare a certiﬁcate conﬁrming the mental state of both myself and Captain Fukai. You may also question Captain Foss about it directly. Captain Foss has her suspicions that the enemy we ﬁght isn’t real but an imaginary one created by the SAF, which is why she transferred into our unit. In other words, she’s a neutral party here.”
“I never seriously claimed that the JAM were something that the SAF was making up,” Captain Foss protested. “All I said was that I thought it was a possibility. But that was just my own way of analyzing the SAF’s culture of secrecy. That being the case, I’d judge the probability of the report Major Booker just gave being some sort of propaganda to be very low. This notion that Lieutenant Yagashira was a JAM is news to me, but I ﬁnd it hard to believe that the SAF would invent a threat that would endanger its own internal organization. If Major Booker is lying now, then I can only speculate that the SAF is operating in a way that I cannot understand.”
“The SAF is already on record as having committed serious oﬀenses,” General Laitume interjected, a look of disdain on his face. “There was the indiscriminate ﬁring upon a front-line base. And I believe the personal name of the plane taking that action was Yukikaze. Since the attack occurred while the plane was ﬂying unmanned, we just put it down as a programming error. Do you know how much trouble I went through to take care of that?”
“That incident and the Lieutenant Yagashira incident are not unrelated,” Major Booker said. “Yukikaze knew that


human duplicates like Yagashira had already inﬁltrated that front-line base, TAB-15. That’s why she initiated the attack. But this isn’t a problem we can leave to our combat machines. You understand, don’t you? Every human is now under suspicion. If our combat machines, combat intelligences, and computers decide that they just don’t want to deal with humans anymore, they’re capable of cleaning up the battleﬁeld by just clearing us out. That’s the reason this meeting is being held in such secrecy.”
“May I assume that when you intentionally had Lieutenant Yagashira sortie and destroyed a very expensive ﬁghter plane along with him, it was because you couldn’t conﬁrm beforehand whether or not he was a JAM?” asked Colonel Rombert. “You determined he was a JAM for the ﬁrst time when he took hostile action against you during the sortie.”
“That’s correct, Colonel,” said Major Booker.
“If these human duplicates are indistinguishable from us,” the colonel continued, “then there is a deﬁnite possibility that our battle computers would conclude that all humans would have to be excluded from the battleﬁeld. It’s a logical decision.”
“Why are you saying it so calmly?” General Laitume shot back. “Are you telling me you think that’d be for the best?”
“No, I’m just doing my job. The JAM aren’t the only enemies the FAF has had to worry about. We used to face subversive elements causing trouble here. Inﬁltrators from Earth. In other words, humans. There were lots of people, both civilians and government agents, who came here to gather intel, then leak information in order to damage the FAF. There was no way we could spot them from their external appearances because they were all real humans. If the JAM are doing that now, then there’s no diﬀerence between them and those spies we used to get. Exposing


them will be our job. The battle computers certainly can’t do this. Major Booker, about how many JAM do you think have inﬁltrated us so far?”
“We expect that any ﬂight crews who were recently shot down and were missing temporarily before their rescue have been copied by the enemy and turned into these ‘JAM people.’ ”
“JAM people, huh,” murmured Colonel Rombert. “Call them Jammies. Too bad they don’t have some distinguishing feature on them, like a reversed-spin tail or something.”
“They have no distinguishing features. Lots of these Jammies have probably inﬁltrated our front-line bases. There are at least a dozen questionable people here at Faery Base.”
“If you’ve got the suspects marked, it makes my job simple,” the colonel said. “I’ll have them detained. This is a great chance to get some information about the JAM.”
“That won’t work,” Major Booker replied. “They won’t know why you’re holding them because they aren’t aware that they’re JAM.”
“I’ll check that out on my own. That’s our duty, after all. Leave it to me.”
“I don’t care if you investigate them, Colonel,” said General Cooley, “but under no circumstances are you to let on that they’re JAM. Not even to the people you’re holding. That’s the second point that the SAF wishes to convey.”
“What do you mean, General? I don’t understand.”
“If this becomes common knowledge, we’re going to see the morale of the entire Faery Air Force drop right before our eyes. The only outcome will be the FAF collapsing from within,” Cooley said. “Besides, I can imagine that those we’ve marked as possible JAM have either been tortured or hypnotized into not even knowing that they are JAM. If that’s true, then there’s nothing to be gained by letting this go public.”


“Their objective is to gather information about human beings. They have to return to their side once they have it,” said Major Booker, picking up where General Cooley had left oﬀ. “When these Jammies leave on a sortie, they take their information with them and then separate from their units, possibly by allowing themselves to be shot down. The SAF’s ﬁghters can go after them. We’d like you to permit us to do this. That’s point three, and we’d like your opinion on it, sir.”
“My God,” murmured Captain Foss. “It’s too risky.”
“This isn’t anything that I have the authority to approve,” General Laitume said, an edge in his voice. “This entertainment you’ve arranged isn’t nearly good enough to move me to do something like that. No, this is a joke. If the SAF engages in these activities, I will not give my approval! Captain Foss was right, this is dangerous. If you do that without some public announcement of why, it’ll not only destroy your reputations, but my own as well! Besides, if I let you do that, there’s also the danger that no one would be able to stop your rampage. The FAF and the SAF would end up at war with each other.”
“If people acknowledge that there are JAM within the FAF now, our combat intelligences will use it as an excuse to lock us out of this ﬁght,” Major Booker pleaded. “Even now, the machines are starting to feel that we’re in their way. If we accept that, then all of us will have to abandon this war. The number of unmanned planes will increase and we humans will be sent back to Earth in short order. If that happens, it’s possible that JAM duplicates will mix in with us, and they’ll have succeeded in expanding the battleﬁeld back to Earth. Once that happens, humanity will have no place left to run to.”
“Even if that happens,” added Rei, who’d been silently listening the whole time, “the people on Earth will have no real sense that anything strange has occurred. It’ll be like it always is, with wars breaking out here and there. The


people involved will only be concerned with defending their own territory. All the JAM will have to do is sit back and watch humanity wipe itself out.”
“You’re the man who brought this trouble back to us, aren’t you?” asked General Laitume, eyeing Rei coldly. “You’re the one who seems like a JAM.”
“There are truths in this world that we’d be happier not knowing,” Rei replied. “I was shot by a JAM duplicate. Now that I know they exist, it’s only natural that I do something about it. Ignoring the truth doesn’t make it go away. It’s possible the JAM have already inﬁltrated Earth. We don’t have anyplace left to run, which means our only option is to ﬁght.”
“You said that Yukikaze knew these beings were at that front-line base while she was ﬂying unmanned,” said Colonel Rombert. “That means the SAF’s computers already know the truth. Have they begun seeing humans as a hindrance to them?”
“Yes, there’ve been signs of that,” Major Booker said. “However, the SAF’s combat intelligences operate independently of the other ones in the FAF. They don’t share their data. That’s obvious by the fact that this information wasn’t transmitted to you. They can’t deny a human access to it, so if it gets transmitted, they won’t be able to hide something as big as this. For now, though, they can.”
“Yukikaze isn’t hiding anything,” Rei said. “She seeks my cooperation in order to survive. Whether or not I can guess what she’s thinking is going to determine how long the rest of my life is going to be.”
“What you’ve said seems to have struck a chord in my heart,” Colonel Rombert said. “Since you’ve identiﬁed these potential Jammies, I’ll have them investigated in absolute secrecy, just as we’d normally do. Until we spot some distinguishing feature we can use to distinguish them from humans, I won’t even tell my subordinates what they’re


observing them for. That way, if this does turn out to be some trick being carried out by the SAF, I’ll be the only one who looks like an idiot. However, I’d like to oﬀer one proposal in this matter.”
“Tell us, please,” said General Laitume. “I’d like your insight into this.”
“There’s an easy way to keep all of these suspects under surveillance. Form a new unit made up of only them. Since they’ve all been shot down by the JAM, we can call it a retraining unit. A thorough check of the physical and psychological states of its members for analysis wouldn’t be at all unnatural for something like that. It’s a good way for us to check and see if they’re Jammies or not. Even if the SAF’s intelligence turns out to be false, retraining people who have been defeated before still wouldn’t be a waste of our time.”
“Excellent! There’s a proposal I’ll be able to present. If I put some eﬀort into it, I should be able to sell my corps on setting up a new unit like that,” General Laitume said with a nod.
“Then we just have to sit back and see what happens. If they’re JAM, then they’ll make a move of some sort. If they try to desert under ﬁre, we won’t need to send the SAF out after them. My people will take care of them right there and then. If we can bring them back alive, we can either put the screws to them in interrogation or just execute them without the need for a court martial.”
“You should try to bring your information back without resorting to such savage means,” Rei said. “The JAM don’t understand humans. That’s why you can’t argue with them. We should teach them what humans are. From there, we can start ﬁghting them.”
“We didn’t ask your opinion,” replied General Cooley, cutting Rei oﬀ. “I still don’t understand why Major Booker asked you to attend—”


“To ask the captain his opinion,” Major Booker interjected. “Captain Fukai, what would you do if I ordered you to make contact with the JAM again? Right now, we’re seriously considering it.”
“Major Booker, what are you talking about?” asked General Cooley. “You never told me about any such operation.”
“If you order me to, I’ll do it,” Rei replied. “I think the JAM want to as well. Three days ago, on a recon mission out to Richwar, I was approached by two JAM ﬁghters. Looking back at it now, I think they were trying to make contact with me. It was as if they recognized Yukikaze. They didn’t launch a preemptive strike against me, though they had the opportunity.
“I think this operation is worthy of consideration,” he continued. “General Cooley, this is the real third point. I’d also like to ask General Laitume his opinion. If we carry this out without hearing from him, he’ll just think that Yukikaze and I are JAM.”
“Have Captain Fukai make contact with the JAM again, you say?” asked Colonel Rombert. “In other words, appoint him our ambassador plenipotentiary.”
“I will not grant this man plenipotentiary powers,” General Laitume protested.
“Then you can contact the JAM,” Rei said. “You can ride in Yukikaze.”
“Watch your mouth!”
“No matter who goes, I don’t think the JAM will accept them,” Colonel Rombert interjected. “The SAF has become disconnected from reality, letting its delusions run away with them—”
An alarm sounded nearby, cutting him oﬀ. “Air raid,” Rei said. “JAM approaching.”


“It’s not unusual,” General Laitume said. “My corps will
—”
“General, this is no time to be boasting about how good your forces are,” Major Booker said sharply. “Get to shelter. We can ask your ﬁnal opinion on this matter later. General Cooley, please, take our guests and get them to shelter fast.”
From the apron near the SAF underground hangar entrance, the shrill scream of high-output turbofan engines revving up pierced their ears. Yukikaze spun around. She was prepared for takeoﬀ.
“Llanfabon! Lieutenant Bruys, do you hear me?” shouted Major Booker. “Mission accomplished! RTB! The meeting’s over. Contact HQ! Cut in on the emergency line! That’s an order! Conﬁrm receipt of orders by blinking your landing lights three times! When you contact HQ, blink them once!”
Llanfabon conﬁrmed with its lights. Bruys could hear the major’s words.
“Yukikaze’s moving out,” Rei said coolly. “Aren’t you going to stop her, Jack?”
“We have no way to contact her, and there’s no time for us to get back to HQ and contact her.”
“You could do it from Llanfabon.” “Do you want me to, Rei?”
“No, let her go. Yukikaze wants to shoot down some JAM.”
“I’m a little worried, since she’s only loaded with enough fuel for ten minutes of air combat,” the major replied. “But I’m interested in seeing what she’ll do on her own. I don’t want to interfere.”
“She’d still be doing this even if I were aboard. Yukikaze’s decided that there’s no time to take refuge. The enemy’s close. Close. They’re almost here.”


Yukikaze was protecting herself. If an aerial recon plane had spotted the enemy earlier and Yukikaze received that intel, she’d have probably sprung into action the moment it reached her. She would have taken refuge if there’d been time, thought Rei. If she was choosing to intercept them rather than run, it meant that she thought the situation was dangerous.
“Jack, we’d better get out of here too.”
Before he’d even ﬁnished speaking, two high-speed objects and their accompanying shock waves tore through the skies right above them. A pair of high-velocity missiles. Rei didn’t bother looking where they were headed; he was gazing in the direction they’d come from. Directly behind, ﬂying so low that it was cutting a swath through the forest, a pitch-black JAM hit-and-away strike ﬁghter had appeared. With the kinetic vision Rei had been trained to have, he saw what followed as though in slow motion.
From behind the JAM ﬁghter ﬂew a missile, driving its way toward the enemy plane. It had been ﬁred by an FAF Faery Base defense air corps ﬁghter ﬂying a combat air patrol in the area. The JAM began jinking wildly to shake it oﬀ, but it was too late. The missile looked like it was going to score a direct hit, but its proximity fuse activated before it could. The sound of the explosions came in quick succession, echoing into the sky.
Rei immediately threw himself on top of Captain Foss to shield her. The exploding missile rained shrapnel down in every direction, with some of it striking the ground so hard that Rei himself could feel it. As the series of explosions resounded over their heads, the JAM ﬁghter began a climbing turn, black smoke pouring from its fuselage. There was a ﬂash, followed by another explosion. The JAM self-destructed. Fragments of the plane fell toward the forest.
Two interceptors from the Tactical Combat Air Corps that had been on scramble standby managed to evade the JAM


missile attack and had taken oﬀ in formation. On the side of the runway, two planes were on ﬁre.
Rei searched for Yukikaze.
Yukikaze…was accelerating in the opposite direction from the two ﬁghters. She then lit her afterburners and began a practically vertical climb at maximum thrust. There were still JAM to ﬁght.
Rei helped Captain Foss to her feet. Major Booker and Gallé Murullé had fallen to the ground. The guests were nowhere to be seen. They must have managed to get to shelter.
“Jack, you okay?” Rei asked.
Shaking his head, Major Booker took Rei’s outstretched hand and got to his feet.
“Shit, I can’t believe I nearly bought it from one of our own missiles. I can barely hear anything.”
“Edith, how’s the chef?”
Captain Foss rushed over to Murullé’s side, then shook her head. His chef’s whites were stained deep red. He raised his right hand and pointed into the sky. Looking up, Rei saw four vapor trails stretching out, high in the clear skies. It could only be one thing: Yukikaze had ﬁred her short-range missiles.
“Jack, get Edith to shelter, then send a rescue team.” “What are you talking about? You’re coming with us!” Rei took Captain Foss’s place and knelt at Murullé’s side,
taking hold of his hand. Rei had wanted to see how Yukikaze would ﬁght. Maybe this chef did as well, he thought.
“Were the JAM targeting this meeting, Major?”
“I don’t know,” Major Booker answered. He ordered Captain Foss to call for a rescue team and then stayed behind as well. “The planes we had on scramble standby were watching us. I’ll bet they were having some fun and chatting about it on the comm lines. The JAM may have


shown up by coincidence; perhaps they thought something interesting was happening out here. Llanfabon and Yukikaze both must have recorded the data on them. We’ll know for sure once it’s analyzed.”
“I think this may have been the ﬁrst time the JAM have speciﬁcally targeted human beings.”
The major paused. “I feel like running back home,” he said.
“That’s the ﬁrst time I’ve ever heard you complain about anything,” Rei replied.
“There’s no place we can run to. All we can do is rise and accept the challenge, like you said, Rei.”
The skies had suddenly grown quiet. Yukikaze’s fuel had probably run out, Rei ﬁgured. This was conﬁrmed a moment later when she silently swooped down, now visible to his naked eye. She executed a wide turn and then got on approach for a glide-in landing.
Yukikaze touched down safely onto the ground. As though that was a signal, the strength left Gallé Murullé’s hand.
“Jack, did you hold this meeting because you ﬁgured the JAM might come and wanted to ﬁnd out if somebody was leaking the information?”
Major Booker didn’t reply. “Well, Major Booker?” “And what if I did, Rei?”
“Because Murullé lost his life because of it. It should have been me. It should have been…”
“Tough luck. He had a bad break.” “Is that all you’re going to say?”
“Rei, we aren’t the only ones here who risk our lives,” Major Booker said. “He was a soldier too. He was one of us. Do you think I don’t feel anything for him?”


Rei couldn’t think of an answer to that. He tightly held the dead chef’s hand as an SAF spotting dolly moved in to tow Yukikaze. As the dolly approached, Yukikaze ﬂashed her landing lights three times.
“The mission accomplished sign,” Major Booker muttered to himself. “The one Llanfabon used to conﬁrm that they understood what I was saying. Holy shit… Yukikaze’s conscious of us. Of you.”
Yeah, she probably was. But she didn’t mourn Murullé’s death. Not at all. And she wouldn’t. Yukikaze was diﬀerent from him.
“I am…” Rei said. “I am…human.”
“And never forget that,” Major Booker replied quietly. “Don’t let Galleé Murullé’s death be in vain, Rei. Human lives can’t be replaced once they’re lost.”


OceanofPDF.com


















V


STRATEGIC RECONNAISSANCE—PHASE
1


OceanofPDF.com