TAINARON:
           MAIL FROM ANOTHER CITY


                                        Leena Krohn
                                   Translated by Hildi Hawkins








                                   Cheeky Frawg Books
                                   Tallahassee, Florida
This edition copyright 2012, Leena Krohn. All rights reserved. All rights reserved. No portion of this
book may be reproduced by any means, mechanical, electronic, or otherwise, without first obtaining
                                the permission of the copyright holder.
                         First English edition copyright 2004, Leena Krohn.
                             Translation copyright 2004, Hildi Hawkins.


                                     ISBN: 978-0-9857904-4-8


                       Cheeky Frawg logo copyright 2011 by Jeremy Zerfoss.
                                  Ebook design by Neil Clarke.
                                 Cover design by Jeremy Zerfoss.


     All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced by any means, mechanical,
      electronic, or otherwise, without first obtaining the permission of the copyright holder.


    Cheeky Frawg is run by Ann & Jeff VanderMeer. Our managing editor is Therese Goulding.


                        Check out the full line of Cheeky Frawg Books at:
                                     www.cheekyfrawg.com
      Cheeky Frawg
        POB 4248
  Tallahassee, FL 32315
vanderworld@hotmail.com


   OceanofPDF.com
      You are not in a place; the place is in you.
                   Angelus Silesius




For Elias, J. H. Fabre and the house of the Queen Bees
                    OceanofPDF.com
     CONTENTS
The Meadow and the Honey-Pattern
      The Hum of the Wheel
             Shimmer
       Their Mother’s Tears
            The Burden
     The Seventeenth Spring
    Burning on the Mountain
   Their Innumerable Dwellings
       Like Burying Beetles
          The Charioteer
        Tracks in the Dust
   The Day of the Great Mogul
            Proof Copy
               Sand
           White Noise
            The Mimic
        The Great Window
    The Work of the Surveyor
          The Bystander
     King Milinda’s Question
           Not Enough
              Dayma
           The Dangler
      The Guardian of the Oddfellows
            The Cloaked Moth
           The Gate of Evening
             The Umbellifers
            Date as Postmark
              Passing Bells
       The Pupal Cell of my Home
Afterword: On Tainaron by Matthew Cheney
            About the Author
             OceanofPDF.com
     THE MEADOW AND THE HONEY
             PATTERN
                          THE FIRST LETTER


How could I forget the spring when we walked in the University’s botanical
gardens; for there is such a park here in Tainaron, too, large and carefully
tended. If you saw it you would be astonished, for it contains many plants
that no one at home knows; even a species that flowers underground.
    But most of all I like the meadow attached to the gardens, where only
wild flowers grow: cornflower, cotton thistle, toadflax, spiked speedwell.
But you would be wrong if you supposed them to be ordinary flowers of the
field. No, they are some kind of hybrid, supernaturally large. Many of the
knapweeds are as tall as a man, and their corollas are as broad as a human
face; but I have also seen flowers into which one can step as if into a sunny
bower.
    It gives me pleasure to imagine that I might one day take you there,
beneath the thistles. Their lovely corymbs are veiled by a downy web,
which floats high above like the crowns of trees on a beach promenade.
    You would enjoy a visit to the meadow, for in Tainaron it is summer and
one can look at the flowers face to face. They are as open as the day itself
and the hieroglyphs of the honey-patterns are precise and clear. We gaze at
them, but they gaze only
    at the sun, which they resemble. It is so difficult to believe, in the
warmth of the day’s heart—just as difficult as before the face of children—
that the colour and light of which they are made are matter, and that some
time, soon, this very night, their dazzle will be extinguished and will no
longer be visible.
    Much happens in the meadow; it is a stage for fervent activity and a
theatre of war. But everything serves just one purpose: immortality. The
insects who are pursuing their own interests there do not know that they are
at the same time fulfilling the flowers’ hidden desires, any more than the
flowers understand that to the insects, whom they consider their slaves, they
are life and livelihood. Thus the selfishness of each individual works, in the
meadow, for the happiness of all.
    But it is not only the ordinary hover-flies and sawflies that come to the
meadow of the botanical gardens to amuse themselves: the idle cityfolk
spend their free moments here, whiling away their time in a way that is
undeniably strange to us.


‘Admiral! Admiral!’ I heard Longhorn shout delightedly one Sunday, when
once again we were wandering along the paths that criss-cross the meadow.
    I looked around me past the flower-stalks—some of them were as strong
as the trunks of young birch trees—but I could not see whom Longhorn had
been talking to until he pointed to the corolla of an orchid-like flower. On
its brilliantly red, slightly mottled lips there sat—or rather, skipped about on
the spot—someone who seemed very anxious and very happy.
    This Tainaronian waved all his legs at Longhorn, and began to whine
earnestly: ‘This way, ladies and gentlemen, please don’t be shy!’
    I must admit that his behaviour bewildered me, for he went on with his
unsteady dance, bouncing from one petal to another and from time to time
rubbing his backside against it. All of a sudden he dropped limply flat on
his face and seemed to chew enthusiastically on the fine, downy fluff that
straggled around the base of the lip. Well, we were in a public place, and I
turned my face away from such debauchery.
    But Longhorn peeped at my face and began to smile; and that only made
me more angry.
    ‘What a puritan!’ he said. ‘You disapprove of lonely people’s most
innocent and cheapest weekend amusements? They make love to the
flowers and the flowers make them drunk; they go from flower to flower
and at the same time pollinate them; is that not beneficial to the entire
meadow, the entire city?’
    At that very moment Longhorn’s friend leaned over toward us from the
broad, generously curving lip of the orchid, which swayed and rocked
violently beneath him. Now I could see that he was stained from head to
foot with sticky pollen, and when I looked upward, shading my eyes from
the sun, a sweet droplet trickled from his long, fumbling proboscis and on
to my lips. I licked it away; it was not unpleasant, but at the same time I
remembered some lines I had read long ago.
   Appeased, I would have liked to have recited them at once to Longhorn,
but his friend was now speaking incessantly.
   ‘My dear friends,’ the Admiral stammered, ‘I wager you have never seen
nectaries like these, aaaah, follow me, quickly, I know the way . . . ’
   And with that he disappeared into the depths of the huge corolla, so that
I could make out only one of his hind legs, wriggling deep in the quivering
cavity.
   ‘No,’ I said finally, ‘I will not go in there.’
   ‘Well then,’ said Longhorn amicably, ‘let us continue on our way.
Perhaps I may introduce you some other time. Let us continue now, and see
whether the meadowsweet has flowered.’
   As we wandered beneath the flowers, I knew their desire and their thirst,
knew that what was visible of them, all their finery, was merely a stepping-
stone for their seed. And I could not stop myself from teasing Longhorn by
reciting the lines that the foolish Admiral had just recalled to my mind:


   For what are anthers worth or petals
   Or halo-rings? Mockeries, shadows
   Of the heart of the flower, the central flame!


He seemed absent-minded as he listened, and finally he interrupted me.
    ‘Can’t you hear?’
    Quite right, I thought I could distinguish a desperate howling that came
from the south, from the other side of the field. This was what Longhorn
had been listening for, throughout my recitation.
    We had turned in the right direction, for we did not have far to go before
we heard an anxious voice panting, ‘I’m here, here!’, and we saw, once
more, a flower as big as a room, this time a glowing ultramarine, where a
little mannikin was struggling, apparently stuck in its funnel-like stigma.
    ‘Well, well,’ said Longhorn, glumly, ‘this is just what I expected. This is
a vincetoxicum, a fly-trap.’
    And he directed his words to the ensnared creature: ‘You are not the first
to have met this fate.’
    And Longhorn climbed nimbly into the sparkling blue corolla, leaning
on the axils of the stem. Without delay and briskly he grasped the victim
beneath the arms. Hup!—and at the same moment there was a hissing sound
like silk tearing, the corolla sagged downward, and both the helper and the
flower’s prisoner rolled on to the lawn.
    But before I could reach them under the broken herb, both had risen to
their feet and were brushing pollen off themselves, so that the air was dusty
with a glittering haze.
    ‘But you are limping,’ said Longhorn sternly to the shy creature he had
saved.
    ‘Just a little accident,’ said the luckless one, glancing at the ravaged
plant as if a sudden attack could still be expected. ‘There was some kind of
trap in there . . . ’
    ‘Never trust a flower,’ Longhorn advised. ‘Next time, think where you
put your head.’
    I do not believe that the flower’s victim intended ever to return to the
meadow. He was already limping off under equally treacherous plants, and
had forgotten to say thank you. Longhorn linked arms with me, and I was
grateful, for I felt I needed support, as if it had been me who had suffered in
the prison of the vincetoxicum.
    The meadow murmured around us as I thought, and its scents began to
make both of us feel faint. We walked under a cloud of meadowsweet—
they were indeed in full flower—but at that moment I would rather have
been walking on regular, hard, reliable paving stones.
    But before me there constantly rose new eddies, glowing with light,
strange, incomprehensible in their silence. I saw the silky glimmer of the
flowers, their wings and carinas, I saw their dull down and their purple
lustre and their seeds, which a gust of wind hurled from their tight capsules.
Ouch! One of them hit my cheek, hurting me; it was as big as a cartridge,
while others popped as they opened so that I jumped into the air. I heard
thuds as nutlets fell from their open hulls, and sulphur-yellow spurs and
swollen lips barred my way. My neck was tickled by the fleecy tips of
bracts, bristles and seed-down, and the searing colours forced their way in
through my pupils, however much they tried to shrink, and into my nostrils,
palate, ears the cries of the honey-pattern and thousands of impudent scents.
    ‘No, we do not know them,’ I said to Longhorn, and he inclined his head
silently.
    Across the ground, which hid all the roots, the cold of the approaching
evening began to move. While the sun still blazed on those large faces,
which were now closing, I had not doubted or asked. But as soon as the first
pale portent of withering rose toward the sky and we turned toward the city,
all I knew with certainty was that I was as lost as I had been before.
                              OceanofPDF.com
           THE HUM OF THE WHEEL
                         THE SECOND LETTER


At night I awoke to a rattling and a ringing from the kitchenette. I am sure
you know that Tainaron is located in a volcanic zone. Scientists claim that
we have already arrived in a period when a large eruption is to be expected,
so fateful that it may mark the destruction of the entire city.
    So what? Do not suppose that it affects the lives of the Tainaronians. The
shudders of the night are forgotten, and in the dazzle of morning, in the
market-place through which I often take a short cut, a honeyed haze glows
in the fruit baskets, and the paving beneath my feet is eternal once more.
    And in the evening I look at the enormous Ferris wheel, whose
circumference, centre and radii are marked out with thousands of points of
light, like stars. Ferris wheel, wheel of fortune . . .
    Sometimes my gaze fastens itself to its spinning and I seem to hear, until
sleep comes, the constant humming of the wheel, which is the voice of
Tainaron itself.
    I do not believe that I have ever seen so many ages and so many gods at
the same time as in Tainaron. Where else but Tainaron can the eye
encounter, in a single glance, the vanishing spires of cathedrals, the liquid
gold of the cupolas of minarets and the pure capitals of a Doric temple?
Here they rise, side by side and yet incomparable, each of them alone.
    But in many buildings here there is something ill-proportioned,
something that is almost ridiculous and makes one think of theatrical
scenery. Where does that impression come from? The decoration of the
friezes of the palace of supreme justice is ridiculously ornate, while
essential parapets and canopies have been omitted from the chamber of
commerce. And sometimes, when I begin to grow tired on my walks, I feel
dizzy in streets and at crossroads, for the buildings look as if they are
leaning and moving in the wind . . .
    Yesterday I walked through an arcade, airy and light, stepping on paving
laid by a master, and my gaze caressed the resilient columns, the glittering
mosaics of the window recesses. The arcade came to an end, I crossed the
square—and got a slap in the face. Before me there swaggered a concrete
wall raised on elephants’ feet, a featureless, gloomy variation of the
colonnade I had just left, insulting and crushingly heavy. But it, too, is part
of Tainaron, like the piece of ancient stone wall at the eastern edge of the
city, in whose crevices a sand martin nests.
    Do you know, I am sometimes startled when, from amid the throng, a
snout-like face sways toward me, above which nimble antennae, supple as
lashes, or when, in a café, a waiter approaches my table, his mandibles
protruding just like those of a dragonfly-grub. And yesterday in the tram, a
creature sat down next to me, his form recalling that of a leaf; he looked so
light that I could have blown him away into the air like a dry weed.
    I have met someone who supplies a special thread for the needs of the
whole of Tainaron. It is so fine, so durable and so elastic that no industrially
produced thread can bear comparison. He secretes it from the rear of his
body, as much as 150 metres in 24 hours. The glittering filament, finer than
a hair, is far less than a denier in thickness. When a ray of sunlight struck it
at the window at which I was examining it, I saw the thread blaze with all
the colours of the spectrum.
    I should like a dress made only of this thread; a garment lighter, more
festive or more beautiful I could not imagine.
    But it is a childish dream: I shall never have such a dress. For the
filament is so sticky that it would stick to my body like a corrosive glue.
    So what is this thread used for? Do not ask me; I do not know, and I do
not wish to know.
                                OceanofPDF.com
                            SHIMMER
                          THE THIRD LETTER


And then the lights of evening are lit, with hundreds of reflections in water
and eyes and windows. You know, don’t you, that there are creatures who
light up their vicinity with the glow of their own organs or parts of the
body: fireflies in the gardens of the south, the glow-worm on its blade of
grass and the creatures who live in moats, who carry lamps on their
monstrous foreheads. Colder still is the vast lustre of rotten wood covered
in honey fungus . . .
   But here in Tainaron, too, there are those who, at evening, draw glances
because they secrete a fine veil of light and at times, when they become
agitated, glimmer and flash. I gaze at them with admiration as they hurry
past me in the street—always quickly, with almost dancing steps. They
emerge from their houses only at evening, and I have no idea what they do
until then, the livelong day—perhaps they merely sleep. I have never seen
any of them alone; they move in flocks and free groupings as if
participating in some kind of formation dancing in the squares. But if it
rains or if there is a fresh breeze, the sparklers go out like candles and
disappear beneath the roofs. Difficulties and a severe climate, tiring work
and unexpected upheavals are not for their sort. Whenever I see them I find
myself thinking that there must be a party somewhere and that lots of fun is
to be expected. They look so cheerful and carefree, and their rose-pink or
yellowish glow would embellish any ballroom.
   In the middle of the city there is a stairway around which Tainaronians
gather in the evenings to converse or merely to watch one another. It is here
that the most colourful, the strangest, the most elegant, the richest and the
most tattered of all meet, on these broad steps, worn over many centuries.
The Fireflies, too—is that not a good name for these little shimmerers?—
are seen here as soon as darkness falls, as long as the weather is calm and
warm.
    I feel melancholy when I look at them, but I have never tried to approach
them. I do not even believe that they speak any of the city’s official
languages; I do not know whether they speak at all. They are as graceful as
down, as fine and light as the first flush of youth that no one has ever lived.
    Recently I have betaken myself on many evenings to the steps to rejoice
in their glimmer. They do not notice me, but when they pass—dance!—past
me and past the beggars and past the pomp of the blue-belted knight, hope
quivers and the spirit of spring gusts around them as freshly as if nothing
had ever yet been lost forever.
    But I must tell you, too, that when, yesterday morning, I crossed the
square on the way to a certain side-street, I saw in the ditch a dusty rag,
with a few pitying backs bowed over it. I passed it by without stopping, but
when, at the corner of the street, I stopped to look, I saw it being lifted from
the ground and carried away. It was only then that I understood that I had
seen one of the sparklers, but this time quite alone. It was no longer
glimmering, even palely; it was just a small, dark mass. The spark of joy,
the gleam of life itself, had been extinguished.
    Wherever, whenever I happen to witness its destruction, bitter pain,
seemingly incurable, weakens my sight and eats away from me, too, the
small days of life.
    But tonight in the city the Fireflies were on the move once more, as
many in number as flocks of birds in spring, more joyful and glimmering
more strongly than ever before.
                                OceanofPDF.com
            THEIR MOTHER’S TEARS
                         THE FOURTH LETTER


There are strange houses in one of the suburbs. They are like goblets, very
narrow and high, and to a certain extent they recall piles of ashes; but their
reddish walls are as strong as concrete. In them live a countless mass of
inhabitants, small but very industrious folk, who are in constant motion.
They all resemble each other so closely that I should never learn to
recognise any of them. One, however, is an exception.
    It is already a long time since I asked Longhorn whether, one day, he
would take me to one of those houses. ‘Why do they interest you?’ he
asked. ‘Their architecture is so extraordinary,’ I said. ‘Perhaps you know
someone there? Perhaps I could go there with you sometime?’
    ‘If you wish,’ said Longhorn; but he did not look particularly keen.
    Yesterday, at last, Longhorn took me to one of those dwellings. At the
entrance was a doorman with whom he exchanged a few words and who set
off to accompany me. ‘We shall meet this evening,’ shouted Longhorn, and
disappeared into the gaudy bustle of Tainaron.
    I was led along dim and intricate corridors that opened on halls,
warehouses and living spaces of different sizes. Past me rushed large
numbers of people; all of them seemed to be in a hurry and in the midst of
important tasks. But I was taken to the innermost room of the house, at
whose door stood more guards. There was no window in the room, but it
was nevertheless almost unbearably bright, although I could not see the
source of the light.
    I certainly realised that there were other people in the room, but I could
see only one. She was immeasurably larger than all the others, monumental,
all the more so because she stayed in one place, unmoving. Her dimensions
were enormous: her egg-shaped head grazed the roof of the vault and, in its
half recumbent position, her breadth extended from the doorway to the back
of the room. As I stepped inside and stood by the wall (there was hardly
room anywhere else), there came from her mouth a creaking sound which I
interpreted as a welcome.
     ‘Show respect for the queen,’ hissed my guide, and knelt down.
Unaccustomed to such gestures, I felt embarrassed, but I followed his
example.
     Some time passed before any attention was paid to me. By the walls of
the room, around the queen, rushed creatures whose task was evidently to
satisfy all her needs. I soon realised that they were necessary, for the queen
was so formless that she herself could hardly take a step. And I concluded
that she could not possibly have gone out through the door; she must live
and die within these walls, without ever seeing even a flicker of sun. Her
plight horrified me, and I wanted to leave the glowing cave quickly.
     At that moment the creaking voice startled me. I realised that the queen
had turned her head a little so that she was now staring at me languidly, at
the same time sipping a milky fluid from a goblet held under her
infinitesimal jaw.
     The straw fell from her lip, and new croaks followed. With difficulty, I
made out the following words: ‘I know what you’re thinking, you little
smidgeon.’
     ‘I’m sorry,’ I stammered, and vexation made me flushed.
     ‘You think, don’t you, that I am some kind of individual, a person, admit
it!’
     As she went on speaking, her voice grew deeper, and it was as if it began
to buzz. It was a most extraordinary voice, for it seemed to be made up of
the murmur of hundreds of voices.
     ‘Yes, indeed, I mean . . . ’ I grew completely confused for a moment and
sat down on my heels, as kneeling on the hard floor was too tiring.
     ‘Quite so, of course,’ I said rapidly, completely puzzled.
     ‘Didn’t I guess?’ she said, and burst into laughter, which sometimes
boomed, sometimes tinkled in the corridors so infectiously that in the end
all the inhabitants of the building seemed to be joining in, and the entire
house was laughing at my simplicity.
     Suddenly complete silence followed, and she said, pointing at me with
her long proboscis, ‘So tell me, who am I?’
     Before I could even think of an answer to this question, I realised at last
what was happening in the back part of the room, which was filled with the
queen’s great rear body. I had, in fact, been aware all the while that
something was being done incessantly, but the nature of that activity hit me
like a thunderbolt. Bundles had been carried past me, but it was only at the
third or fourth that I looked more closely and saw: they were new-born
babies.
     The queen was giving birth! She was giving birth incessantly. And just
as I realised that, I seemed to hear from all around me the din of a hammer,
commands, the chirrup of a saw, and everywhere there hovered the stench
of building mortar. I realised that more and more storeys were being added
to the house, and that it was reaching ever higher into the serenity of the sea
of air. The sounds of construction reached me even from deep under the
ground, and in my mind’s eye I could see corridors branching beneath the
paving stones like roots, greedily growing from day to day. The tribe was
increasing; the house was being extended. The city was growing.
     ‘You are the mother of them all, your majesty,’ I replied, humbly.
     ‘But what is a mother?’ she squealed, and suddenly her voice rose to a
piercing height, as one of her antennae lashed through the air above my
head like a whip.
     I retreated and pressed myself to the wall, although I understood that she
would not be able to come any nearer.
     ‘She from whom everything flows is not a someone,’ the queen hissed
through her wide jaws, like a snake. I gazed at her, bewitched.
     ‘You came to see me, admit it!’ she growled, more deeply than I dared
think. ‘But you will be disappointed! You are already disappointed! Admit
it!’
     ‘No, not in the least,’ I protested, anxiously.
     ‘But there is no me here; look around you and understand that! And
here, here in particular, there is less of me than anywhere. You think I fill
this room. Wrong! Quite wrong! For I am the great hole out of which the
city grows. I am the road everyone must travel! I am the salty sea from
which everyone emerges, helpless, wet, wrinkled . . . ’
     Her voice chided me warmly, like a great ocean swell. As she spoke, she
glanced languidly behind her, at her formless, mountainous rear, from
whose depths her latest offspring were being helped into the brightness of
the lamps. They were all born silently, as if they were dead.
     But suddenly I saw something gush from her eyes; it splashed on to the
floor and the walls and wetted all my clothes.
   She was no longer looking at me, and I rose and left the room, wet with
the queen’s tears.
                              OceanofPDF.com
                        THE BURDEN
                          THE FIFTH LETTER


I have not told you that I am already living at my second address here in
Tainaron. There were some difficulties with my first apartment, so vague
that I have not written about them earlier, but at the same time serious
enough to force me to move.
    For my first week I lived in a northern suburb, in a building which must
once have been plastered in pale green, but had since fallen badly into
decay. The plaster had split off in great flakes, and the spaces they left
behind them brought to mind faces and patterns seen long ago. At first,
nevertheless, I liked both the house and the apartment a great deal: a room
and small kitchen on the first floor, with a window opening on to a short,
peaceful street.
    Then, one night, I woke up. It was perhaps my third or fourth night. My
upstairs neighbours were making a noise, and it was this which had woken
me. Someone was moving a heavy piece of furniture—that is what it
sounded like, at least—dragging it back and forth across the floor above my
ceiling. I looked at the clock: it was a little past one. For some time I lay
awake, waiting for the noise to end, but when the din went on I got up,
angry and tired, to look for something with which to knock on the ceiling. I
could not find anything; I had not yet bought even a broom for the
apartment.
    I opened the door that led to the stairway and listened: it seemed to me
that the whole house must have woken up. But the noise was much fainter
in the stairwell, and no one else had got up to wonder what it was. The calm
light of the street-lamp drew a beautiful ornament in the cracked marble of
the wall of the stairway.
    I lay down once more and stared at the ceiling. It looked to me as if it
were shaking under the heavy thumps that went on, one after another. I
thought I had lain there for a long time, I thought it was already morning,
when the noise suddenly ceased and it was as if everything was abruptly
interrupted. When I glanced at the clock, I realised that it had all lasted for
less than an hour.
    The following night as I went to bed, I had already forgotten the matter.
But my sleep was interrupted again by precisely the same kind of sound as
on the previous night, and at exactly the same time. I tried to remain calm,
and took up a book. I even leafed through it (it was the flora you gave me
long ago), but the incessant knocking prevented me from understanding
anything. The hands of the clock moved as if some nocturnal force were
hindering them, but when they finally reached two, peace returned as
suddenly as it had been broken.
    The next day, I saw the upstairs resident in a small neighbourhood shop
opposite our house. She was a fragile old spinster with astonishingly thin
limbs, who supported herself with a slender stick with an elegantly turned
head—it represented a creature with a beak and horns. The lady was known
well in the shop and was served with respect. In the midst of her purchases
she turned to me and asked, in a surprisingly strong, trumpet-like voice,
‘Well, how do you find us?’
    I had not in the least expected that she would know who I was. My
landlord had only once pointed her out to me, through the window, when I
was signing the rental agreement.
    ‘That old lady lives above you,’ was all he had said, and I had glanced at
my neighbour in passing from my first-floor perspective.
    ‘I am Pumilio,’ the old lady said now, and now it was my turn to
introduce myself; but I am sure that I was unable entirely to banish the
quiver of suspicion from my face as she continued, immediately: ‘Have you
settled in to your new apartment?’
    As she asked the question, quickly and animatedly, I thought her gaze
held real curiosity, quite out of proportion to the formality of the question.
    I hesitated, but managed to say: ‘Thank you, it is a comfortable
apartment. But at night I find it difficult to sleep.’
    I took fright at my own boldness, and watched her closely.
    ‘Really? Just fancy, and you are still so young. I am already quite old, as
you see, but I sleep well. Quite well!’ she repeated, examining me through
her wide, motionless pupils.
    I did not know what to think. She left the shop before me, leaning on her
beautiful stick, and proceeding with some difficulty. But on the threshold
she turned: ‘Tonight I am sure you will be able to sleep.’
    And she smiled, her mouth closed.
    I hoped it was some kind of promise. I fell asleep quickly and, it may be
said, in good faith, but my sleep was interrupted again in the same way and
at the same time as on the previous two nights. Exhaustion and rage
pounded at my forehead, but now I listened to the sounds from the floor
above more closely than before. In particular, I tried to make out the tapping
of Miss Pumilio’s stick on the floor, for it seemed to me that it would be
very difficult, if not impossible, for her to move without support. But all I
could hear was heavy thumps and dragging sounds, and in addition I could
see clearly in the light of the reading-lamp that the ceiling-lamp, a glass
ball, was rocking slowly in its mount.
    It began to seem incredible to me that Miss Pumilio, who was old, frail
and, what is more, an invalid, could be capable, night after night, of the
kinds of trials of strength that the noisy events upstairs would seem to
presuppose. But above all I asked myself: why would she do anything like
that? What reasons could force her to move furniture around in the middle
of the night?
    I could think of only two reasons, and both of them were linked with
fear. First: Miss Pumilio feared something so strongly that, every night, she
built a barricade in front of her door, using her heaviest furniture. Did that
seem likely? Not really, because things were dragged above my head in a
number of different directions—remember this—and besides, the mornings,
when she would have had to have taken down her fortifications, were silent.
Second: Miss Pumilio wanted me to be afraid, perhaps because, for one
reason or another, she wanted me to move out.
    On the fourth night, as soon as I awoke—and it happened a few dozen
seconds before the noise began (and this time I was absolutely certain it
would happen again)—I was extraordinarily afraid. It was as if the
consuming fear that I had imagined Miss Pumilio felt (or that she wished
me to feel) had, that night, been transferred to me. Most repugnant of all to
me was that the noises always began at the very same stroke of the clock. I
remember saying to myself, many times: ‘But it is unnatural! It is
unnatural!’
    This time, however, I did not get out of bed, and the most difficult thing
of all for me would have been to try to do anything to stop the noise. I
would not have gone upstairs for any price, or rung Miss Pumilio’s doorbell
and enquired what the matter was and whether she could not do whatever
she was doing at some more civilised hour.
    Why was it is so impossible for me? I will tell you at once: because my
mind was afflicted by a suspicion that was difficult to dismiss. You see, I
suspected that if I really did go upstairs, if I really did ring Miss Pumilio’s
doorbell and say the words I intended to say to her, she would look at me
with the dim eyes of a sleeper who has just been wakened from slumber and
would not understand at all, at all, what I was talking about and what had
given me the right to dare deprive her of her much-needed sleep.
    And in fact this was the ultimate reason that cast me into despair and
why I never examined the origin of the noise any more closely.
    From time to time I saw Miss Pumilio in our street or in the little
neighbourhood shop. She always greeted me amicably, but no longer made
conversation with me. But sometimes when I had passed her on the street, it
seemed to me as if she turned to look after me, and as if her bluish mosaic
eyes glowed with a feeling or thought that I did not understand. But it could
also be the case that she was looking through me, and was not even thinking
about me.
    At night, I stayed awake. And to keep up my courage. I repeated to
myself: ‘It’s nothing! Nothing! I just don’t happen to understand what is
behind this, but I am sure it is something quite insignificant and ordinary. I
am sure I would laugh if I found out what it is, and laugh heartily.’
    But above my head the rumbling continued like a very localised storm,
and along the creaking floorboards was pushed and pulled something that
was heavy and recalcitrant and immense, something so formless that it
resembled human life. At last came night and, staring at the shaking ceiling,
I felt the foundations and the cellar of the house respond to the thundering
sound from above. I fled those two sledge-hammers, of which one was the
earth itself, to the open air, and have never returned to that address.
                               OceanofPDF.com
         THE SEVENTEENTH SPRING
                           THE SIXTH LETTER


In Tainaron, many things are different from at home. The first things that
occur to me are eyes. For with many of the people here, you see, they grow
so large that they take up as much as one third of their faces. Whether that
makes their sight more accurate, I do not know, but I presume they see their
surroundings to some extent differently from us. And, moreover, their
organs of sight are made up of countless cones, and in the sunlight their
lens-surfaces glitter like rainbows. At first I was troubled when I had to
converse with such a person, for I could never be sure whether he was
looking at me or past me. It no longer worries me. It is true that there are
also people whose eyes are as small as points, but then there are many of
them, in the forehead, at the ends of the antennae, even on the back.
    Like their eyes, Tainaronians may have a number of pairs of hands and
feet, too, but it does not seem to me that they run any faster than we do, or
get more done in their lives. Some of them, it is true, have a jumping fork
under their bellies, which they can, whenever necessary, release like a lever
and thus hurl themselves forward, sometimes by dozens of metres.
    The hustling forest of antennae and pedipalpi in the streets at rush-hour
is certainly an extraordinary sight for people like us, but most difficult of all
is to accustom oneself to a certain other phenomenon that marks the life of
the majority of the inhabitants here in the city. This phenomenon is
metamorphosis; and for me, at least, it is so strange, to my very marrow,
that even to think about it makes me feel uncomfortable. For, you see, the
people here live two or many consecutive lives, which may have nothing in
common, although one follows from the last in a way that is
incomprehensible to me.
    We, too, change, but gradually. We are used to a certain continuity, and
most of us have a character that remains more or less constant. It is different
here. It remains a mystery to me what the real connection is between two
consecutive lives. How can a person who changes so completely still say he
is in any sense the same as before? How can he continue? How can he
remember?
    Here you can bump into a stranger, and he will come up to you like an
old acquaintance and begin to remember some past amusing coincidence
that you apparently experienced together. When you ask, ‘When?’, he
laughs and answers: ‘When I was someone else.’
    But perhaps you will never discover with whom you have the honour of
conversing, for they often change comprehensively and completely, both
their appearance and their way of life.
    There are also those who withdraw into total seclusion for as much as
seventeen years. They live in tiny rooms, no more than boxes; they do not
see anyone, do not go anywhere, and hardly eat. But whether they sleep or
wake there, they are continually changing and forsaking the form they had
before.
    Seventeen years! And when, finally, the seventeenth spring arrives, they
stop out of their hermit caves into full sunlight. And there begins their only
summer, for in the autumn they die; but all summer long they celebrate all
the more. What a life! Do you understand it?
    But sometimes I feel a little envious: to be able to curl up in a pupal cell
without hoping for dreams, knowing that one spring one will step before the
eyes of the world, new, refreshed, free from the past . . .
    Farewell once more; my head is heavy and I believe a thunderstorm is
brewing. I ponder the reasons why you do not reply, and there are many.
Are you dead? Have you moved? The city where you lived has perhaps
disappeared from the face of the earth? And can I trust the mail of Tainaron;
who knows on what back-garden compost-heap my letters are languishing?
Or you stand on your doormat turning my letter over in your hands; turning
it over and then putting it aside unopened, on top of the pile of newspapers
and advertisements that grows and grows in the dusty corner.
                                OceanofPDF.com
       BURNING ON THE MOUNTAIN
                        THE SEVENTH LETTER


Behind the hillock where the amusement park of Tainaron is built rises
another hillock, dim with distance. From time to time, at midnight
moments, I have seen a fire blazing on its highest peak, small but very
bright.
    How I loved to look at it once. I thought about campfires and guitars,
shared meals and hikers resting and telling stories after the exertions of the
road. But later I began to suspect that it was perhaps not, after all, a
campfire, but some kind of beacon, for it always lit so high up and it can be
seen so far away in every direction; particularly, however, down in the city
of Tainaron.
    Some days ago I happened to mention the fire on the mountain to
Longhorn, and I immediately felt embarrassed, for my question made his
face grow harsh and severe. I had hardly ever seen such an expression on
his calm face.
    ‘Do not look at it; it is not for you,’ he enjoined me quickly. ‘When the
time of the new moon comes, draw the curtains and go to sleep.’
    The time of the new moon . . . Longhorn was right. I had last seen the
fire about a month earlier, and that night there had been a new moon. The
earth had cast a long shadow, and perhaps it was for that reason that the fire
blazed so large and solitary. And had not two cycles of the moon passed
since the earlier blaze?
    Even though Longhorn had grown so uncommunicative-looking, I made
so bold as to ask: ‘Tell me: who lights those bonfires?’
    ‘They are no bonfires,’ he said, and his voice did not grow any milder.
‘They are not intended to delight the eye, and their ashes are not used for
baking root vegetables.’
    ‘What are they, then?’ I asked, and I realised my voice had dropped to a
whisper.
    ‘Burnt offerings, sacrifices. They are sacrifices,’ he replied.
    I felt I had known before I asked.
    ‘Who is sacrificed?’ I asked. In admiring the blaze, had I not noted a
light smell hovering over the city?
    ‘Why do you keep asking?’ Longhorn cried, growing angry. ‘They set
fire to themselves.’
    But I could not stop; I went on, stubbornly: ‘But who are they? What do
they want?’
    Longhorn had turned his back to me and was pretending to examine my
books. The conversation seemed repugnant in the extreme to him, and I was
ashamed of my own tactlessness. Nevertheless, I felt that if I could solve
the mystery of the fire I would also understand why some people chose
destruction as if it were a privilege.
    But Longhorn shrugged his back-armour wearily.
    ‘What do they want, you ask. They are sectarian delusions. To redeem
Tainaron, I suppose that is what they want. That the Tainaronians should
live differently from how they do. That they should wake up from their
sleep; that is what they say. Mad!’
    And he shook his fists at the mist-clad mountain that bowed over the
city. ‘How many innocent souls will they yet take with them to the pyre?’
    Yesterday it was new moon once more. Early in the evening, I had done
exactly as Longhorn had instructed me: I had drawn the curtains across my
windows. But after I had gone to bed I could not sleep, and it seemed to me
that a red colour was shining through the curtains.
    Then I got up, went on to the balcony and immediately saw the balefire,
high on the mountain in the darkness of the new moon. None of the lights
of Tainaron—not its neon colours, not the lights of its Ferris wheel—burned
as brightly as the fire on the mountain. There it blazed, attracting the gazes
of the city-dwellers as a lamp attracts moths. Even from miles away it was
dazzling, and made my face glow.
    Last night was calm, and the sacrifice burned evenly. It was a candle on
the table, the night’s focus and its terrible purifier. Who was he who was
burning with such a high and unwavering flame? What did he believe he
knew that no one in the valley of Tainaron knew, which was more than life,
more than his own boiling tears and his scalding eyes? Was it as clearly
visible to him as the fire on the mountain was to me? To me, lingering on
the balcony; to me, who could not take my eyes off the fire, was no
justification to him, no expiation, no comfort.
   And I had gazed on the blaze as if it were a midnight flower, rejoicing!
   No, as long as the sacrifice burned, I could not go to sleep, could not
concentrate on anything. I stood on the balcony until he, whoever he was,
had turned from fire into embers and from embers into ashes.
   Will there ever be a new moon when there is no need to light a fire high
on the hill?
                              OceanofPDF.com
THEIR INNUMERABLE DWELLINGS
                          THE EIGHTH LETTER


Tainaron is full of voices of a kind I have not heard anywhere else. Here I
have come to realise that there is no clear dividing line between music and
language. For the citizens, you see, secrete their voices from themselves
which can be interpreted sometimes as speech, sometimes as music. I do
not mean they sing; that is, at least, not very common here. Neither do they
play instruments of any kind; instead, their voices are created with the help
of muscles, glands and guts or chitin armature.
   Their voices may well up from a surprising depth, as if from leagues
away, so that it is no wonder that they are often so difficult to locate. For,
you see, the Tainaronians’ way of life is a very curious one. You will
perhaps not have heard that they often have a number of dwellings, but not
only in the way that we have city apartments and summer villas. No: the
people here are able to live in many dwellings at the same time, as in a nest
of boxes. Some of them carry their innermost apartment, a one-roomed flat
which fits their dimensions like a glove, with them everywhere. But this has
the drawback that one cannot always make sense of what they say, for it
echoes and reverberates from the walls of their private apartments. It is also
vexing to me that I cannot always tell where the dwelling ends and its
inhabitant begins.
   Poor things, who never come among people without this innermost
shield. It reflects the terrible vulnerability of their lives. Their little home
may be made of the most diverse ingredients: grains of sand, bark, straw,
clay, leaves . . . But it protects them better than others are protected by
armour, from every direction, and it is a direct continuation of themselves,
much more so than clothes are to you or me. But if it is taken away from
them, they die—perhaps simply of shame, perhaps because their skins are
too soft for the outside air, or because they do not have any skin at all.
   Who would be so cruel as to tear from them this last shield! Oh, I have
heard that such things, too, happen here in Tainaron; I have been startled by
the moans of death- throes in the depths of the night.
   But I have my own theory concerning why this happens. For, you see,
those who constantly drag their houses with them remain unknown to other
people. One can gain only a brief glimpse of them, if that; they are always
in hiding.
   And then there are those who cannot bear such a situation, those who
wish to see everything face to face and to reveal, open, show the whole
world the nakedness of things . . . Now and then the temptation becomes
overwhelming to them, and they split open the house of some poor
unfortunate. I awake to shrieking, sigh and turn over—and soon fall asleep
again.
                               OceanofPDF.com
            LIKE BURYING BEETLES
                          THE NINTH LETTER


You do not reply. It is something that stays in my mind almost incessantly.
The reasons for this silence are perhaps independent of you; or then again
not. But I continue writing—that freedom I do allow myself—and I believe,
I trust—well, no more of that!
    There is much here that reminds me of former things, particularly of the
city in which we once lived, close to each other. For example, a particular
office window brings to mind another shop window on the far side of the
green and white Oceanos.
    I walked past it almost every day, but I never stopped in front of it,
because it was always the same. Behind the glass hung a skilfully draped
blue curtain; in front of it were set a stone urn and a wreath of flowers tied
with a white silk ribbon.
    There is such a shop in Tainaron, too, but its windows display not urns
but small, very beautiful boxes. One day I went inside with Longhorn, who
continues to guide me patiently from day to day in this city.
    Someone had died, someone who I heard only now had been alive and
who had known Longhorn, perhaps well, so that it was his task now to care
for the funeral arrangements. I followed Longhorn because I had often,
passing by, looked at those small boxes, and I wanted to examine them
more closely.
    The shop was empty as we stepped inside, but on the shelves that ran
along the walls I saw more boxes, of all shapes, some smaller even than
matchboxes, and the largest the size of books. They were covered in
multicoloured fine fabrics, or painted or engraved with mark and symbols
whose meaning I did not understand. What astonished me the most was
their smallness. Among the Tainaronians, it is true, there are some very
small races, but even for the smallest baby these boxes were far too small.
    ‘Are these urns?’ I asked Longhorn, who was examining brochures at
the counter. ‘Are they used for dead people’s ashes?’
    ‘Ashes? No, there is no crematorium here,’ he said. ‘They are used for a
single organ, often an eye or an antenna. But sometimes the family may
choose part of a wing, a part with a beautiful pattern.’
    I fingered one of the boxes. It was as delicate and pretty as a
confectionery box, and lined in white silk. I remembered that I had once, as
a child, received just such a box, in which there had been sweeties. It had
been Easter morning, and I had just been allowed to get out of bed for the
first time after a bout of bronchitis. I am still seeking the purity, the silken
whiteness and the colours of the metallic foil of that convalescent morning,
its pussy-willows, its feather-tufts, in the world.
    ‘What happens to the rest of the body?’ I asked, wrapped in my
thoughts, but Longhorn did not reply, for out of the back room, at that
moment, stepped the funeral director, a very imposing man. Most noticeable
about him was, however, not his size, but his colours: they were as bright as
the complicated patterns of the boxes. His chest ranged from green to
lemon, while the knobs of his antennae were as yellow as clementines. He
bowed elegantly, and was surrounded by a cloud of scent which I
recognised only after a moment: it was undoubtedly musk.
    He became absorbed, with Longhorn, in a conversation conducted in low
voices, in conclusion of which one of the boxes was chosen from the shelf,
round and grass-green, with sky-blue crescent moons.
    When the funeral director turned to tap at the cash register, I went up to
Longhorn and asked once more: ‘What happens to the rest of the body?’
    I was a little startled at Longhorn’s look, for it betrayed irritation, from
which I understood immediately that my question was unseemly. All the
same, I waited for his answer.
    ‘Do you really want to know?’ he asked.
    ‘Why not? I am interested in everything,’ I said with some hauteur, and
when he continued in silence, I asked again, with real curiosity, ‘Is there
something secret about it, then?’
    ‘Very well,’ said Longhorn, somewhat coolly. Suddenly he stepped up to
the funeral director and whispered a couple of words to him, pointing in my
direction.
    The funeral director looked at me strangely, from head to foot, bowed
once more in his cultivated way, and asked me to follow him. I looked
interrogatively at Longhorn, and he growled: ‘Go on, I’ll stay here.’
    The funeral director had already reached the back room and was waiting
for me, silent but smiling. He opened a door leading to a badly lit stairway,
which smelt of cellars and fish; or that is what I thought then. The funeral
director gestured for me to walk in front of him, but when I shook my head
he stepped past me into the gloom. My curiosity had now completely
disappeared, but I followed the strange figure lower and lower down the
steep and uneven stairs, regretting my frivolous wish for information. The
deeper we went, the more uncomfortable I felt, above all because of the
increasingly strong smell. Finally I stopped, intending to return to ground
level without delay, but as it turned out the funeral director was now behind
me, so close that his yellow chest was nearly touching my back and his
musky vapours mixed with still odder scents. I continued my descent
unhappily, for one way or another the man was pushing me forward, gently
enough, it is true, but so firmly that it was no longer possible for me to
retreat.
    ‘The fish is rotten,’ I thought, but the smell of decay had already grown
to a stench that filled my lungs with nausea. I scarcely realised that we had
arrived in a great vault, and that it was filled with an extraordinary bustling.
    I could no longer see my guide anywhere. I felt faint, and pressed my
back against the damp stone wall. I already realised that I had been brought
into a sepulchre. Before me on the earthen floor lay carcasses without
number, but about them was such a ceaseless bustle that at times it looked
as if there were still some degree of life in them. Around me moved dozens
of creatures that were reminiscent in their appearance of the funeral
director, but whose clothing was—if possible—still more brilliant. The
more closely I examined them and their work, the more they reminded me
of the toil of burying beetles.
    I had descended into the Hades of Tainaron. I had asked: ‘What happens
to the bodies?’ and the answer to my question was now before my eyes.
One of the most prosaic and indispensable of the functions of the city of
Tainaron was carried out here, shielded from the gaze of passers-by; but as I
looked at their toil, my horror gave way and made space for impartial
examination, even respect.
    I spoke of Hades and a sepulchre, but in reality the space in which I
found myself served the opposite purpose: it was a dining room and a
nursery. Those who toiled here were not merely workers; they were also,
above all, mothers. Now I could see that around every larger form flocked a
swarm of smaller creatures, its offspring. As they did the work that had to
be done for life in this city to be at all possible, these workers were at the
same time feeding their heirs; and if the way in which they did it was not to
my taste, where would I find more convincing proof of the never-broken
alliance between destruction and florescence, birth and death?
    So: there was a carcass, of which one could no longer detect who or
what it had been when it was alive, so decomposed were its features. But I
no longer felt sick, although I saw one of the mothers poking about in its
pile of dross. For that was where the mother sought nourishment for her
heirs, her snout buried in the stinking carcass, and look! there glistened a
dark droplet, which one of the little ones drank, and after a moment the
second received its share, and the third; no one was forgotten.
    And here, then, was their work: to distil pure nectar from such filth, to
extract from the slimy liquid of death health, strength and new life. How
could I ever complain about what took place in the Hades of Tainaron?
Truly, it is a laboratory compared to which even the greatest achievements
of the alchemists are put to shame; but all that is done there is what the
earth achieves every year when it builds a new spring from and on what
rotted and died in the autumn.
    ‘Have you seen enough?’ someone asked behind me. I turned and saw
Longhorn, who was standing at the mouth of the corridor, looking at me in
a troubled way. I do not know whether his expression was caused merely by
the stench, which my own nose hardly sensed any longer, or whether it was
real grief. For his friend had just died, and I had hardly spared a thought for
his feelings. But when our eyes met, I, too, felt the bite of suffering.
    The kindness of his eyes! How had I never noticed it before? And they
were so dazzlingly black, so wise and alive . . . But in fact I have seen just
such a gaze before, and more than once. I have seen it—do not be shocked
—in your eyes, too, different as they are. I have encountered it—or seen it
pass me by—among acquaintances and strangers, at parties, in department
stores, in my own home, in trains, on stations and in lecture-halls, shops and
cafés; in summer, in the great lime trees in the park, where cast-iron
benches have been placed for the citizens; and I am sure that at unguarded
moments it has also resided in my own eyes.
    That it ever disappears! It was the impossible, and unbearable, thing that,
as I turned to look behind me and met Longhorn’s eyes, was relentless in us
both, and the strange meal we were following as onlookers offered no
solution.
   The soundless glitter of immense treasures—That it could be
extinguished and sink into the cold mass of raw material as if it had not
been anything more than the moisture of lachrymal fluid on the surface of
the cornea . . .
   ‘Come away,’ said Longhorn, with unexpected softness, and we left
Hades without looking at each other again.
                              OceanofPDF.com
                    THE CHARIOTEER
                           THE TENTH LETTER


I have received a card from my home country. Yes, it was not from you; we
know that. The bronze statue on the card is two thousand four hundred
years old, but he whom the card shows is a mere youth. His forehead is
encircled by an ornamental ribbon, and his hair curls, lightly gilded, over
his ears. He holds a pair of reins in his hands, and his eyes are dark stones,
glittering, mysterious and surprised.
    But what life and riches shine from them! It is hard for me to believe that
what I see is merely coloured light reflected from stone. What a coincidence
that it arrived just as I had sent you my last letter! For, don’t you see, he has
the same gaze, the one I was talking about, which hurts me, which I
recognise everywhere.
    But this young man is astonished at something; even his mouth is
astonished, already ajar and about to open. I am sure I am not mistaken in
remembering that I once saw a similar expression on the face of someone
who was dying; all the tubes had been disengaged, and his eyes were wide
open. The same concentration marks both their faces and forces both of
them forward in an invisible race.
    Why is it that it is in the form of this young man’s face that I should
most like to remember the face of humankind . . .
                                OceanofPDF.com
                TRACKS IN THE DUST
                        THE ELEVENTH LETTER


Have I told you that Tainaron has a prince? As a foreigner, I was
unexpectedly offered the opportunity to attend his reception. I asked
Longhorn for advice as to how I should dress for the occasion and what
behaviour was expected. I felt his answer was vacuous, and did not help me
one bit.
    ‘You can go in whatever you like,’ he said. ‘You can ask whatever you
want.’
    And then he added: ‘It’s not important, after all.’
    ‘Not important?’ I was astonished. ‘Do you just go there as you are,
straight off the street, and say whatever comes to mind to the prince?’
    But he did not give me any more clues, and I went there by myself, in
my best dress of course, but distinctly nervous.
    The prince lives in the middle of the city, in his palace, which is
surrounded by a moat. The drawbridge was down, and there were no guards
to be seen. People were going in and out, and no one paid any attention to
me. I had been given a piece of paper, a promissory note which I tried to
proffer to some of the passersby whom I guessed to be members of the
palace staff, but no one wanted to accept it; everyone just waved their hands
vaguely: ‘It’s not necessary.’
    ‘Where does the prince hold his reception?’ I asked three different times,
and it was only on the third occasion that I was directed to the right place;
but no one bothered to come with me as a guide, and the corridors along
which I walked were empty. Through doors that had been left open I saw
various different rooms: tambours, halls and stairwells, new colonnaded
corridors and courtyards where landscape gardens had been built with
pavilions, artificial lakes and bridges.
    The prince received visitors in the tower at the heart of the palace, in the
donjon. I saw him from a distance from the dim passageway on whose
stone floor my shoes tapped alarmingly noisily.
    The door to his reception room was wide open, and I could not see
anyone else in the vicinity.
    The salon was oval in shape and small. At its centre was a single chair,
on which the prince sat.
    The room was very high, in fact as high as the tower, so that the prince
looked as if he were sitting at the bottom of a well.
    I stopped before stepping across the threshold, for I did not know how I
should approach him. He sat motionless, but seemed to be looking me
straight in the eye. He was very old and frail. The way in which the light
fell around him and on to his domed head from the upper windows made
the vision desolate and melancholy.
    I think I stood there for a long time, anxiously, but just as it began to
seem to me that the prince was sleeping with his eyes open, his forelimb
rose in an encouraging gesture, slowly and ceremoniously. I stepped into
the room.
    ‘Your highness,’ I began, ‘I have come . . . ’
    ‘Yes, yes,’ he interrupted me before I had time to begin. ‘It’s perfectly
clear. You can ask whatever you want.’
    I had prepared many kinds of questions concerning both domestic and
foreign policies, trade links and tax reform, but at the moment they all fell
out of my head.
    ‘May I ask, may I ask,’ I mumbled, ‘how you are?’
    This was, of course, completely inappropriate, I understood that myself.
But I could not get anything else out of my mouth, and I looked at him,
dumbly, waiting for him to rise and announce that the audience was over.
    Strangely enough, he seemed on the contrary to be engrossed by my
question, as if it were completely apt for that time and place.
    ‘As to my health, I have nothing to complain about,’ he said, in such a
low voice that I had to lean forward to hear. ‘But I am worried about my
ears. There is a murmuring in them all the time. Or else a ringing, of a little
silver bell.’
    And he suddenly shook his head, so that the fluffy blue collar that
surrounded his neck hissed and rustled.
    ‘And then there are the nights, they are definitely too big. They have
grown larger and larger since the princess left, and the princess left thirty
years ago, in her prime. You will not believe how small they were when she
was still here. This small!’
    He stretched out two of the downy pincers of his forelimb for me to see:
they were almost touching. I looked at them with polite interest and nodded.
    The prince leaned backward in his chair and spoke now more audibly, as
if with greater warmth: ‘When the princess had died, I often went into the
city incognito, in strange armour. I stood by the bridge and did not let
anyone by without inspecting him or her thoroughly from head to feet. But I
never saw the princess again, for I should have known her in any disguise,
even if she had been through the most comprehensive of metamorphoses,
that you may believe. For the images of shared secrets had remained in the
princess’s eyes, and they, at last, would have revealed her immediately, but
in the uninterrupted flow of oncomers there flowed only the loam of strange
memories . . . ’
    And the prince’s voice fell. I suspected that the audience should have
ended long ago, and it tired me to stand before him as the only hearer of his
ancient yearning. No one came to fetch me away, and in the palace there
was a soundlessness as if there were no one else there.
    ‘Do you know why we have been forgotten?’ the prince whispered
unexpectedly, and his choice of words surprised me: why that ‘we’, it was
not really right in this situation, and why did he lower his voice in such a
familiar way?
    ‘Because it is all the same to them,’ the prince whispered, ‘what I do
now, where I go or what I say, everything is permitted now. Do you
understand?’
    ‘No, I do not believe it, your highness,’ I said hesitantly, but his forelimb
crooked and beckoned me closer.
    I bent obediently toward him and came so close that I thought I heard the
little silver bell he had mentioned, as well as the scent of some bitter herb.
Then he whispered into my ear: ‘In reality, I am no longer the prince.’
    He drew away to see the effect of his words on me. I can say that they
did not really have any effect. I was convinced he was speaking the truth.
Only thus did the emptiness and indifference which I had encountered in the
palace—and earlier—make sense.
    ‘I see you believe that I . . . ’ the prince said heavily. ‘But do not worry,
that is not the case, not in the least. Know this: times change, but each is
only one time of many. So what; it can be changed, like a change of clothes.
Today I still sit in my palace. But often I ring my bell for a long while and
no one comes. My shirt still bears the arms of Tainaron, but the wine which
is brought to me is no longer of the same quality as before. So what. For
tomorrow I shall be in exile, or my body will lie in that landscape garden on
the little wooden bridge and the national guard will have pierced it with
newly sharpened bayonets.’
    Now he finally rose to his feet—I had been expecting it for a long time
—and I realised, with relief, that the audience was over. I bowed
respectfully, and when I turned, I saw only my own footprints in the heavy
dust that completely covered the stone floor of the donjon.
    Their solitude proved to me with complete clarity that no one had visited
the room for ages, and that the prince himself had not left it.
    He was a lost cause.
                               OceanofPDF.com
    THE DAY OF THE GREAT MOGUL
                        THE TWELFTH LETTER


I do not know why I pick up my pen again. No longer because I might
expect return mail. But I would like to tell someone that something strange
has happened, some curious, unpleasant changes, and I have no idea what
has caused them. Perhaps it is temporary, and my life will return to how it
was before. Perhaps, too, the days that were like prizes, long ago, will
return.
   I have not travelled anywhere, but this city is now different. The change
does not please me. When I look out, I see that it is as if it has been
unclothed. The most important thing is absent; the thing that once, just a
moment ago, made me strong and happy. I look at the ground, I look at the
sky, and everywhere is the same absence, in the eyes that crowd the streets
and the department stores as if they were seeking their lost pupils in the
windows and sales counters. If I were to send you photographs of Tainaron
before and Tainaron now, you would say no difference is visible, and
perhaps it is so; but nevertheless I know that everything is decisively
different.
   If the sounds of the city were to be muted for a moment, I could hear a
secretly crumbling sound as if a trickle of sand were falling from the side of
a sandpit. And the vital force, which I believed to be inexhaustible, runs and
runs somewhere where no one can use it.
   Is this what is known as growing old? Do I see it everywhere, although it
exists only inside myself? And what once was happiness around me, was it
too a mere reflection? But in that case how can I know anything of what
Tainaron is, what it is like?
   Today the book I open describes the great mogul Aurangzeb, who was a
cruel tyrant. Fifteen of his elephants fell into a cleft on a mountain road, and
on the back of one of them was his favourite wife.
    ‘Remarkable,’ writes the great mogul, ‘empty-handed I came into this
world, and now, as I leave it, I drag with me an enormous caravan of
sins . . . My sorrow mortifies me. Farewell, farewell, farewell.’
    I force myself to get up and open the door and step out into the street. I
have decided to eat, but from the window table of the café the passers-by
look as if they are dragging burdens which are invisible but nevertheless
heavy. The liquid glimmers in my cup, and soon I shall have to swallow it. I
look at it as if it were the goblet of today.
    Under the marble table my legs wait, motionless, symmetrical, side by
side. I do not know whether I have ever sensed their existence as such.
They are alive, and all at once I am scorched by hot pity. My legs, my poor
legs! Modest, sturdy and resilient, my own pillars, you too will wither!
    Small days, small days. The woman who, in the tramcar, takes a comb
from her handbag and, pulling it through her stiff hair, complains: ‘The
comb doesn’t work, no. The concrete eats the hair so.’
    A friend who sways toward me, his coat open, shaking his fingers. There
was a time when he ran from table to table, his face flushed, to proclaim
that his dogma was the youth of the world. What he says now is something
quite different, quite different,
    but I do not listen; I mourn. The youth of the world!
    How we secrete words around us, so that the eye of reality may not see
us! In vain! So hopelessly thin and tattered a veil does not hide anything,
and we writhe in the brightness of destiny. No shield, no armour, and
neither will flesh ever return to the word.
    And when I pass by the statue of the Great Sleeper, around it billows a
tired song:


   Sweet is my sleep, but more to be mere stone,
   so long as ruin and dishonour reign;
   to bear nought, to feel nought, is my great gain;
   then wake me not, speak in an undertone!


My poor friend! I saw his finger fall and he wavered across the frosty
wasteland and shut himself up in the fortress of the telephone kiosk in the
square.
   It happened there, not here in Tainaron, for these are different statues,
but the days are as small everywhere and their shape is that of a funnel.
   I wonder if you too have noticed: there are moments when you do not
wish to wish and then you look inward and what is it that you see? An
endless sequence of wishes, infinitely many yous, and all of the yous are
threaded on to the tough thread of memory, and in the end you yourself are
no more than that thinnest of thin threads, and it quivers, tensed . . .
   But today I walked past a chirping flock of sparrows and it fell silent as a
wave of nausea swept across me and suddenly the earth gave way beneath
my feet and I remembered once more that beneath Tainaron is nothing but a
crust, as insubstantial as one night’s ice.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                        PROOF COPY
                     THE THIRTEENTH LETTER


The rapist panted in my pursuit, reducing the distance between us with
horrifying speed. Then I remembered that what I was seeing was a dream
and that I therefore had an opportunity: with all my strength, I forced my
feet to leave the ground, and as the murderer’s filthy paw fumbled for my
ankle, it slipped beyond his grasp and past the highest branches.
    My unbelief had saved me, but the poor creature who believes that
everything is true is the victim of his dreams.
    Today I remembered that many years—many grace-filled years ago, I
should say, for that is what they have been—we were walking up a street
between two churches, and you said: ‘The soul is what is visible.’ Do you
remember?
    When I happened to look in the mirror a moment ago, you said it, from a
long way off, but as clearly as you did then. I seldom look in the mirror, but
always there is someone there who gives me my eyes. And the root of my
nose is bluish; a line has inscribed itself at the corner of my mouth like a
drypoint groove. But this is no proof copy, and the acid of everyday life
corrodes, prepares that which is the soul.
    Once you said, moaning: ‘I would love you even if you were someone
else.’
    You are crazy! How the word reassured me, how calm it made me.
    But yesterday morning I stood in front of a large department store where
I planned to go and buy clothes, and the sun had just risen behind the roofs
of Tainaron. I came to a halt because I happened to glance at my legs, for no
particular reason; and from them grew two shadow-trees, and both of us
were whole, I and the other.
    Oh, I have something wider than a prairie, wider than Oceanos. I do not
know where to put it, to whom to present it. I cannot show it; I cannot use
it. It is too wide for this city; one life is too small for it. No one needs it, but
today it has me flying and singing.
                                  OceanofPDF.com
                                 SAND
                     THE FOURTEENTH LETTER


The new day dawned low and cloudy. In my melancholy, I set out for a
walk—alone—for Longhorn, after all, has his work, of which I know
almost nothing; but I assume it is some kind of business activity.
    I wanted to see something I had not seen before, and for that reason I set
out toward the eastern part of the city, although I well remembered that
Longhorn had urged me to stay away from those parts. When I asked why,
he merely said that it was not safe to go there alone.
    But it was midday, after all, and I was walking along a broad esplanade
bordered on both sides by high poplars which were still green. Looked at
from a distance, they recall the crowns of some other tree, standing on their
bases. I walked past the theatre, on whose eaves snouty caryatids slumber;
that building has a particular charm. I came to a cross-street full of
expensive specialist shops and pretty little cafés. I myself have often sat at
their clean tables, but now I did not stop. I was in a hurry, as if on my way
to some agreed meeting.
    Now I came to streets which were unfamiliar. I could no longer see
business plaques or inventively decorated shop windows. The buildings
became more closed, dilapidated and lower. I sank into melancholy, and for
a while I went on hardly glancing around me, but the unevenness of the
gravel under my heels startled me. Now I realised that the streets in this part
of the city were not paved, or even asphalted. They were deeply rutted, in
an almost unpassable condition, but neither did there seem to be any kind of
traffic any longer in these parts. Pavements, too, had been left unbuilt, and
between the buildings there meandered indistinct lanes. After a few steps I
was forced to ask myself: were they buildings? For is it not the case that the
buildings in which we live and our friends live have straight and solid
walls? Are their roofs not covered in slates or tin and are their windows not
made of glass?
    As I walked, I remembered entrances and heavy front doors whose
handles were of brass, gutters that drummed in the rain, and chimneys and
chimney-pipes which, seen from an attic window, looked like solitary
people. And behind the window panes? There should have been the
glimmer of white curtains, eyes, cats and the dim perspectives of the life of
strange rooms . . .
    But there was nothing of the sort to be seen. The habitations past which I
walked were lacking in all the characteristics of proper dwellings. First of
all, there were no straight lines. Everything curved and twisted, meandered
without direction, without clear corners. The dwellings rose from the earth,
earth-coloured, made of clay and loam. They had indefinitely shaped
openings in place of windows and doors. Where were the columns and
capitals which one could admire in almost every square in the centre of the
city? Where was the rosy golden glow of the cupolas, and the window
recesses with their rich mosaic patterns? The wall-niche and the sandstone
shapes that beckoned to them? The slender roof-groins and the pointed
arches? The pilastered galleries and the atriums with their flowering trees?
    I realised that there were two Tainarons, or perhaps even more, who
knows . . . This was a Tainaron lacking in everything that is called culture,
everything which joy and hope, prosperity and ambition, can build and
embellish on Earth.
    I cannot say I liked it.
    I walked faster than before. My intention was now to traverse this
obscure and peripheral part of the city as quickly as possible and spend a
moment at the sandy beach of which I had heard. After that I decided to
return to the centre of the city via the northern causeway, although it is long
and dull.
    The light increased, and from somewhere the shimmer of water was
reflected over the nests, cells and systems of caves that were hollowed out
of the sand and the rock. From in front of me I heard an incessant rustling
and scouring, as if the earth were being swept with a large brush; but there
was nothing to be seen. A couple of times I heard, from behind a stony
hillock, the sound of dragging and something buzzing; I was certain that a
lizard or reptile was hiding among the stones. I saw a couple of passers-by;
they were small and fragile, dragonfly-like creatures. The last dwellings I
passed were just low mounds and holes. They would offer shelter only to
the most insignificant and modest beings, and they soon sank and merged
into the fine, golden sand, which was certainly beautiful to look at, although
it made my steps heavy and insinuated its way into my shoes and even into
my mouth, making me thirsty.
    Nevertheless, I decided to walk a few steps further, although I had
already admitted to myself that my trip was not exactly fun. The sand
spread before me in gently swelling dunes. I could no longer see any signs
of the city around me. The sand radiated the same simple severity as the
snowfields at home, the allure of inviolability, dreams and emptiness.
    As I gazed at one particular sandbank, its shape reminded me of a
sledging slope which, long ago, rose in the courtyard of my childhood
home. I began to be very tired, and I felt like sprawling for a moment in its
softness. Suddenly I was so sleepy that my thoughts became confused: what
if I freeze?
    I took a couple of steps toward the ridge, and at the same time my
attention fastened on some insignificant protuberances that were at first
hardly distinguishable from the surrounding sandy plain. When I went
nearer, I saw earthworks of various sizes, all of them in the form of circles,
forming concentric rings. At their centre was a conical pit, symmetrical and
apparently purpose built, for wind or water could not possibly have built
such exact forms. Those hollows reminded me of something . . . Long ago, I
must have seen something similar; but it was quite painful that I could not
bring to mind where it had happened.
    Behind the sandbank I saw yet another earthwork, larger than all the
others. I climbed up to its ridge and the sand immediately began to move
under my feet. Small avalanches fell down the walls of the pit here and
there, soundless falls and swifter torrents, making a rustling sound as if a
woman in evening dress were rushing, complete with train, through a
thicket.
    It was not until a moment later that I noticed that there was a hole deeper
in the pit. At first it looked infinitesimally small, but that could not be the
case, for in fact I was still so far from it that it could well be wider than the
circumference of my head. It looked immeasurably deep. The grains of sand
that were displaced by the heels of my shoes as soon as I moved in the
slightest fell over its fragile edges. I stood where I was—insofar as there
was a definite place to stand, for something was continually happening on
the ridge of the earthworks, so I did not have a firm foothold—yes, I stood
where I was, and I could not take my eyes off that round hole. At first I felt
that the movement I thought I noticed came from the shadow of my
eyelashes, for my eyelids were fluttering. Then I saw it quite clearly,
without any doubt: something was moving in the hole, very deep beneath
the sand; and then the walls of the pit, too, began to undulate.
    At that moment I believe I executed a very strange and, in relation to my
strength, supernatural leap, for my foothold was finally giving way and I
felt myself slipping with the sand toward the grave-dark hole.
    On no account did I climb; I made a half-vault backward, for the next
moment I found myself behind the earthwork, looking at the panicles of a
tussock of grass, which moved lightly at the level of my eyes. I turned my
head so that I now saw nothing but sand: dim quartz granules, deep red
grains of granite, crushed snail shells. The clouds had dispersed; the sun
shone on the shadowless sand. I felt as if I had never looked at anything so
closely, because the gold of a particular vein of mica shone into my pupil,
red as the embers of a fire.
    I had thrown myself on the sand through the sheer weakness of fear, for I
had been able to glimpse how some kind of point, a claw covered in fur or
prickles, or perhaps a tooth, had flitted past the edge of the hole, but had
immediately disappeared back into the darkness.
    Later I got up and my feet took me back, but I do not remember the road;
and it is of no importance. I have not yet met Longhorn, and I have no
intention of telling him what happened today.
    At this moment I could be hollow, as empty as the ants from which ant-
lion grubs suck the innards and vital fluids. In writing this, I am a little
ashamed, as if I wanted to disturb you by telling you this; but it is true, after
all.
    I examine my nails and the skin on the backs of my hands closely,
knowing that they could be among the fragile and dry skins that are thrown
over the ridge of the earthworks and which crumble to dust and disappear
among the sand.
    But the wind! It rises and distributes both dust and sand over the towers
of Tainaron, and the dunes shift once more some distance toward the
interior. From a high hillock a grating sound is heard, and I see the Ferris
wheel spinning in the wind, but guess that its cogwheels, too, are now
grinding sand from the shore. When I think about the buzzing, the sea of air
that undulates around the antennae and the towers and which sets the papers
in the gutter dancing, I am no longer at all afraid. Its reinvigorating breath
passes through personal happiness and unhappiness, and they are no more
than a couple of steps in the great dance.
   But have I not just returned from a beach where I have no memory of
water? Was it really the case that I did not even glance northward, across
the expanse of Oceanos, but that the waves and details of the sand
swallowed all my attention, just as they will one day cover the city of
Tainaron? The skuas must have shrieked then, too, and the waves roared,
but I, absent-minded, saw nothing but the sand and the claw . . .
                              OceanofPDF.com
                         WHITE NOISE
                       THE FIFTEENTH LETTER


Sometimes, when I find myself in the street’s densest throng, I am
surrounded by such a confusion of voices that I feel like covering my ears
with my hands. Someone croaks; someone else drums; from a third passer-
by come snapping sounds that combine to make a kind of monotonous
music. And what about the strange bellowing or shrill cries that from time
to time pierce the spaces between the houses and rebound from one wall to
the other? I understand them as little as I understand the screaming of birds,
the silence of fish.
    The state of confusion in which I often move in this city makes me
remember and long for something. I remember the radio, whose place was
on a low rosewood shelf in the bay window. I often sat on the floor in front
of the radio for quite long times and listened.
    But that happened only when I was able to be alone in the room. When
the other children came to listen to the radio, I found other things to do, for
I did not care for storytime, or for quizzes or sports commentaries. Why,
then, did I dawdle, turning the knobs of the radio for so long that my mother
often lost her temper and told me to stop?
    Beside the radio there grew, in a large earthenware pot, a crown of
thorns, and as I listened I liked to finger its sturdy prickles; they were shiny
and amazingly sharp, as hard as bone.
    ‘That’s nothing but noise,’ said my older brother, stepping into the room.
‘Let me try.’
    And he bent over the receiver and adjusted the vertical pointer to a
station that broadcast music or sports commentaries or news.
    ‘Is this what you wanted to listen to?’ my brother asked, and out of
politeness toward my brother, or rather in order to be left in peace the more
quickly, I answered: ‘Yes, this is it.’
    But as soon as my brother had gone, I turned back to the dimly glowing
pointer board and ran the red line through all the cities of Europe. I heard
them murmur and sing, but their invitation did not move me. Although I did
not understand their distant languages, I knew that they said the same things
as in our own language, and at that time I doubted whether that could be
used to say anything really important.
    For precisely that reason, I did not pause at any of the big cities, but
adjusted the pointer to the empty space between the radio stations, where no
one was sending anything. To these regions, which were as deserted and
roadless as the spaces between stars, I returned again and again. As I
wandered through their integrity, I felt the happiness of an explorer, and I
was bewitched by the ceaseless humming that rose like vapour from their
nameless seas. It was secreted from the receiver as a radiation of the same
strength, almost unchanging in wavelength, which brought to mind honey
and the homes of thousands of bumblebees. It swayed before me like a
curtain, like dancing dust; it was ceaseless happening, but nothing changed
in it.
    So I wandered through the forest, peaceful and alone. The language I
listened to was so full of meaning that once I even felt my intestines
pausing in their work in order to understand better. If I had been asked then,
‘But what does it mean?’, I should not have replied. For I could not have
said anything but: ‘It means everything,’ and even to my own ears such an
answer would have seemed senseless.
    But that was precisely how it was. The roar that lured me was the
chimera of all languages and all voices.
    Once I heard the same storm rising elsewhere. I had a fever, and I was
standing in line in the school playground. Faintness made me black out and
dizziness thrust me to the ground. But I did not feel myself hit the gravel,
for in my eyes and my blood there rose, roaring, such a plenitude and
suction of voices that I dived into it headfirst as if into the sea, and there,
too, ‘everything’ lived.
    But from time to time as I listened to the noise of the radio, I could
distinguish individual voices and call them to me. I did not always succeed,
but sometimes all I needed to do was listen, and a whisper or a note would
detach itself from the density of the cloud of voices and float in the
foreground. But nothing I heard was unambiguous, so that often I wanted to
tear the roaring aside as if it were a stage-curtain. But that, of course, was
impossible: the voices were born and lived only in the fog, and if it lifted,
‘everything’ disappeared immediately into a deathly silence.
    But one day I could hear the seagulls shrieking above the reef, and on
another the trains dashed forward. It happened very far away, and I admit I
was a little afraid.
    Everything floated and changed; something was always happening. I
could exert only the tiniest influence on what was born and died behind the
calm fabric that covered the radio loudspeaker. Some events were terrible:
cities destroyed by earthquakes, assassinations, collapsing stars. One
eruption sparked another, the echo of ceaseless explosions never seemed to
weaken. It was as if one were hearing, from afar, the birth of matter itself.
    Then my fingers reached out once more for the spine of the cactus and
tightly pressed its sharpest point, in extent warmer than a nail, living,
steady.
    Once I remembered, in front of the receiver, that I had a heart: that
whatever I did, that heart beat and beat, ceaselessly. And as if in answer,
through the tempest, I heard the beats of another heart, dull, even and self-
assured. Then I found myself looking at the fabric that hid the loudspeaker
behind it, but it did not sigh like my own chest; it did not even quiver.
    Or I remembered the name I had once been given, and at the same time I
was called by that name, but from a place so far off that I could never have
reached there, even if I had set off immediately.
    And when the dishes clattered in the kitchen, I was already sitting at
table like the others.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                           THE MIMIC
                       THE SIXTEENTH LETTER


In Tainaron I have a balcony where I sometimes sit and bask when the sun
shines and I have no reason to go into the city. For you it is autumn, but for
us it is still high summer.
    Yesterday the dazzle closed my eyelids and set fiery landscapes rolling
beneath them. There was a book on my lap, but I did not turn its pages.
Here in the courtyard grows a great tree whose name I do not know, and the
blaze of the sun was extinguished only when it was snared by the branches.
    Look! At that moment I saw below me a group of stones. They were
largish cobblestones, grey ones, dappled and reddish ones, granite or
possibly gneiss. The centre of the courtyard was paved with them, and they
were beautiful stones; but that was not why I was looking at them. It
seemed to me that new stones had been brought to the courtyard and that
some kind of a hillock had been built, which had certainly not been there
before.
    Just as this little riddle was beginning to trouble me, Longhorn stepped
on to my balcony.
    ‘Look under the tree,’ I said to him. ‘Do you understand why a hill like
that has been built there?’
    He looked, and began to smile—if the slow withdrawal of his jaws to the
side of his face can be called a smile—I never get used to it.
    ‘Perhaps you find it amusing,’ I said, a little irritated, ‘that all sorts of
obstacles are built on the thoroughfares; I myself can see no sense in it.’
    When I glanced at the pile of stones again, I was downhearted, for I
thought it began to look like a small grave.
    ‘Do not worry,’ said Longhorn reassuringly, resting his light forelimb on
my shoulder. ‘I see you do not yet know the Mimic. If you wish, I will
introduce him to you.’
    ‘Who is he?’ I asked, and my mood was cheerless, even though the day
was bright and autumn was still far off.
    ‘It is him you are looking at,’ Longhorn said amiably.
    I did not blink, but nevertheless something happened in my eyes, for
now I could see that what was in the courtyard in the shade of the tree was
no pile of stones but a living creature, motionless, whose back was covered
in a reddish-grey, lumpy carapace.
    I wanted to ask something, but Longhorn made a gesture with his hand.
He has, you see, a habit of moving wonderfully gracefully and elegantly,
and his movement silenced me indisputably.
    ‘Now look,’ he ordered, and there was no longer anything or anyone in
the shade of the tree. But a round knoll had appeared on the strip of lawn
beside the wall, and it, too, was as green as new grass.
    ‘Is it . . .?’ I began.
    ‘Yes, he is quick,’ Longhorn acceded.
    ‘I do not understand,’ I complained. ‘Is he someone, then? Who is he?’
    ‘My dear,’ Longhorn said, and looked at me, waving the extensions of
his antennae, ‘do you believe that the Mimic could have a personality?
Today he is one thing, tomorrow another. Wherever he is, that is what he is
—stone a moment ago, now the summer’s grass. Who knows what form he
will take tomorrow. But come, let us go; I shall introduce you to one
another.’
    ‘No,’ I said, feeling an obscure rage. ‘I do not wish to. I have no
intention of making the acquaintance of such a person. It certainly takes all
sorts . . . ’
    ‘Really,’ said Longhorn, without showing any kind of sympathy, in fact
teasingly. ‘So you want everyone to be someone. You want what someone
is at the beginning to be what he is at the end.’
    ‘But surely! There has to be some kind of continuity!’ I shouted.
‘Development, naturally, but at the same time—loyalty!’
    I attempted to continue, but I could already feel my irritation slipping
away into the summer day that embraced Tainaron from all directions. Soon
I was feeling the desire to protect the unknown creature.
    ‘In a sense I understand him,’ I said with some considerable forbearance.
‘He is seeking his own form.’
    ‘Is that so?’ said Longhorn, and we both leaned over the rail and looked
downward. There was no longer any kind of hummock in the courtyard, but
beside the large tree stood another tree, but much smaller and sturdier.
   ‘Does he know we are here?’ I asked. ‘Does he do it for us, or for his
own amusement?’
   ‘It is his work,’ said Longhorn, but I do not know if he was serious.
   ‘Why are you laughing?’ asked Longhorn in turn.
   ‘How I love this city!’ I said. ‘Perhaps I shall stay here for ever.’ (What
on earth made me say it?)
   ‘Yes, stay here forever,’ Longhorn said, but his voice darkened to such a
depth that I forgot the Mimic and turned toward him in astonishment.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                THE GREAT WINDOW
                     THE SEVENTEENTH LETTER


It was evening once, and I was a child, out in the street. All the lights were
on, street lamps, shop windows, car headlights; and I was standing in front
of a toy shop. You know the shop; it is still there, in the centre of town, and
you must have passed it many times, or perhaps you have even been inside
it in the days before Christmas.
    That window! It was lit with prodigal brightness, and along the glass
flowed glistening drops; a rainstorm had just passed over the city and
everything was clean, never before seen. In front of the dolls, cars, balls and
games, immediately behind the glass, a large selection of marbles had been
set out in the shape of the petals of a flower. Some of them were
transparent, others brightly coloured, others as white as milk.
    I had never owned any marbles, and their glow captivated me; I admired
them for a long time, but all of a sudden, from far away and without
warning, the terrible knowledge slid between them and me—that one day
my mother would die.
    When this pain hit me, I was looking at a particularly beautiful
shimmering blue marble, and something happened: it changed. Its colour
did not vary, its size was the same as before, and it remained steady in its
place; but all the same it was quite different from before. Something had
fallen away from it, something which only a moment ago had made it
desirable, the most important thing of all. The marble was no longer of
value; it was merely junk, and there was no longer anything in the entire
shop window to interest me. It was as if stage spotlights had been
extinguished in the middle of a performance and a curtain had been drawn
from earth to heavens in front of all the magnificence, a curtain whose
name was VOID.
    Even the street in which I stood was now a strange street in a strange
city; but I went on standing in the same place. A vague desire for
knowledge forced me to make an experiment. I wanted to see whether I
could make the marble change back to what it was before. Gazing at it
unwaveringly, I began to struggle to disperse the thickness of night which,
unseen, dominated everything I looked at.
    I did not believe the darkness, I said, it is not true; and soon it was
indeed not true; it paled and lifted like a night-mist. And the marble glowed
before me, lovely as ever.
    But then I understood that the plenty of the shop window, all the jewels
of its treasure trove, were only a tiny foretaste of what life would bring me
with both hands—no, a hundred hands! a thousand!
    And I have never left that shop window. I stand and stand, I look and
look at how it shines, and goes dark, and shines again. There is night and
there is day, and I see both hell and heaven through the same window.
                               OceanofPDF.com
      THE WORK OF THE SURVEYOR
                     THE EIGHTEENTH LETTER


Today I have looked through my window at the work of the City Surveyor. I
have already watched him in another part of the city, fulfilling his
professional responsibilities, and now, this morning, he has reached our
street. He measures the lengths and widths of streets, the diameters of
squares and the heights of buildings. I do not know why he measures them,
but I suppose the information he produces is stored in an archive
somewhere and that interested parties can consult them there.
    His territory is rather large and he is very hard-working, but he has only
one measuring device: his own body. It is a long, green body, and he uses it
extremely skilfully; I have previously had the opportunity to admire such
agility only in the performances of acrobats. Sometimes his body forms a
large loop; the next moment it has stretched out again to a long, straight
stretch and he has covered quite a distance along the street. He also has no
trouble in climbing vertical brick walls, right up to the eaves, and he does
not seem to suffer from vertigo of any kind.
    As I came from the shop and took a short cut through the park, I saw the
Surveyor eating his lunch on a bench. On his head was the white cap worn
by city officials, decorated with spiral patterns. I asked if I might sit with
him for a moment, and he willingly made space.
    ‘Would you like some?’ he asked, opening his lunch box. But I had
already eaten, and refused, with thanks. There was something I wished to
ask him.
    ‘Do you find your work interesting?’ I asked, for something to say.
    ‘Extremely,’ he replied, munching his sandwich. Behind us, in the
playground, the children of Tainaron, screaming, were playing the games
played by all the children in the world: running away, being had, and then
exchanging prisoner for persecutor.
    ‘Have you been doing it for long?’
    ‘Ever since I reached my full height,’ the Surveyor replied, pouring a
steaming, sweet-smelling drink from his thermos flask into his cup.
    Bells rang out from the cathedral, the children left the playground and
disappeared into the shade of the trees. It was already almost noon, and the
siesta was beginning. I could not see any movement anywhere, and heard
only the booming of the bells. It felt as if life were standing still, resting and
reviving like the Surveyor.
    Through the incessant ringing, I heard his even voice: ‘My father did the
same work, and his father and his grandfather and his grandfather’s father.
A new City Surveyor is chosen from each generation; now it is I.’
    And he added something which I did not hear, for the power of the bells
swelled to numb the ears.
    I bent over toward him and his flat face neared my mouth. Now I could
hear what he said: ‘I am the measure of all things.’
    But he did not say it haughtily, merely stated it, brushing the crumbs
from his chest.
    ‘But this part of the city is old,’ I thought aloud. ‘Was it not surveyed
many generations ago? What could there be to measure here?’
    He looked at me in disbelief. ‘What is there to measure?’ he asked. ‘It
was a different time then. A different time, and different measuring devices.
I and my grandfather are not at all the same size, as you may have thought.’
    He took a large piece of fruit from his bag, sinking his many rows of
healthy teeth into it. I no longer knew what to say, and felt a fool.
    When the Surveyor had sucked the stem clean and dropped it into a
rubbish bin decorated with the city arms, he rose decisively and felt it his
duty to remark: ‘Back to work!’
    He, the measure of all things, hurried energetically to fulfil the demands
of his job, growing smaller and smaller on the park path, and a straight,
clear furrow was left in its raked sand. He went as official representatives of
the people go, or as those who know that everything has its measure, and
more—what and who he himself is.
    And, following the Surveyor’s example, time too moved on; a dry leaf
fell before me on to the dust and it was the first leaf of autumn. The season
had changed.
    The bells had stopped echoing, but the city radiated its own sound, like a
busy bumble-bee. The brightly coloured Ferris wheel of the Tainaron
funfair, which was motionless for a moment at midday, started to spin once
more. I saw it from the bench on which I was sitting, alone; it can be seen
down in the harbour and in all the squares and markets, so high has it been
set up, in the constant wind.
                              OceanofPDF.com
                     THE BYSTANDER
                      THE NINETEENTH LETTER


This morning as I woke up, in bed, I was overcome by a prurient
restlessness whose reasons I could not immediately divine. For a long time I
sat on my bed and listened. Although it was already late in the morning, the
city was silent, as if not a single citizen had yet woken up, although it was a
weekday and an ordinary working week.
    I dressed myself in yesterday’s clothes and, without eating my breakfast,
went down to the street, seeking Longhorn’s company.
    But before I could open the front door a surprising sight opened up
through the round window of the stairwell: the pavement in front of the
building was full of backs, side by side, broad and narrow, long and sturdy;
but all were united by stillness, the same direction and position.
    All at once I thought of a picture which I had once seen, perhaps in a
book, perhaps in a museum; I cannot remember. Perhaps you too have seen
it? The crowd in the picture had a common object of interest, which was not
visible; it was outside the edge of the picture, perhaps in reality too. But
more than the invisible event and its observers, my attention was drawn to a
man in the background of the picture who was looking in the opposite
direction to all the others. Do you remember him too?
    When I then stepped out on to the outside step—and I can tell you that I
did it hesitantly, almost unwillingly—I can confirm that a fair number of
people were standing in front of the opposite block, too, but that there too
silence prevailed. I do not think I have yet mentioned that the boulevard on
which I now live runs from east to west. When, this morning, I eyed it from
my front door, it looked as if the entire city had gathered along this long,
wide street and had been standing there silently—that was my impression—
perhaps from the middle of the night onward. The din that, with such
numbers of people, generally rises like puffs of smoke, is impressive, but
the rage or joy of the crowd could not have dumbfounded me as completely
as its silence.
    Since autumn is already approaching here, the sun was hanging, at this
time in the morning, fairly low at the eastern end of the street, but as far as I
could see every single citizen was staring in the opposite direction, at the
point in the distance where the boulevard shrinks to a small yellow flower:
where the linden trees stand in their autumn glory.
    The street was empty. I have often examined its surface, skilfully
patterned in stone, but now, as it spread, deserted, before me, when not a
single walker was crossing it and no vehicle was rolling along it, I hardly
noticed its unique beauty. In the pure dawn of the new day the tramway
rails sparkled as if they were made of silver.
    Then it occurred to me that perhaps some national day was being
celebrated in the city, and that the boulevard was closed to traffic for a great
festival parade. It might be that we should soon see the prince himself—if
he is still alive—driving past us, perhaps acknowledging us with a slender
hand . . . Or were we expecting a state visit to the city? Would a procession
of closed carriages glide past us, taking noble guests to a luncheon
reception at the city hall?
    But I was soon forced to abandon such thoughts. For nothing about the
appearance of the Tainaronians suggested great festivities. There were no
bunches of flowers, no balloons or masks. Not a single child was blowing
the kind of whistle which, whining shrilly, unwinds from a roll to a long
staff, and no one was flying a miniature Tainaron flag, a white pennant
printed with a spiral (or perhaps a nautilus; I have never been quite sure
which).
    Yes, they went on standing silently, and the eastern sun infused the
strong heat of copper into their back-armour.
    Despite the disapproving glances which were cast at me, I pushed right
through to the front row and found myself balancing on a narrow kerbstone
of the pavement.
    Beside me stood a gleaming black shape that reminded me of a diver. I
knocked echoingly on his polished surface and said: ‘Excuse me, but please
would you tell me what day today is?’
    He glanced at me, disturbed, and after making the rapid and sullen reply,
‘The nineteenth,’ he turned back at once toward the west.
    I was none the wiser, but I had only myself to blame—the timing and
phrasing of my question had been badly chosen.
    Then, my dear, there was a sudden gust of wind, and the Tainaronians
suddenly began to crowd around me, so that I had to stand with one foot in
the gutter. That did not matter, since I had managed to secure a lookout spot
for myself. For something was now happening at the point where the
boulevard dived into a dusky tunnel under the linden trees. From that
direction, some kind of procession was approaching, something very long
and pale; but however much I screwed up my eyes I could not make out any
details.
    It progressed slowly, and our moments stretched with it, but inch by inch
it approached our building; and the better I could make it out, the more
astonished I was.
    What a parade it was! I could see no glittering carriages or brass bands.
Quite the reverse: as it approached, the silence deepened still further, for on
the broad boulevard of Tainaron silence combined with silence; the silence
of the procession merged with the stillness of the crowd. No flags or
streamers, no songs, shots or slogans. But neither did this procession have
any of the solemn brilliance of a funeral cortège; not a single flower or
wreath gave it colour, and there were no candle flames to flutter and smoke.
    When the head of the endlessly long ribbon, which took up almost the
entire width of the street, reached us, new battalions rolled forth far away
from under the trees. Battalions, I call them, but even today I still do not
know whether these were in any sense military. I shall now try to describe
to you what I saw before me this morning.
    The procession was so uniform that it recalled a snake, but in fact it was
made up of countless individuals. Its speed was leisurely, so that I had
plenty of time to examine the beginning, which broadened like a reptile’s
head and which—apparently like the entire procession—was covered by a
transparent, slightly shiny membrane, like an elastic cellophane bag. Inside
this membrane, in rows and fronts, marched small creatures; as far as I
could see from where I stood they were like grubs, almost colourless and
about as thick as my middle finger, but a little longer. I shuddered slightly
as I watched them as one shivers when one comes inside from the cold.
    The procession was made up of two or even three layers: those below
carried the surface layer, which moved more slowly than the lower layer
along a living carpet. I think what happened was that when those on top
reached the head of the procession, they joined the bottom layer and, in
turn, carried the others. It was impossible to estimate the number of
members of the procession, but I should imagine that it was a question of
millions rather than hundreds of thousands of individuals.
    As I gazed at the torrent that surged before me, I remembered that a few
nights previously I had dreamed a dream in which this same street had
become a river. Now I was, of course, tempted to see it as a prophetic
dream, although I do not habitually do that.
    I tell you, I would like to understand the nature of the silence with which
the city greeted the march-past of this mass. Was it respect? fear? menace?
Now, when I remember our morning, I am inclined to think that it included
all those emotions, plus something else, which I shall never understand, for
I am in the end a stranger here.
    I—like the others who stood around me—saw at the same time that a
small figure had appeared in the middle of the roadway, some kind of
weevil, which stared dispiritedly at the approaching flattish serpent’s head.
There was nothing that was open to interpretation about its motionlessness:
it was pure terror and catalepsy. The great head, which glistened unctuously
in the sun, by now shining from high above, and which was made up—as I
have already said—of hundreds of smaller heads, drew ineluctably nearer to
the point on the cobblestones where the poor creature stood. At that
petrified moment it did not even occur to me that I could have dashed into
the roadway and dragged the creature to safety. For my part, I was
convinced that the weevil would become food for that living rope; or, if not,
that it would at least be an unwilling part of that strange procession.
    But what happened was this: when the slowly undulating river reached
the creature—which looked as if it was benumbed into a hypnosis-like state
—its head split in two and left a space for the weevil without even brushing
its unbudging form.
    There was a sigh—it was unanimous—and the front part of the snake
merged once more, but in the middle of the broad flow the little creature
stood like an island, while the masses that seethed around it flowed,
glistening, onward.
    I do not know whether you will find this description strange. Have you
ever, on your travels, encountered anything comparable? You have told me
so little about the time when we did not yet know each other . . .
    For my part, I am still bewildered by my morning experience. I do not
know how long I stood on the spot, one foot on the pavement, the other in
the gutter, as new battalions, divisions, regiments, rolled past us. I should
like to say, too, that (with the exception of the case of the weevil) nothing
about the procession suggested that anyone in it might have seen or noticed
us, that we, the citizens of Tainaron (I am, after all, in a sense one of them)
existed in any way for them, let alone that this great march was organised
with us in mind.
    If you were to ask, I would answer that I do not know. No, I really have
not been able to find out what it was and why it went through Tainaron,
where it came from and whether it had a destination. It could be that it was
searching for something; it could be that it was fleeing something. If the
others know something, if you receive any information about this matter,
then tell me; do not hide anything!
    When the tail of the procession, so thin that its tip was formed of just a
few individuals—and they themselves were unusually slender and
transparent—had finally slipped out of sight beyond the square where the
boulevard terminates to the east, the crowds dispersed incredibly quickly. I
looked around me and stood there, alone on the kerbstone, and the sun was
at its highest. Everything bustled around me as before; the shops opened
again and vehicles rolled both eastward and westward. Some dashed to
banks and offices and secret assignations and others to meetings or to
prepare the day’s dinner. But in the middle of the street—as far as the eye
could see, in either direction—ran a moist, slimy trail.
    This afternoon, when I walked across the boulevard, I could no longer
see it. It had dried up and as covered in the same sand and dust that dances
before winter in each of the streets of Tainaron.
                                OceanofPDF.com
         KING MILINDA’S QUESTION
                      THE TWENTIETH LETTER


My immediate neighbour, on the same floor, is an extraordinarily old
person; much older than the prince. Some people claim he is already over
one hundred and fifty years old, while others, like Longhorn, say that he is
only one hundred and twenty-five or one hundred and thirty. But everyone
who sees his frailty understands that he has lived past his own time, and it is
incomprehensible and even cruel that he must continue living here in the
city of Tainaron.
    He has a servant—or perhaps he is one of his descendants—who takes
him out every morning. He is dry and light and has shrunk so small that he
is carried in a kind of bag or sack. The bag is set in the sun on a park bench
and its sides are turned down a little so that the old man can take the air and
look at the flowers and the passers-by. There he is left, and after a couple of
hours he is taken home again. In his bag he looks, with his thin limbs, like
nothing but a bunch of straw, as dry as kindling.
    Do you think there is a place where people do not grow old? I wonder if
I ever met an inhabitant of such a country when I was quite young? And
will he meet me again when my age is as great as that of the old man in the
sack?
    What a shock he will get. ‘My dear friend,’ he will stammer. ‘What
dreadful thing has happened? Who has treated you so badly? Where is your
thick hair? Why do you walk so slowly and with such a stoop? Tell me who
is to blame, and I shall make him answer for his deeds.’
    Childish, ignorant person! Let him go back to where he came from!
    I have seen a vision that came from the sack. It looked just as if there
were a mirror in it. And the straw rose to give a sign; it beckoned to me.
And so of course I went, I went and sat down next to the sack, which was
very humble considering that one hundred and fifty years fitted inside.
   The sack’s voice was so weak and hoarse that I could not immediately
understand it. The sack asked where I was from, and said that it had not
been born in Tainaron either. And I had only sat there for a moment when I
realised that the bag contained someone alive and remembering. And when
I had sat there for another moment, I knew that he was not old. Old age was
merely his disguise, as childhood had once been. I knew it as I once knew
that a certain very small creature was right when she shrieked: ‘I am not a
child! I am not a child!’ I knew it because I had not been a child myself,
either; I knew it because I shall never be old. I knew it because I had heard
King Milinda’s question: ‘Was he who was born the same as he who died?’
and heard the answer, which was not yes or no. And now the park’s trees
waved the shadows of their fluttering over my years and over the years of
my companion, leaves that were still fastened to their branches, but were
already yellow and would soon be dead, detached, absent.
   I asked what had been most difficult in life, and the bag answered: ‘The
fact that everything recurs and must always return and that the same
questions are asked again and again.’
   But before I could ask more of the same questions, the servant or
descendant approached us with purposeful strides. Lightly he lifted his
burden—its years were feathers to him—and, grinding the gravel under his
feet, took him back home.
   I had got hot and, forgetting the old man in a moment, strolled slowly
toward the harbour. There I saw the same white ship that once brought me
to Tainaron; but why, I cannot remember.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                       NOT ENOUGH
                    THE TWENTY-FIRST LETTER


How are you? How are things with you? That you are so implacable in your
silence makes you gradually become more like gods or the dead. Such is
your metamorphosis; and it is not entirely repugnant to me.
    For let me tell you what has happened to me. What has happened to me
is that people are no longer enough. They are not enough, be they ever so
great or beautiful or wise or complicated.
    They are not enough, even if their antennae were to stretch further than
radar beams and their clothes were to be stronger than armour.
    For that reason I confess that everything I say contains the unspoken
hope that it is linked with all my actions as well as to the moments when I
just sit and look. Ardent hope! Incorrigible hope! That gods and the dead
might hear. That gods and the dead might see. That gods and the dead might
know . . .
    But there is only one who can make them hear their song. But he was
one who became truly unhappy and was torn to pieces.
    Last night I returned to you after long years, from such a distance and
over many obstacles. Barricades and brushwood fences, barbed wire
obstacles and piles of stones rose up in my path. Craters, chasms and
stinking trenches opened up before my feet. But my speed was so dizzying
that I flew over peaks and depths and sped along the bright, frozen channel
that led straight to your door.
    The bell rings through the house, through the darkness of the winter’s
day, and you open the door, the same as before. How happy we are! How
we embrace each other!
    But at once I notice how absent-minded you are. You are expecting
something completely different; yes, I am right: you listen over my head,
which is pressed against your chest. And now I, too, hear footsteps
approaching below in the stairwell.
   Then the light of a living flame spreads across your face as you ask: ‘Are
they coming here? Are they not close? Are they not familiar footsteps?’
   But I do not reply, and you would not hear what I said. Your arms have
already loosened around me, and I have returned on the same road along
which, just now, I sped toward you, trembling with anticipation.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                               DAYMA
                   THE TWENTY-SECOND LETTER


Yesterday I wished to try, for my morning drink, the Tainaronians’ favourite
sweet, foaming dayma or daime, which is drunk through a straw. They like
it so much that they drink it at every possible opportunity, cold or hot, and
in addition to dayma they have dozens of other names for it. I have heard it
said that in large quantities it has curious effects and that some may see
strange and even improper things after drinking it.
    For my part, I did not notice any such effects. But everything I see here
is strange, even without drinking a drop of dayma.
    I remembered a particularly pleasant little cake shop on the side of a
canal where Longhorn took me soon after I arrived in Tainaron for the first
time. I also wanted to try those particularly crisp herb pastries, as light as
wafers, which smell of smoke and which I believe are not made anywhere
else but in that bakery. My desire was so strong that my mouth watered and
I had to swallow when the memory of the little pastries spread on to my
tongue.
    To my disappointment, I could no longer find the cross-street of the ring
boulevard on which the café was located. I thought I was following the
correct route; I turned at the same street corner as before, and carried on
along the side of the canal, but soon I found myself in quite unknown
quarters. There were unfinished buildings and enormous industrial shells
from which the sound of turbines and the fumes of combustion engines rose
into the air. The people there also looked completely different, poorer and
smaller than the Tainaronians who had sat on the terrace of my favourite
café. At last I found a glum coffee bar where badly foamed dayma was
served in thick handleless cups and where the bread was dense and heavy.
    ‘I should like to have a map of Tainaron,’ I said yesterday to Longhorn.
‘It would be much easier to wander here alone, and you would not always
have the bother of being my guide. I could not find a single map in the
department store. Could you perhaps find a map somewhere? Would it be
possible?’
   ‘Unfortunately it is impossible,’ he answered.
   ‘Why impossible? Have all the maps sold out?’
   ‘That is not why,’ he said. ‘No comprehensive map of Tainaron has ever
been made.’
   ‘What? No proper map has been made? But that is very strange,’ I said,
dissatisfied and astonished.
   ‘It is not at all strange,’ Longhorn said abruptly. ‘It would be sheer
impossibility to draw up such a map, a completely senseless project.’
   ‘Why so?’ I asked, increasingly irritated. ‘To me a kingdom which has
no map is not a real kingdom but barbary, chaos, mere confusion.’
   ‘You still know very little about Tainaron,’ he said quietly. ‘We too have
our laws, but they are different from yours.’
   I felt a little abashed, but that did not wipe away all my irritability.
   ‘A map cannot be made,’ he continued, ‘because Tainaron is constantly
changing.’
   ‘All cities change,’ I said.
   ‘None as fast as Tainaron,’ Longhorn replied. ‘For what Tainaron was
yesterday it is no longer today. No one can have a grasp of Tainaron as a
whole. Every map would lead its user astray.’
   ‘All cities must have maps, at least of some kind,’ I continued to argue.
   Longhorn sighed and looked at me kindly, but a little wearily.
   ‘Come!’ he said, and took me gently by the arm. ‘Let’s go!’
   ‘Where to?’ I asked.
   ‘We are going to the observation tower,’ Longhorn said. ‘To make you
understand.’
   The observation tower was built on the same hill as the funfair. I had not
noticed it until now, for the movement of the Ferris wheel had taken up all
my attention. We had to climb for an agonisingly long time up the narrow
wooden stairs which circled the outer wall of the tower like a creeper. I do
not like such high places, and I felt as if the wind were rocking the frail
construction. We climbed and climbed. As we circled the steps, the Ferris
wheel, too, kept returning before my eyes; its carriages, now empty, shook
and swayed, and its movement made my dizzy. We climbed, and I regretted
that I had taken up Longhorn’s offer.
   Midway, I said to Longhorn: ‘Now I cannot climb any farther. Let us
stay here. We can see enough from here.’
   But Longhorn’s ears were deaf, and he continued his astonishingly agile
clambering. At times he seemed to glide upward—but of course he did have
more pairs of legs than I. He did not even glance behind him, and I had to
follow him. I went on climbing.
   At last! We were standing on the upper platform, but I had grown dizzy
and did not immediately go right up to the rail. My eyes were sore from the
wind and sunshine which, up here, seemed blindingly bright. I tried to
breathe slowly; I swallowed and fastened my eyes on the fibres of the
platform’s planks. I had decided that I would not complain any more; for I
suspected that Longhorn now considered me spoilt and bad company and
by no means did I wish him to tire of acting as my guide.
   But I could not help hoping that Longhorn would put one of his narrow,
long upper limbs around my shoulders. He appeared not to have noticed my
uncertain state, but was gazing absorbedly and—so it seemed to me—with
eyes moist with pride the panorama that opened up before us. He began to
hum a wordless song which I had never heard before, and its monotonous
melody and the peaceful wave-forms of the timber fibres restored my
balance.
   I gathered my courage and looked downwards. We had been climbing
for a long time, but I was still astonished that we were so excessively high
up. I shaded my eyes and saw, in the dizzying depths, the plain of Tainaron,
patterned with the shadows of frantically scurrying clouds. I also realised
that the tower must be a little skew, for the horizon was clearly slanted.
Directly below us was the little funfair, today deserted, with its gaudily
coloured tents. Even the highest carriages of the Ferris wheel were far
below us. Far away glass and steel glittered, bronze and gold glimmered,
when a shimmering ray lit up the windows of a skyscraper or the cupolas of
churches. This was Tainaron, his city, theirs—never mine.
   But it was an astonishing city! Longhorn’s pride was understandable. I
had never understood how enormous Tainaron was. I saw the cone-like
areas which I had once visited, only to be dampened by the queen’s tears, I
saw the prince’s palace park with its paths and pagodas, and in the east the
endless, muddled skeins of the slums.
   We were so high up that from below all that could be heard was the
occasional shriek, isolated, a shriller cry than the rest, and mysterious
clinking sounds which I had also heard at night and whose origin I had
never been able to trace. It sounded as if someone were tapping a glass with
a silver spoon in order to make a speech. A little farther up, and everything
would have been completely silent.
    ‘Here is everything I have,’ Longhorn said. ‘You, too.’
    The shining belt of Oceanos with its stripes of foam encircled us on all
sides. A haze hid the horizon to the south, but to the north a high, silver-
glowing cloud formation was visible, so motionless, in contrast to the
clouds that slipped over Tainaron, that it looked like a metal sculpture. Its
shape was like that of a human torso.
    ‘Is there a storm brewing?’ I asked.
    ‘It is not a storm,’ he said. ‘Worse. It is winter. Although it will be a long
time before it reaches us. But when it is here, I pity those who have not
already gone to sleep!’
    I already felt cold now, in full sunlight. We looked in silence at the
majestic shape of snow and ice. To me it still did not look as if it were
changing shape or approaching Tainaron.
    ‘Perhaps it will not come this time, after all,’ I said to Longhorn, half in
earnest, and hopeful. ‘Perhaps it will stay up there in the north.’
    ‘What a child it is,’ Longhorn said in an aside, as if there had been a
third person with us on the platform. Then he continued, turning to me once
more: ‘I did not bring you here only to look at the coming of winter. Do you
see?’
    Longhorn gestured toward the northern edge of the city, below the
winter, where there swelled a cluster of dwellings of different heights and
shapes. It must have been because of my sore eyes that their outlines looked
so indefinite. As we looked, it seemed strangely as if some of them were in
motion.
    ‘What is happening there?’ I asked.
    ‘Changes,’ he said.
    That was indeed how it looked. Clouds of dust spread on the plain—and
in a moment all that could be seen where the crenellations of towers and
blocks had meandered were mere ruins. But there had been no sound of any
explosion.
    ‘That part of the city no longer exists,’ he said calmly.
    ‘Not an earthquake, surely?’ I asked fearfully, although I could not yet
feel any tremors.
   ‘No, they are merely demolishing the former Tainaron,’ Longhorn said.
   Longhorn raised his finger and pointed westward. And there, too, I saw
demolition work, destruction, collapse, landslides. But almost at the same
time, in place of the former constructions, new forms began to appear,
softly curving mall complexes, flights of stairs that still ended in air,
solitary spiral towers and colonnades which progressed meanderingly
toward the empty shore.
   ‘But . . . ’ I began.
   ‘Shh,’ Longhorn said. ‘Look over there.’
   I looked. There, where a straight boulevard had run a moment ago,
narrow paths now wandered. Their network branched over a larger and
larger area before my very eyes.
   ‘And this goes on all the time, incessantly,’ he said. ‘Tainaron is not a
place, as you perhaps think. It is an event which no one measures. It is no
use anyone trying to make maps. It would be a waste of time and effort. Do
you understand now?’
   I could not deny that I understood that Tainaron lived in the same way as
many of its inhabitants; it too was a creature that was shaped by irresistible
forces. Now I also understood that I should never again taste those smoke-
scented wafers which I had wanted so much this morning. And yet I
understood very little.
   ‘I am thirsty,’ I said to Longhorn, longing once more for the foam of
dayma.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                       THE DANGLER
                    THE TWENTY-THIRD LETTER


I really must say that many of the inhabitants of Tainaron have the most
extraordinary habits, at least to the eyes of one who has come from so far
away. Quite close to here, in the same block, lives a gentleman, tall and
thin, who is in the habit of hanging upside-down from his balcony for a
number of hours every day. This strange position does not seem to interest
passers-by in the least, but when I passed under him for the first time I was
so startled that I immediately thought of running for help. I thought, you
see, that there had been an accident and that the man was clinging to the
wrought-iron decorations of the balcony with his feet. Longhorn, who was
beside me, remarked coolly that he had selected his pose through his own
free choice and that I would be wise not to interfere so eagerly in other
people’s lives. I admit that I was offended by his remark, but recently I have
begun meekly to take his advice.
    I see the man most days, and whenever I walk under his balcony I greet
him, even though he never responds. In fact, I think he is either asleep or
meditating. In his chosen state he is so limp and floating that he recalls a
garment that a washerwoman has hung out to dry. With incomparable calm
he suspends his head above the busy street without stirring, even when the
fire brigade drives under him, sirens wailing. He always looks the same: a
bright, even gaudy, green, so that one can make him out from the broad
steps of the bank at the end of the state like a living leaf against a red brick
wall . . .
    Does he dream as he hangs there, sometimes suspended from just one
limb, but nevertheless apparently completely relaxed? I believe that is
exactly how it is. I know from my own experience the difference between
the immobility of fear and the immobility of the hunter, but this is neither. I
believe he dreams, dreams swiftly, passionately and incessantly, dreams
with death-defying intensity without sacrificing even a jot of consciousness
to the struggles of everyday waking life. I believe he must have long ago
become convinced that all action is unnecessary, or even dangerous.
    There are days when I think that this gentleman is admirable and his way
of spending moments of his life most enviable. On such days I, too, would
like to concentrate on sweet communion with my private visions as
headlong and with the same kind of mental calm as he. But do not imagine
that it would be possible. In the evenings, even if I shut my window tightly,
turn out my lamp and fill my ears with cotton-wool, this city teems before
me, still more restless and colourful than in full daylight. Then I should like
to get up and got to see whether the green gentleman is still hanging head-
first from his balcony. I should like to climb up there myself and position
my limbs just like his. Then, with my blood flooding my head, all of
Tainaron would begin to dissolve into the mists and I, too, should begin a
dream, endless and leaf-green . . .
    But if, in the morning, my nocturnal experiences return to mind, if I have
idled through agonising labyrinths, I know that I would not wish to spend
my life in the city of dreams. If, on such a morning, I pass under the
Dangler’s balcony, I am more inclined to pity him than to admire him.
    Then I know that in my dreams I can never capture the same sun-glow
and that the air that I breathe can never, there, flow as freshly in my cells,
and I can never see so sharply or so far; and I believe once more that what
is true can be seen by everyone, everyone.
                               OceanofPDF.com
             THE GUARDIAN OF THE
                 ODDFELLOWS
                   THE TWENTY-FOURTH LETTER


I admire her; I call her the Queen Bee. But Longhorn has another name for
her, the name of an already forgotten saint: The Guardian of the
Oddfellows. And indeed that is the nature of the Queen Bee: she cares
tenderly for those whom many here in Tainaron consider strange and to be
avoided: street singers, beggars and ladies of joy, people who are cracked in
various ways or lost in their own drug-worlds.
    All sorts of people visit the Queen Bee, both by day and by night. The
light is always on in her house and the door is always swinging—to and fro,
for it is a double-hinged door of the kind that one sometimes finds in
obscure cafés. There is no threshold or latch, and the hubbub and singing
from the Queen Bee’s house can be heard distinctly a couple of blocks off.
    There is room for everyone, although her house is not large. No, it is
very, very medium in size and as modest in its external appearance as
countless other houses outskirts of the city.
    But sometimes, although the house is full of people, it is very quiet, and
then the neighbours say that the Guardian of the Oddfellows is holding a
Great Day of Remembrance once again.
    ‘Whose memory are they celebrating?’ I asked Longhorn, and it became
clear that it was not a question of any particular dead person. The matter is
as follows: the Queen Bee gathers memories; she lives off memories, and it
is perhaps only on account of memories that she receives so many people of
so many different kinds. But she is not satisfied with any old memory; no,
she can use only happy, sweet memories that sparkle with happiness, and if
anyone were to try to offer her something cold and gloomy I think she
would drive them mercilessly from her house.
    Longhorn said that everyone who needs it receives both a meal and a bed
for the night at the Queen Bee’s house, but on certain days of the month
everyone must bring her at least one happy memory in payment. That is the
rent she demands, and there is no haggling.
    On that day the Queen Bee spreads a white cloth on the table and lights
dozens of candles so that it looks as if Christmas has come. But the table is
not set, for on the Great Day of Remembrance no food is offered, only
memories.
    ‘But they really do satisfy your appetite,’ says the Queen Bee, and all her
drunks and madmen and beggars agree, as they must in order to be able
next day to partake of a proper meal.
    ‘Can I, too, participate in the Great Day of Remembrance some time?’ I
asked Longhorn.
    ‘Everyone can,’ he said, ‘but not everyone wants to. And remember to
take a really happy memory with you.’
    ‘Oh, I have plenty of them,’ I said light-heartedly, and when the next
Great Day of Remembrance dawned I was sitting in the Queen Bee’s house
side by side with her Oddfellows.
    I had already heard a few things about my table companions, so I sat a
fair distance away from the Pickpocket (as if I had something valuable with
me!) and even farther (although I felt ashamed of myself) from a black and
spotted creature whom all the people of Tainaron dreaded, and who was
called the Disease Carrier. But as I glanced around me, the Queen Bee’s
Oddfellows did not look to me any stranger than the people of Tainaron in
general, and it was my turn to feel embarrassed when I realised what
curious and even suspicious glances were being directed at my own person.
I, too, was now one of the Oddfellows, perhaps the most obvious of the
entire company in my foreignness. I, who have always believed I can merge
into almost any crowd, who have always believed I can examine others
while myself staying in the background, was now experiencing what it was
like to be the object of the Tainaronians’ attention.
    But the Queen Bee was sitting opposite me and, once I had recovered
from the confusion, I could at least gaze at her as much as I liked, her
motherly form and her tight, tiger-striped dress, and her tousled, dark face,
lit by the hazy glow of her seeing tubes.
    ‘Let us begin!’ shouted the Queen Bee in her resonant bass, which
brought to mind the buzzing of a sunny meadow. ‘Psammotettix, you are
the first.’
    I turned and saw that with this handsomely reverberant name she was
addressing a greying, modest and clumsy-looking gentleman who had, since
the beginning of the session, been mumbling incessantly to himself. I
suppose he was repeating the memory he had chosen so that he would not
forget it at the decisive moment.
    With extraordinary speed, Psammotettix began a long story of which I
understood scarcely a word, for it was interrupted—perhaps for effect—by
a remarkable smacking and croaking noise which, at points of emphasis—
so I supposed—became a rough croaking. The few words I could
understand, because Psammotettix repeated them a number of times, were
‘foam’ and ‘bubble’; but that was all.
    On the other hand, the other participants in the Remembrance Festival
followed Psammotettix’s performance with interest, and when it was over
they showed their approval in an extraordinarily wide range of ways: by
clicking the chitin plates of their backs together, drumming, glowing,
changing their colour or clapping their limbs together.
    The Queen Bee raised a little hammer or club which gleamed gold in the
candlelight, knocked it on the table and said: ‘Accepted!’, at the same time
turning toward the Pickpocket, motioning him to start with a gesture of her
hand.
    ‘Once I went abroad,’ the Pickpocket began hurriedly in a small voice,
obviously nervous. The other Oddfellows interrupted him, howling:
    ‘Not true! Not true!’
    Then the hammer fell again, the others fell silent, and the Pickpocket
began: ‘Once in a foreign country, in a big city, my job took me to a certain
department store. It was the eve of a great festival, and the people were
swarming about, announcements and music flooded from the loudspeakers
and the shoppers’ attention was taken up with the brilliant displays and the
shouts of the product demonstrators. The conditions were perfect, one could
say, and for that reason that day was perhaps the most productive of my
entire career.’
    At this point the Pickpocket paused; grumbling began to be heard around
the table and I saw the Queen Bee purse her lips.
    ‘I cannot accept this,’ she was beginning, but the Pickpocket shouted
hurriedly, ‘I have not finished, that is not all. You see, just as the department
store was closing and I was already leaving with my swag, a fine lady swept
past me with a bag on her shoulder, decorated with pearls. My practised eye
noticed immediately that its silver lock only seemed to be closed and in a
second I had caught up with the lady. I did this (and he waved a sharp nail
in the air), the bag opened soundlessly, and in my own pocket there was—
so I thought—a fine wad of the country’s currency. But (and the Pickpocket
raised a limp, demanding silence, for the guests had begun to babble once
more) what did I see when I examined my trophy more closely? The notes
were merely thin piles of paper, quite empty all except one. On it was
written, on it was written . . . ’
    And here the Pickpocket’s voice fell and he began to writhe on his chair,
looking beseechingly at the Queen Bee.
    ‘Carry on,’ she said, nodding approvingly, but this did not seem to calm
the Pickpocket.
    ‘No, I can’t, not with all these people listening,’ he managed to mutter,
gesturing at the other guests.
    ‘He has forgotten his memory!’ came a shout, and another: ‘That’s not a
happy memory at all!’
    ‘Come here,’ ordered the Queen Bee. ‘Whisper it in my ear. I shall
consider the matter.’
    And the Pickpocket went up to the Queen Bee and whispered a couple of
words into her ear.
    I tried to prick up my ears, but I was far too far away, and I regretted my
choice of place, for I desperately wanted to know what could have been
written on the paper that could turn the Pickpocket’s disappointment into a
happy memory.
    ‘Accepted!’ acceded the Queen Bee, and to my horror she turned to look
at me, and the lenses of her seeing tubes glittered with strange colours.
    Then something unexpected happened to me: my past disappeared. It
sank among millions of other pasts, so that I could no longer distinguish a
single one of my own memories, happy or sad, from among the swarm of
countless memories.
    It was as if walls and fences had fallen, as if dams—very necessary—
had burst, and in the floodwater there floated long-forgotten fragments of
conversations that I had happened to overhear, remarks from novels and
films and a vortex of human faces and destinies which sped past me like
bubbles in a surging wake.
   Through it I could, however, see the unwavering face of the Queen Bee,
which was still waiting in front of me, majestic and demanding, a trace of
dissatisfaction already apparent in her expression. Desperately I grabbed
one of the memories that spun around me and, extraordinarily enough, I
knew its origin: it was a survey from a weekly magazine whose readers
were asked to remember star moments from their lives. Praying mentally
that it would be good enough for the Queen Bee and that my deception
would not be noticed, I began:
   ‘This happened ten years ago. My lover was massaging my face. Then,
suddenly, I was seized by a sensation of lightness. Before my eyes a door
opened, and behind it was a lighted room. Such a light room I have never
seen, before or since. I went into the room. I have never felt as good as I did
then.’
   That was all. But as I set the sentences of the little interview one after
another, from memory, which now worked with the accuracy of a
photograph, I realised that it was no deception. What had happened had
happened, all of it, to me, and I remembered the smell of my lover’s fingers
and the fact that it had been the first cool, high day after a long summer.
   And, dumbfounded by the superabundance of my life, I fell silent, and
waited for the rap of the golden gavel.
   ‘Accepted,’ the bass of the Queen Bee rang out, and I saw a veiled smile
spread over her face as if something inexpressibly sweet had just dripped on
to her palate. In such a way my memory, too, although stolen, was added to
her collection, to the great store of honey which was the basis of her
economy, to the honeycombs from which she drew her happiness and her
hospitality and which no thief would ever empty.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                THE CLOAKED MOTH
                     THE TWENTY-FIFTH LETTER


Do you remember the entomologist who thought he saw a cloaked moth on
the ground? He was delighted, and picked it up, only to realise that it was
no more than a piece of rotten wood. Then, of course, he threw it away in
disappointment.
    I wonder why—already preparing to leave—he nevertheless crouched to
seek once more the piece of branch he had thrown away. But how diligently
and closely he had to examine it before he saw: it was a cloaked moth after
all.
    Tonight the earth carries the city steadily on its shoulders. Even the
heavens are motionless, and the buildings have long roots. I confess: I have
countless times been forced to return and fetch home what I have
abandoned and thrown away as worthless. Other colours glimmer from
beneath the camouflage coat, and who knows which of them is right.
    When I open the curtain, I see a half-darkened street, and nothing is
happening there, but in the emptiness which is not now fractured by steps
the restlessness of the first step and the exhaustion of the last combine.
    Tonight I see in the half-light as if it were broad daylight; I see so far and
so clearly that I can make you out too, cloaked moth.
                                 OceanofPDF.com
             THE GATE OF EVENING
                    THE TWENTY-SIXTH LETTER


Yesterday Longhorn and I visited the city museum. I wandered rather
absent-mindedly through the echoing halls and corridors, which were full of
the utensils of times gone by, tools, clothes and furniture. A flood of dates
and names of kings flowed from Longhorn’s mouth—his memory is
astonishing—but hardly a detail lodged itself in my memory, although it
would have been an opportunity to learn a great deal about Tainaron’s past.
    Weary, I happened to stop in front of a glass case where only one object
was on display: a cap of some kind. It was deep black, but magnificently
embroidered with stars, moons and suns. Gold and silver thread glittered as
if the head-dress had just been sewn, but from the label fixed to the case I
read that it was many hundreds of years old. In the centre of the cap—or
perhaps it was a calotte—was a small hole.
    ‘What kind of cap is that and why is there a hole in it?’ I asked
Longhorn, finally interested in what I saw.
    ‘It is called the Gate of Evening,’ Longhorn answered, delighted at the
interest I showed, and immediately eager to give me all his information. ‘In
the old days, when Tainaronians grew old and frail and it was time for them
to depart, one of their heirs brought them a cap like that. The dying person
put it on their head, and it eased their last moments.’
    ‘How on earth?’ I asked.
    ‘Because the hole is a gate, and it showed them the direction in which
they were to go and so they did not stray from the right road.’
    In the next room, too, there was something that aroused my interest: a
row of masks. They were not demonic masks of the kind one often sees in
folk museums; they were not grimacing or cruelly decorated or spattered
with blood. I saw quite ordinary faces of the citizens of Tainaron staring
peacefully out of point or compound eyes, antennae gently outstretched.
One could see hundreds of such faces as one walked in the city; and that
was what was most extraordinary about the masks.
    ‘What are these used for?’ I asked Longhorn.
    ‘Ah,’ he said thoughtfully. ‘There was a time when a peculiar festival
was held in Tainaron at the time of the autumn equinox, the day when day
and night are equally long. These festivals gave employment to an entire
profession: mask-makers. For the revellers had three kinds of mask: the first
represented their faces as they were when they were quite young, the
second showed their faces as they were at the midpoint of life, and the third
mask as they would be when they were very old. They used the first mask
in the morning, the second at midday and the third from evening to
midnight.
    ‘So at some time of the day their mask was like their own face?’ I
understood. The custom seemed very strange to me.
    ‘Yes, it was the day of the equinox,’ Longhorn said. ‘It spanned a whole
life.’
    ‘And when were the masks taken off?’ I asked.
    ‘The masks were taken off at midnight,’ he replied. ‘They had fasted all
day, but then they were allowed to eat and drink. There was everything in
profusion, and beggars, too, were permitted to come to any table they
wished.’
    It was late at night by the time I returned from the city, and the vault of
the sky was as black as the calotte which I had admired during the day. But
behind the reflections of the city I could sense the promises of other lights,
perhaps as deceptive as they. Here, too, their distance is as flabbergasting
and strange as on the harbour pier where once, pierced by them, we
lingered.
    But I shall need no other gate of evening.
                               OceanofPDF.com
                   THE UMBELLIFERS
                  THE TWENTY-SEVENTH LETTER


We grow cold and look inward, for the frost has breathed on us and the city
is making ready for a long hibernation. The season is over and the city
people withdraw to their homes, doors are locked, conversation decreases.
In the streets there are fewer and fewer people and vehicles, and all of them
have particular destinations.
    In many shop windows I have already seen a careless scribbled notice
announcing that the shop will next open in the spring. Only one in three or
four street lamps are lighted in the evenings, and later—so I have been told
—only squares and crossroads will be lit.
    Tourists are scarcely to be seen any longer. Who would be amused, after
all, by touring a cold, dark city?
    It is sad, sad. I think the lights of Tainaron should shine now that the sun
is seen only seldom, more plentiful and colourful than before, but instead
the city becomes dimmer and more impoverished.
    Life stops in a thin crust of ice like frozen water and in the eyes of the
few passers-by there is only the glimmer of the need for well-earned rest,
but I am restless and wish to live. I wish to come and go, I wish to do
something with these hands I see before me on the table so pale and
helpless; I wish to debate important questions and eat and clink glasses.
    Too late! Longhorn, if I mention my wishes to him, merely shakes his
head and reassures me: ‘In the spring! When the winter has gone.’
    And I see, of course I see exhaustion in his black jewel-eyes, I see that
he himself would already prefer to withdraw to his home and stays on his
feet only because I am here and in a way his guest. Always, before I meet
him, I intend to say: ‘Go, do go, you do not have to stay awake for my sake;
I shall manage very well here.’ But the words stick in my throat, for I know
I shall be lost when he is gone.
    And one cannot even see the fireflies here any longer; they have
completely disappeared from the streets, and that, more than anything else,
shows what hard times await us. Even the house of the Queen Bee looks
bolted, and I cannot imagine where all the Oddfellows have scattered.
    But today when I went past the house’s battened-down shutters, I saw a
little light coming out of one of the cracks. I got up on tiptoe and peered
inside, but I did not see the Queen Bee. But the empty room was filled with
a warm, rosy glow whose source is in the honeycombs of memory.
    Perhaps its warmth will suffice for the Queen Bee, however long and
hard the winter. The Dangler’s balcony, too, is empty, and the street below
it, one of Tainaron’s busiest thoroughfares, cuts through the city, empty and
clean. Just occasionally a hawkmoth or two rushes past me in its late
refitting. Elsewhere it is quiet, but in my head clatter the melancholy words:
chippings and clay! Chippings and clay!
    The spring tide is over, and Oceanos is murmuring its winter story. It is
unlikely that I shall ever again come to gaze longingly over its swelling
waters.
    If now it were to happen that a letter were to drop on to my doormat, I
know what it would say. You would write: ‘Why do you not go away?’
    I can hear you say it, rather coldly and a little didactically, as if you were
offering me something on a plate, but looking away at the same time. And I
admit that I have heard those words before; I have asked myself the same
question. And perhaps, if someone were to say the word, I would go. I taste
the word in my mouth; how fresh and pure it tastes.
    I had my reasons for coming to Tainaron; I am sure they were important
reasons, but I have nevertheless forgotten what they were.
    ‘Come!’ What if I were to say that to you? It would be in vain, quite in
vain, for all I could show you would be the wintry stalks of the umbellifers
in the meadow at the Botanical Gardens.
    Upright like them, I remain in this land of sleepers.
                                 OceanofPDF.com
                 DATE AS POSTMARK
                   THE TWENTY-EIGHTH LETTER


Today I opened the door, and before me rose the Rhinoceros Beetle, as
gloomy and simple as a mountain. He is a friend of Longhorn, but I have
only met him in passing before.
   ‘Come inside,’ I asked, but he went on standing on the spot, swaying,
and I could not fathom what he wanted.
   ‘Have you seen Longhorn recently?’ I asked at length, for I had not seen
Longhorn for many days.
   ‘It was Longhorn who sent me here,’ he responded, and fell silent once
more.
   ‘And how is he?’ I asked, becoming a little impatient.
   ‘He told me to come here and ask if there is anything I can do for you,’
the Rhinoceros Beetle managed to say, swaying in ever greater circles. I
think he must weigh more than one hundred kilograms.
   ‘Thank you, but I do not need anything,’ I said in astonishment. ‘But
where is Longhorn himself?’
   ‘I thought you already knew,’ said the Rhinoceros Beetle, suddenly
standing still.
   ‘I do not know anything,’ I said, fearing the worst. ‘Has something
happened to Longhorn?’
   I felt like shaking the Rhinoceros Beetle, who remained motionless, but
he was too wide. I thought I understood.
   ‘Ah, he is already asleep,’ I said, and was very offended. It was not
polite to retire for the winter without even saying goodnight.
   ‘He is in his pupal cell,’ said the Rhinoceros Beetle, becoming even
more massive than before.
   This information came as a shock to me. For the sake of the Rhinoceros
Beetle, I managed, with difficulty, to restrain myself, for I would have liked
to have cursed him: ‘Damned longhorn beetle! How dare you!’
    The Rhinoceros Beetle left, but I went on standing in the doorway. I
should never meet Longhorn again; not the Longhorn who had for so long
been my patient guide in this strange city. If he were to return and step
before me, I did not know who or what he would then be, or even when it
would happen, for everything here has its own time and particular moment,
unknown to others.
    I should never again be able to turn to him, but when he nevertheless
stepped before me, into the place where the Rhinoceros Beetle had just been
standing, stood there and began to grow as the dead grow.
    Then I saw that I had never known him and that I had never even wanted
to know him. And as he grew, he became thinner and more indistinct; his
form slipped into the darkness of the stairwell and he no longer had shape
or mass.
    But his eyes, his eyes remained, and his gaze, which is as black and
piercing as it ever was, and as impenetrable. And when I look into the
darkness of his eyes they gradually begin to sparkle like double stars, like
the planets on which the sun shines and on which there are seas and
continents, roads, valleys and waterfalls and great forests where many can
live and sing.
    Then I went inside and closed the door, a little less sad. For it was, after
all, now clear that although I had lived beside him from the beginning to the
end, not just one life but two or three, I would never have learned to know
him. His outline, which I had once drawn around him, in order to be able to
show him and name him, had now disappeared. It liberated the great
stranger who was a much realer Longhorn than the person I once knew,
small and separate.
    Such is my farewell to Longhorn today, date as postmark, in the city of
Tainaron.
                                OceanofPDF.com
                      PASSING BELLS
                    THE TWENTY-NINTH LETTER


What a rumbling! Over all of Tainaron it spread, echoing from wall to wall,
shaking the windowpanes and resonating in my own chest. When I pressed
my fingers against the table, I could even feel the sound of the ore bells in
my fingertips. And my toes, the soles of my feet, my elbows heard it, for
the floor, all the soil of Tainaron quivered and resounded.
    The prince had died, and now in all the churches, cathedrals and temples
of the city, the many of them that there were, passing bells were being rung.
They roared from morning to night as if to restore to the deceased the
respect which no one had accorded to him before his death.
    ‘What happened to the prince?’ I asked the Rhinoceros Beetle. For the
cause of his death had not been divulged on the news.
    ‘Him? He just died,’ the Rhinoceros Beetle answered, turning his slow
gaze upon me. ‘It was high time. He was an old man.’
    ‘But was it not almost too fitting a time?’
    I had seen, in the heart tower, what I had seen: the thin, expectant form
of the prince, huddled on a simple chair which had been set in the middle of
the floor without the company of adjutants or even the most lowly
guardsman. His cloak was surrounded, like another cloak, by the aura of his
fast approaching end. And it was not a natural end.
    ‘Did it not happen very suddenly?’
    ‘No more suddenly than anything else,’ the Rhinoceros Beetle growled,
even more dully than usual.
    Slow-blooded, simple-minded creature! How could Longhorn ever have
imagined that the Rhinoceros Beetle could have replaced him as my guide
to Tainaron?
    ‘I should like to know what will happen next,’ I said.
    ‘Now power will change hands,’ the Rhinoceros Beetle said.
    ‘Yes, of course,’ I said impatiently. I knew that, of course, but I wanted
to find out what it would mean in practice and what kind of leadership
Tainaron would now receive. But as I looked at the Rhinoceros Beetle I
realised that it was not worth pursuing the subject. I could already see that
nothing could have interested him less.
    At that moment he glanced at me askance, and behind the membrane that
covered his black eyes there flashed something—like amusement. Was the
Rhinoceros Beetle really capable of being amused by something? For a
moment I felt I might have been mistaken in regard to him, as if his
dullness might veil completely different characteristics which he hid for
who knew what reason. I tried to find the light again, but his gaze
extinguished, as normal. Perhaps the fleeting impression was caused merely
by the lighting or by my own state of mind.
    ‘Will you go to a memorial service in one of the temples? What religion
do you belong to?’ I found myself asking, for I wished to change the
subject, which had proved fruitless.
    ‘Each in turn,’ he said. ‘Naturally.’
    ‘Each in turn? Surely that is not possible,’ I said, stunned. And
‘naturally’—surely that was too much.
    ‘Why not?’ he said, chewing something in his massive jaws. ‘One must
be impartial. At the moment I belong to the temple of the highest
knowledge. Next month I shall move to—oh, I do not think I can remember
the name of the parish.’
    ‘But if where you are now has the highest knowledge, why is it worth
moving to another parish?’
    He did not answer, but chewed and swallowed some tough and gluey
substance which from time to time stuck his jaws together. I could still hear
the ringing of the passing bells, from both far and high, both low and from
quite close by.
    ‘Do you recognise the bells of your own temple?’ I asked.
    ‘I think they are the ones that are clattering quite close by,’ he said. ‘Or
else those where you can hear a double ring between the low strokes. No,
listen, I think after all that they are those slower ones from farther east, that
always ring three and one, three and one,’ he said.
    I listened in vain. I could not distinguish the bells from each other; all I
could hear was a roaring in which they were all mixed up. These
Tainaronians! I do not suppose I shall ever learn to understand them. I am
beginning to be weary of my long visit; yes, now I am weary.


The Rhinoceros Beetle has gone, but the prince’s passing bells are still
booming. And why should I not admit that today I am plagued by home-
sickness? I am sick with home-sickness. But Oceanos is freezing for the
winter, and not a single ship will leave the harbour before spring.
    The tall trees of my home courtyard are now tossing in the grip of a
storm. The slanting brightness of autumn falls into my room. I see the
room’s books and pictures and carefully chosen things; I remember its calm
and its secret joy. It was at just this time of year, before winter, long ago,
that you came into my room.
    You came into my room as the morning dawned, and I did not know
whether I slept or woke. I did not stir, but you, you squeezed your hard,
salt-weathered lips silently to my throat, where the pulse beats, and then
they pressed my temples and moved, hot, over my eyelids, until finally you
felt for my mouth and opened it with your own lips. Then I tasted your
taste, the taste of your thirst, and I answered, and answered, and moaned.
                               OceanofPDF.com
      THE PUPAL CELL OF MY HOME
                        THE THIRTIETH LETTER


How long I searched for a home back then. Before me furnished and cold
rooms opened, broken rental agreements fell, houses with destruction orders
collapsed, and the endless queues of housing offices wound in long roads
without issue.
   Now all that is in the past. In the room in which I now live I have
everything I need, and more: if I step on to my balcony, I see the white
pennants and golden cupolas of Tainaron, the cloud-girt mountains and the
blue heart-waters of Oceanos.
   Nevertheless, I have now started to prepare a new dwelling for myself,
just in case. Yes, it is almost ready for me to move in, my little pupal cell; it
can no longer be unsuccessful. It has the fresh smell of mud and algae and
reeds, for I have gathered almost all the materials myself from the beach
where I once almost found myself in the jaws of death. I have done it all
with my own hands, and when I look inside I am satisfied. It is just my size,
like a well-fitting garment which does not pull anywhere. It is small on the
outside but spacious inside, just as a good dwelling-place should be.
   It is dark there. When I peer in through its only opening which, when the
occasion arises, I shall close from inside, I am overcome by irresistible
sleepiness. I do not believe that the lack of space will trouble me, for once I
reach it it will be as wide as the night.
   The mail will go on being delivered for some time, so I have heard, but
the city now seems dead. More and more people are withdrawing for their
winter rest, some of them—like Longhorn and, before long, I myself too—
will be away for much longer. I spoke of sleeping just now, but of course
we shall not merely be resting, but changing. Will I know how? Will it be
hard work? Will it bring pain or pleasure or will it mean the disappearance,
too, of all regrets?
    Some change imperceptibly, little by little, others quickly and once and
for all, but everyone changes, and for that reason it is in vain to ask whose
fate is the best.
    My entire room stinks like an estuary! There was something I still had to
tell you, but the smell of the sludge dulls my thoughts. I shall remember it
once more when it is spring, and that will come soon, soon, the seventeenth,
and all around will sparkle—droplets! and I shall rise; and we shall see
again . . .
                               OceanofPDF.com
         AFTERWORD: ON TAINARON
                          MATTHEW CHENEY


Q: Since Tainaron is one of your only books to be translated into English,
English-language readers can’t really know how it fits in to your work as a
whole. Is Tainaron typical of your writing in its style and subject matter, or
is it different from your other work?


A: In some respects Tainaron is typical, in others unique. For instance I
always build my novels from short chapters (the letters in Tainaron), which
often can be read as independent short prose. And I have written about the
life of insects and animals (artificial life, too) both before and after
Tainaron.


Yet, Tainaron is perhaps the work nearest to me. My whole philosophy of
life is in there. But as I have grown older, my voice is no longer so gentle
and lyrical. Tainaron is at the same time allegorical and realistic (in its
entomological details). My later works like Pereat Mundus: A Sort-Of
Novel, and Unelmakuolema (“Dreamdeath”) are satires about our own
shattering, absurd world.
                                                               —Leena Krohn,
                                        in an interview with Matthew Cheney,
                                                        SF Site, February 2005


Great tomes have been written by writers whose single, impossible
ambition was to capture all of life. And then there are writers of short
stories like Anton Chekhov or Jorge Luis Borges or Grace Paley, writers
who capture the essence of life with only a few pages, a few perfect details,
a few words that sink deeper into our imaginations than hundreds of pages
by other writers—and we discover that literature does not need to be
voluminous to catch the substance of life’s infinity. The great babbling blurt
of a doorstopping novel may miss more life than the intense whisper of a
fable.


More and more, I find myself attracted to innovative writing that isn’t afraid
to leave great gaps within itself, that doesn’t try to stick the world onto a
postage stamp, but rather puts a postage stamp in the middle of the world’s
unfathomable complexities. Leena Krohn’s short “sort-of novel” Tainaron
is a book that I prefer to various massive novels of erudition and insight, a
book that feels like it expands within my consciousness rather than a book I
have to squeeze into the cluttered space of my cranium.


All of which is just to say that Leena Krohn has, with a slim volume of
thirty letters written from an imaginary city of insects, given us a lens of
words through which to consider reality, a microscope to reveal yearning
and wonder, a telescope to look for what it means to be human, a window
and a mirror and an eye other than our own. Sometimes it is best to use
fantasy to imagine our way back to where we actually are.


Here, let me read to you:


  Some of [the citizens of Tainaron] carry their innermost apartment, a
  one-roomed flat which fits their dimensions like a glove, with them
  everywhere. But this has the drawback that one cannot always make
  sense of what they say, for it echoes and reverberates from the walls of
  their private apartments. It is also vexing to me that I cannot always
  tell where the dwelling ends and its inhabitant begins.
      Poor things, who never come among people without this innermost
  shield. It reflects the terrible vulnerability of their lives. Their little
  home may be made of the most diverse ingredients: grains of sand,
  bark, straw, clay, leaves . . . . But it protects them better than others are
  protected by armour, from every direction, and it is a direct
  continuation of themselves, much more so than clothes are to you or
  me. But if it is taken away from them, they die—perhaps simply of
  shame, perhaps because their skins are too soft for the outside air, or
  because they do not have skin at all.


   It’s a beautiful, sad image, is it not? People who carry home so close to
themselves that their voices are muffled and they can die from exposure,
from having the armor of where they live torn away so that they are nakedly
alienated from the place where they belong. But Krohn doesn’t stop there,
no, she continues and lets the imagery expand beyond any simple metaphor:


  Who would be so cruel as to tear from them this last shield! Oh, I have
  heard that such things, too, happen here in Tainaron; I have been
  startled by the moans of death-throes in the deeps of the night.
     But I have my own theory concerning why this happens. For, you
  see, those who constantly drag their houses with them remain
  unknown to other people. One can gain only a brief glimpse of them, if
  that; they are always in hiding.


    The idea grows roots and tentacles, particularly if you remember that the
narrator, the writer of the letters, is a human who has come to visit the city,
that the letters are written to the human home far across the sea, and so far
there has been no response.
    We learn through this fantasy as much about the narrator as about the
city, and the two entities entwine, they grow and reflect from each other,
until the city is an extension of the narrator’s psyche and the narrator is one
piece of the city’s mysterious mind.


But we’re not done yet, because there is one more paragraph to this
particular letter, and it adds depth to something already so deep as to be
nearly unfathomable:


  And then there are those who cannot bear such a situation, those who
  wish to see everything face to face and to reveal, open, show the whole
  world the nakedness of things . . . . Now and then the temptation
  becomes overwhelming to them, and they split open the house of some
  poor unfortunate. I awake to shrieking, sigh and turn over—and soon
  fall asleep again.


   If I were in an even more grandiloquent mood than I already am, I would
say that that paragraph contains all the contradictions, glories, and evils of
humanity. Instead, I will simply say that all I have quoted here is but one
example of what makes Leena Krohn such a truly great writer. She uses
fantastic events, situations, and images, yes, but not merely for the
pleasures inherent in oddity. Tainaron resonates because its words fuse
imagination with many possible meanings, allowing the book a weight far
beyond its few pages, its thirty short tales.
   In one of the letters, the narrator tells of a trip with a guide named
Longhorn to an observation tower on a hill above Tainaron. As they look
out over the whole of the city, Longhorn says, "Tainaron is not a place, as
you perhaps think. It is an event which no one measures. It is no use anyone
trying to make maps. It would be a waste of time and effort. Do you
understand now?"
   Tainaron the book cannot be mapped any more than Tainaron the city
could be, because with each reading it changes, and with each reader. It is
not a single story, but rather a conglomeration of stories whose borders
blend into each other, whose words echo other words, until the book
becomes a harmony in the reader’s mind, a suggestion of even more stories
than the ones told on the pages.
   Tainaron ends with impending hibernation, a stasis that promises
regeneration. The reader who can resist returning to the first page and
starting all over again is stronger than I, because within the words that
create Leena Krohn’s imaginary city, rereading is its own rebirth.


Q: You said that your whole philosophy of life is in Tainaron. The
philosophy that I most noticed while reading was that of the cyclical nature
of life—the continuing cycles of birth, death, and regeneration. Is that what
you meant, or were you thinking of something else as your philosophy?


A: I wrote in Tribar that logically impossible constructions lie at the bottom
of our society. They consist of material and immaterial things, true and not
true, rational and irrational. I call them “tribars” (the term is physicist Roger
Penrose’s). I talk about “false” connections, where realities of different
levels join into some kind of hybrid phenomena.
    Fiction and so-called reality live in an odd symbiosis. Our civilization is
not based on any rational fundament. Let’s think about money, for instance.
We think it as something material, but alas! —what else is as speculative, as
illusionistic, as liable to metamorphoses as money? What is “real” money?
Not banknotes or coins, which are only images of money, not even digital
conditions. Money is a phantom phenomenon; it’s about our speculations of
the future, our dreams of security. They are real, or “real” (you choose).
    Tainaron is a distant place that reminds us of every place in the world in
its plasticity, strangeness, frightfulness. But its properties are the properties
of our own heart.


This essay has been adapted and revised from a review of Tainaron originally published by SF Site in
2005: www.sfsite.com/03b/ta196.htm and an interview with Leena Krohn at SF Site in February
2005: www.sfsite.com/03b/lk196.htm


                                        OceanofPDF.com
                ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Leena Krohn (1947–) is one of the most respected Finnish writers of her
generation. In her large body of work for adults and children, which
includes novels, short stories, poems, essays and radio plays, Krohn deals
with issues related to the boundary between reality and illusion, artificial
intelligence, and issues of morality and conscience. She has been awarded
the prestigious Finlandia Award for her novel Matemaattisia olioita tai
jaettuja unia(Mathematical Beings, or Shared Dreams), the Young Aleksis
Kivi Prize for Pereat Mundus and her short novel Tainaron: Mail From
Another City was nominated for a World Fantasy Award, an International
Horror Guild Award and the Finlandia Award. In addition to English, her
work has been translated into Estonian, Hungarian, Swedish, Russian,
Japanese, Latvian, French and Norwegian. In 2013, Cheeky Frawg will
publish Dona Quixote: The Leena Krohn Omnibus, featuring newly
translated stories, novels, essays on Krohn’s work, and a complete
bibliography. More information on Krohn is available on her author
website, www.kaapeli.fi/krohn




                       Other Books by the Author


English
  Dona Quixote and Other Writing (Carcanet, 1995)
  Pereat Mundus (Gazelle Distribution Trade, 2009)


Finnish
   Vihreä vallankumous (1970)
   Tyttö joka kasvoi ja muita kertomuksia (1973)
   Viimeinen kesävieras. Kertomuksia ihmisten ilmoilta (1974)
   Ihmisen vaatteissa. Kertomus kaupungilta (1976)
Kertomuksia (1976)
Suomalainen Mignon. Runoja ja lauluja vuosilta 1965-1977 (1977)
Näkki. Kertomus vesirajasta (1979)
Metsänpeitto. Kertomus kadonneista (1980)
Galleria (1982)
Donna Quijote ja muita kaupunkilaisia. Muotokuva (1983)
Sydänpuu (1984)
Tainaron. Postia toisesta kaupungista (1985)
Oofirin kultaa (1987)
Rapina ja muita papereita (1989)
Umbra. Silmäys paradoksien arkistoon (1990)
Matemaattisia olioita tai jaettuja unia (1992)
Todistajan katse (1992)
Salaisuuksia (1992)
Tribar (1993)
Älä lue tätä kirjaa (1994)
Ettei etäisyys ikävöisi (1995)
Kynä ja kone (1996)
Pereat mundus, Romaani, eräänlainen (, 1998)
Sfinksi vai robotti. Filosofinen kuvakirja kaikenikäisille (1999)
Mitä puut tekevät elokuussa (2000)
Datura tai harha jonka jokainen näkee (,2001)
3 sokeaa miestä ja 1 näkevä (2003)
Unelmakuolema (2004)
Mehiläispaviljonki (2006)
Kotini on Riioraa (2008)
                          OceanofPDF.com
OceanofPDF.com